1. (d) Cotton grows there
2. (c) Coffee cultivation in Sri Lanka was abandoned because the leaf rust disease which affects the fruit and leaf of coffee. The causative fungus is Hemileia Vastarix.
3. (a) Wheat is a temperate region crop thus require moderate temperature and rainfall both. Temperature should not exceed above 20°C and rainfall should be between 50-100 cm alongwith a first free growing season.
4. (a) The important crop of Barak valley is jute, because Barak valley is situated in Assam. The temperature of the valley varies from 25° to 30°C and rainfall varies from 100 to 200 cm, which is ideal for jute cultivation.
5. (d) Option 1 is not correct because, Tapioca is not an important crap of Kerala.
6. (c) Onion is cultivated by transplanting seedlings.
7. (a) Barley requires cool climate with poor soil quality. Barley can be grown in high latitude even beyond the Arctic circle. Whereas rice needs hot and moist climate with rich soil.  Millets are grown in hot and dry climate with poor soil, whereas tea needs warm and moist climate with high altitude.
8. (b) The place marked in the given map of India.  'A' refers to Gujarat where groundnut is a major crop.  'B' refers to western part of Maharashtra which is known for sugarcane.  'C' refers to southern part of Orissa and northern part of Andhra Pradesh, where 'Ragi' is cultivated abundantly.  'D' refers Andhra Pradesh and tobacco is cultivated in this area.
9. (c)
10. (a) Gujarat is the foremost producer of cotton. Gram is produced in Madhya Pradesh, Black pepper is produced in Kerala and Pineapple is produced highest in West Bengal.
11. (b) A. Cotton cultivation needs 1500-2000 mm and the suitable temperature for cotton growth is 25° - 35°C.B. Flax cultivation needs 600-800 mm and temperature varies from 5° - 18° C.  C. The suitable climatic condition for sugar beet requires 500-600 mm and temperature 18°-22° C.  D. Jute cultivation needs 500-1000 mm rainfall and temperature between 18º-22ºC 
12. (a) Organic farming is a production system of crops which avoids the use of synthetic and chemical inputs like fertilizers, pesticides, growth regulators and livestock feed additives.
13. (a) Assertion and reason is true and reason is the correct explanation of assertion.  Bacillus thuringiensis is the bacterium which is used in Bt gene of cotton. Bt cotton is insect resistant.
14. (a) Assertion and reason both are correct and reason is correct explanation of assertion.  Chile is the largest copper producer in the world. 35% of total global production is produced by Chile and the major deposit is poryphyry copper.
15. (b) Assertion is correct, but reason is not the correct explanation of assertion but he statement is true.  In Australia farmers rear cattle for meat export, and most of the Australian people are non-vegetarian.
16. (a) Due to availability of fertile alluvial soil intensive agricultural practices was possible in the Nile river and islands of Java. So, in this regions high density of population is found.
17. (a) In Indian agriculture about 90% of the area under pulse is rainfed, but pulses need less water for cultivation so, the production of pulse hampers.
18. (c) Arjun and Sonalika are hybrid variety of wheat produced by Indian Council of Agricultural Research.
19. (c) Assertion is true, but reason is false. The western coast receives more rainfall than eastern coast, but the temperature between 20-27ºC, heavy clayed soil quality and rainfall is more suitable for rice cultivation.
20. (c) India is the original home of cotton plant, and India ranks number one in the world accounting for 20% of the total area planted under cotton. The cotton hybrid variety H-4 developed first and Raj-16, Dhanalaxmi, and Fateh are the variety which were developed in India.
21. (a) The genetic engineering approval committee comes under Ministry of Enviroment, Forest and Climate change.
22. (d) India ranked 2nd in the fruit production in the world and ranked 6th in production of tobacco.
23. (b) Cotton, Groundnut and Maize are kharif crop whereas Mustard is a rabi crop.
24. (a) Five varieties of silkworms are reared in India for producing five varieties of silk. Mulberry silk, Muga silk, Tasar silk, Oak tasar silk and Eri silk. India is the 2nd largest producer of sugar in the world.
25. (c) Assertion is true but Reason is false.  Net sown area of Andhra Pradesh is 40% and West Bengal has 60%. So, the assertion is correct. But the reason is false because the alluvial soil is found in delta of rivers of the Godavari, the Krishna and the Cauvery of Andhra Pradesh.
26. (d) Production of rice is 96.43 MT, wheat is 78.4 MT, pulses is 15.11 MT and coarse cereals are 40.73 MT in India. So, the correct sequence in decreasing order is Rice - Wheat - Coarse cereals - Pulses.
27. (d) In the 20th century tea was being grown in 3 African countries like Tanzania, Kenya and Uganda.  So, the assertion is wrong. But the reason is correct because tea plants need highly organic or loamy soils.
28. (d) Rosewood is associated with Dalbergia species.  Dalbergia species are used as food plants and fragnant wood in aromatic oils.
29. (a) Both tea and coffee can be propagated by seeds and stem cutting, so (2) is wrong.
30. (b) National Food Security Mission launched by government of India to increase the food production of rice, wheat and pulses and commercial gaps like sugarcance jute. The target is to increase the production of rice by 10 million tones, wheat by 8 million tones and pulses, by 2 million tones  by theend of Eleventh Plan.
31. (c) 
32. (b)
33. (b) Unless the salts and minerals are washed down into the groundwater, the sodium and other ions are absorbed by the colloidal clay particles. It leads to the deflocculating of the particles and the soil becomes structure less and impermeable to water.
34. (c) Mixed farming refer to rearing of animals and cultivation of crops together.
35. (d) All are used as  pulse, folder and green manure ?
36. (d) All of them are predominantly rain fed crops
37. (d) Contour Bunding is one of the simple method of soil and water conservation. This technique is used at places where the land is sloppy. Due to slope, soil and nutrients erode fast which makes agriculture on this land very uneconomical. To adopt this technique the agriculture fields contours are marked and then the bunds are taken along the contours.
38. (c) Rice is the main kharif crop and groundnut and cotton are also the kharif crops wheat is a raki.
39. (d) All 1,2 and 3 are true.
40. (d) Kinnaur (Himachal) is famous for apples. Areca nut mostly confined to Karnataka, Kerala and Assam.  Mewat in haryana is not famous for mango. UP is famous for mango.  Similarly, coromandel coast is not famous for soya beans.Top two producers  of soya are Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra which are outside coromandel coast.  Therefore, (d) is the correct option.
41. (d) Transgenic crops include transfer of DNA between two unrelated species. All the above methods does not involve transfer DNA.
42. (d) All three statements are correct  as Maize can be used for the production of starch.Oil extracted from maize can be a feedstock for biodiesel. Alcoholic beverages can be produced by using maize.
43. (b) NPK (fertilizers) can be applied at the rate of 112 kg, 25 kg and 48 kg per acre, respectively through inorganic or organic methods. Hence statement #3 is wrong, this eliminates (a), (c) and (d). therefore, answer (b) 1,2,4 only.
44. (d) The draught prone area programme is by ministry of Rural development  to minimise the adverse effects of drought on production of crops and livestock and productivity of land, water and human resources. The desert development programme is also by ministry of Rural development to minimise the adverse effect of drought and control desertification.  National Watershed Development Project for Rainfed Areas is by ministry of agriculture.
45. (c) Integrated Watershed Management Programme (IWMP) was launched during 2009-10.It aims at Prevention of soil runoff, Rainwater harvesting and recharge of groundwater table and Regeneration of natural vegetation.
46. (b) Guar gum is used in hydraulic fracturing technology during shale gas extraction.
47. (c) Vegetative reproduction is a form of asexual reproduction in plants. It is a process by which new organisms arise without production of seeds .It helps in development of clones. Vegetative propagation involves only mitosis, this ensures that the genetic information in DNA of vegetative progeny (child) is same as in the mother plant and can be practiced throughout the year.  However it does not helps in elimination of viruses. Plant once systematically infected with a virus, usually remains infected for its lifetime. Thus any vegetative parts taken for propagation remains infected.
48. (b) Capital-augmenting technological progress results in the more productive use of existing capital goods; for example, the substitution of steel from wooden ploughs in agricultural production.
49. (b) Seed vill age concept i s to promote t he quality seed production of foundation and certified seed classes.  The area which is suitable for raising a particular crop will be selected, and raised with single variety of a kind. Suitable area for seed production will be identified by the Scientists. The foundation/ certified seeds or University labelled seeds will be supplied by the University through Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) and Research Stations at 50% subsidy cost tothe identified farmers in the area. The farmers will use these quality seeds and take up their own seed production in a small area (1 acre) for their own use.  The crops are Rice, Pulses and Oilseeds.
50. (a) Banaras Brocades and Sarees (Logo) has been accorded 'Geographical Indication' status. A geographical indication (GI) is a name or sign used on certain products which corresponds to a specific geographical location or origin (e.g. a town, region, or country). India, as a member of the World Trade Organization (WTO), enacted the Geographical Indications of Goods (Registration and Protection) Act, 1999 which has come into force from 15 September 2003.  
51. (c) Excessive/ inappropriate use of nitrogenous fertilizers increase the acidity of soil and Leaching of nitrate to the ground water.
52. (b) Agricultural Produce Market Committee Acts of respective states are responsible for markets in agricultural products.
53. (c) 'Agreement on Agriculture', 'Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures' and 'Peace Clause' are related to World Trade Organisation.