1. (d) Art. 269 says taxes on income other than agricultural income shall be levied and collected by the Government of India and distributed between the Union and States. Entry 46 in the state list of Seventh Schedule. This gives power to the state governments to impose agricultural income tax.
2. (d) World Trade Organization is attempting to lower trade barriers across nations. Hence export  of all member nations will go up.
3. (a) Rice production is highest in India among cereals but its quality of rice cannot compete with other rice producing countries. Most of rice produced in India is meant for internal consumption. India is a major producer and exporter of Basmati rice.
4. (d) Prevailing illiteracy in rural areas is low but it does not lower productivity. The farmer has adequate knowledge of farming techniques. Low prices of primary products compared to the manufactured products and investment in the agriculture sector compared to the industry are major factors which accounts for low incomes in rural economy than in Urban economy.
5. (a) The most appropriate answer is (a). Investment, weather conditions and agricultural transformation are the best indicators of agricultural development. Political stability plays a very small role in agricultural development.
6. (c) The terminator gene is a specific genetic sequence inserted into a seed's DNA. Once activated by a synthetic chemical catalyst of the manufacturer's choosing, the sequence renders the seed and crop it produces sterile. This means that the farmer cannot retain seeds for future crops as is the practice in India. The farmer has to repurchase the seeds at a heavy cost.
7. (*) The decreasing order of the sugarcane producing States in India is: Uttar Pradesh- 132427.6842, Maharashtra69648.0768, Karnataka-35732, Tamil Nadu33919.17, Andhra Pradesh-15567 (2012-13 Data).
8. (c) Maharashtra produces 52% of total production of Jawar in India. Groundnut production is maximum in Andhra Pradesh, not in Gujarat, Maize production is highest in Karnataka, not in Andhra Pradesh and Rajasthan has the maximum cultivable waste land in India.
9. (d) In the given bar diagram the annual production of "Rice" for the period 1991-92 to 1998-99 is shown.  1 Year
10. (b) Largest agricultural exports were of marine products followed by tea and spices.
11. (c) The policy involves procurement of various food grains, stock and price levels.
12. (b) The reduction of rainfall and leak of seed preservation technology are the main cause.
13. (b) India is the fourth largest country, regarding consumption of rubber with total consumption 631000 tons in 2001, after USA and Japan. Due to high consumption in domestic market India does not export natural rubber. However small quantities of natural rubber is exported to get higher prices.
14. (d) The National Development Council (NDC) in its 53rd meeting held on 29th May, 2007 adopted a resolution to launch a Food Security Mission consisting of rice, wheat and pulses and to increase the production of rice by 10 million tons, wheat by 8 million tons and pulses by 2 million tons by the end of the Eleventh Plan (2011-12).  The project is under Ministry of Agriculture. The project identifies districts and varieties which would be concentrated on.
15. (c) Statutory minimum price of sugar come for every season is a poli cy provision whi le sugar and sugar came falls within essential commodities act.
16. (c) The first statement is correct because with Micro irrigation, Fertigation can be used to check the loss of the nutrients. The second statement is incorrect. The third statement is correct, because Micro irrigation has evolved from the subirrigation where irrigation water is supplied to the plant by "raising the water table" up to the root zone.
17. (b) Around 800 species of orchids found in the Northeast region.
18. (d) All are correct. Seabuckthorn is a medicinal plant which has health-promoting properties. It can play a crucial role in preventing soil erosion and help nitrogen fix option in cold and desert areas.
19. (b) We  have a National Seed policy made in 2002. So 1 is not a constraint. The private sector produces high-priced seeds but in lower volume. It supplies nearly the entire hybrid seeds required for vegetables. So 2 is not a constraint. In the case of low value and high volume crops such as wheat and rice, farmers tend to use their own preserved seeds as there is demand and supply gap. So 3 is a constraint.
20. (c) The current account consists of the balance of trade and balance of invisibles.