1. (b) King Kobra is the only snake that not only lives in holes but also builds a nest.
2. (a) The blooming of desert plants is controlled by low temperature.
3. (c) Living organism require about 27 elements of which 15 are metals. K, Mg, Na and Ca are required in major quantities. Minor quantity of Mn, Fe, Co, Cu, Zn and Mo and trace amount of V, Cr, Sn, Ni and Al are required by some organisms.  Calcium, magnesium  and phosphorus are essential parts of the bones and teeth.  Calcium is necessary for blood clotting.  Sodium helps in muscle activity and transmission of nerve.
4. (c) Hormone auxin is responsible to produce seedless tomato fruits.
5. (c) Photosynthesis occurs in green plants by the help of chloroplast. Plasma membrane is a membrane of transport minerals. Cellular respiration related to mitochondria,  by which energy releases. Ribosome is helps in protein synthesis.
6. (d) Potato tuber bears buds in small pits known as eyes. Buds develops to branches. Some of the branches become green, erect and leafy stems that grow horizontally under ground.
7. (c) DDT is non-biodegradable chemical.  Biomagnification is the phenomenon of increasing concentration of compound in the tissue of organism, as the compound passes up a food chain, usually as a result of food intake. In this case, the concentration of compound will increase with increasing the tropic level.  Biomagnifying pollutants which increases in concentration from producers ® P rimary consumers ® Secondary consumers ® Tertiary consumers ® T op consumer.  The snake is a tertiary consumer. So the DDT concentration will high in snake.
8. (b) After the pollination of ovary, fruit develops gradually from it.  Stem of  tree develops to wood.  Seed develops from fertilized ovule.  Leaf produces starch at the time of photosynthesis.
9. (c) Starch and cellulose both are plant origin. Starch deposits in plant cells, whereas cellulose is most important constituent of plant cell wall. Both starch and cellulose are polymers. Starch is branched polymer of a - D - glucose unit linked by a - 1, 4 glycosidic bond. Cellulose is a linear polymer of b - D - glucose unit.  G lucose molecules are present in both starch and cellulose.  Amylose in starch is responsible for the formation of deep blue colour in the presence of iodine but cellulose does not give any colour at the treatment with iodine, because amylose is absent in cellulose.
10. (a) Ergotism is the effect of long term ergot poisoning, due to ingestion of alkaloids produced by fungus Claviceps purpurea which is found in infected cereals and ryes.
11. (d) Mycorrhiza is a symbiotic association between a fungus and the roots of a vascular plant. Mycorrhiza takes carbohydrate from the plants. In return, the fungus helps the plant by supplying water and the important minerals.
12 (a) A keystone species is a species that play a critical role in maintaining the structure of an ecological community and  whose impact in the community is greater than world be expected based on its relative abundance or total biomass.
13 (a) Blue green algae is used as a biofertilizer in rice crop. Blue green algae has the nitrogen fixing ability which enhances the production of rice.
14. (c) Phytotron is a type of chamber, designed to provide a controlled environment for the study of plant growth.
15. (a) Cocoa contains caffeine, carbonated water, glucose-fructose, kola extract and caramel colour.
16. (b) Canola oil is the lowest in saturated fat, it is high in certain omega 3 fatty acid and mono saturated fats, which are found in nuts and are healthy for the heart.
17. (d) DNA found in mitochondria other than nucleus.  The DNA is called mitochondrial DNA.
18. (b) Athlete's Foot disease is caused by parasitic fungus of  genus Trichophyton. Scaling, flaking and itching of affected areas are the symptoms of this disease. This disease transmitted in moist areas where people walk bare foot.
19. (b) An epiphyte is a plant normally grows on another plant for support. It is non parasitic, but uses the host plant for support. A plant such as tropical orchid or staghorn fern, that grows on another plant upon which it depends for mechanical support but not for nutrient.
20. (a) In bisexual flower, the production of male and female flower (androecium and gynoecium) mature at different times to avoid self-fertilization. That is called dichogamy.  E
21. (b) Asiatic wild ass - Equus hemionus Barasingha - Cervus duvauceli Chinkara - Gazella gazella Nilgai - Boselaphus tragocamelus
22. (d) Deer is monogamous. Monogamous is the organism which has only one spouse and mate at any one time.
23. (c) Bougainvillea, cocoa and grapes plants are propagated by stem cutting process.
24. (b) Spirogyra and Ulothrix are green algae not blue algae. The chamelean can see in both the direction forward and backward at the same time.
25. (c) Assertion is true because unsaturated fats are more reactive compared with saturated fats due to multiple bonds present between carbon atoms. The reason is false because unsaturated fats have atleast double bond in their structure.
26. (a) Molasses is by-product of sugar production process and bagasse of sugar used as a fuel in boilers for sugar factories. But sugar produced from sugar cane and also from sugar beet.
27. (b) The protocol was initially adopted on 11th December 1997. But it entered into force on 16th February 2005, after Kyoto, Japan. So, it is called Kyoto protocol.  Kyoto protocol deals with reducing the green house gases emission to a level at least 5% below 1990 level.  Methane is more effective or harmful green house gas than carbon dioxide.
28. (a) Cellulose is not soluble in water that is why it is used in making shatter-proof glass. Cellulose is a poly saccharide.
29. (b) In pitcher plant, the lamina of leaf is modified into pitcher and the leaf apex gives rise to a coloured lid for attracting the insects.
30. (b) Photosynthesis occurs between wavelengths of about 400 nm and 750 nm. Red and blue colour wavelength is categories in this wavelength. So, plants absorb these colours. Photosynthesis does not occur in the infra-red or in ultraviolet light.
31. (d) Rice fields, coal mining, domestic animal and wet lands all are the sources of the methane.
32. (b) Pitcher plant is an insectivorous plant. It feeds on living creatures including insects and small mammals. These plant attracts the prey with a smell of rotting meat. The victim is dissolved by some chemical enzymes.
33. (c) Probiotics are the living microorganisms that to be healthy for host organism. Lactic acid bacteria, Bifido bacteria are common type of microbes used as probiotics. Certain yeast and Bacilli may also useful.  Probiotics are commonly consumed as a part of fermented food with specially added active live cultures such as yoghurt or as diatary supplements.
34. (c) Grafting is a most common method of vegetative propagation. In this method, parts of two plants are joined in such a way that they grow as a one plant.  Sweet orange plant is propagated by grafting technique.  Layering is another type of vegetative propagation.  In this method, roots are artificially induced on the stem branches before they are detached from the plant for propagation. Jasmine plant is propagated by this technique.
35. (d) Saffron is a spice obtained from the stigma of the flower of Crocus sativus Linnalus.
36. (c) Methane and nitrous oxide are the two green house gases emitted from rice field. In rice field, the flooding a field cuts off the oxygen supply from atmosphere resulting anaerobic condition which emittes methane and nitrogen fertilizer which generally used in rice field for high production, emits nitrous oxide by the reaction with atmospheric oxygen.
37. (b) Ethanol production in India from maize, sugarcane, starch, corn grain etc. Maize is easily available and maize is not costly for product as to economic concern.
38. (b) •     Bhiterkanika, Orissa is a protected area for salt water crocodile, where breeding is the main purpose of that protected area.  • Great Indian Bustard is protected in desert area of Rajasthan.  • The Eravikulam National Park was established to protect the Nilgiri tahir (wild goat) species.
39. (b) Insectivorous plants prey insects because most of the insectivorous plants grow in those area where there is deficiet of nitrogen in nutrients so they catch insect to fulfil its need of nutrients.
40. (b) Mon 863 is genetically modified variety of maize, which is resistant of corn root worm.
41. (a) Both tea and coffee is propagated by seeds and stem cutting, so the (2) option is wrong.
42. (d) Biodiversity hot spots are located in temperate regions and hotspots are present in eastern Himalayas, Western Ghats and Andaman Islands.
43. (c) The fix boundary of national park is described in Wild Life Protection Act, 1972 and the actual area of the national park is notified by state government.  A biosphere reserve conserves an ecosystem and not just few specific species of plants and animals.
44. (d) Biomagnification is the phenomenon of increasing concentration of compound in the tissue of organism, as the compound passes up a food chain, usually as a result of food intake. In this case, the concentration of compound will increase with increasing the tropic level. Biomagnifying pollutants which increases in concentration from producers ® Primary consumers ® Secondary consumers ® Tertiary consumers ® Top consumer. Hawk is the top consumer, so the pesticide concentration will be highest in Hawk.
45. (d) Crop rotation, Sand fences, terracing and wind breaks all are used for sand conservation in India.  Sand fences is a simple and cheap method of inducing accretion of sands in arid and sandy areas.
46. (c) Pongamia Pinnata is adaptable to arid zones, and has a varied habitat distribution and able to grown in a variety of soils, it is native to humid and subtropical environment and grows naturally along coasts and river banks of India and Myanmar.  It is nitrogen-fixing trees.
47. (b) Phloem layer of tissue just below the bark is responsible for carrying food from leave to roots.
48. (c) Except 3rd, all the statements are correct.
49. (b) Nostoc fix atmospheric nitrogen and are used as inoculations for paddy crop.
50. (c) Fruits respire. They give out ethylene which helps in ripening. When fruits are kept in cold storage the rate of ethylene production can be controlled and shelf life of fruits can be increased.
51. (c) During a transplant the fine roots are destroyed due to the jostling during the uprooting process. These root hairs come under a shock. The plant which has been transplanted either takes time to readjust to the new soil  or  dries up and dies due to the root hair loss.
52. (d) To inhibit water loss or to conserve water most of the desert species have waxy leaves that keep them water proof when stomata are closed. Water is further conserved by reducing surface area so most succulents have few leaves or no leaves. Some desert plants have thorns instead of leaves. Thorns do not let the water go out.
53. (d) Mycorrhizal associations play vital role in plant nutrition. They greatly increase the efficiency of nutrient and water uptake; enhance resistance to pathogens, and buffer plant species against several environmental stresses and drought resistance.  Mycorrhizal also improve plant growth and survival in soils contaminated by heavy metals.
54. (d) Diphtheria, Leprosy, Plague are Bacterial diseases. AIDS, Polio, Pneumonia, Gonorrhoea, Syphilis- Viral disease. Japanese B encephalitis - Protozoan disease. Colour blindness and Haemophilia - Sex linked disease. Sickle cell anaemia is a genetic disease in which RBC became sickle shaped.
55. (b) Person having blood group 'AB' is called universal recepient because the 'AB' blood group has no antibody in the blood plasma. So, the person can accept any type of blood group (i. e. A, B and O)
56. (a) The amnion is a membrane that protects the developing embryo by a fluid-filled space called amniotic cavity. Amnion is formed above the embryo.
57. (d) Leprosy is caused by  Mycobacterium leprae  and tuberculosis is caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis. The effective drug for Mycobacterium species  is Rifampicim.
58. (d) Normal body temperature of human is 37° C. But when we convert 37° C into Kelvin it becomes 310 K because 0° C = 0°C + 273 = 273 K 37° C = 37° + 273 = 310 K
59. (d) Protein is a complex organic compound of Carbon, Hydrogen, Oxygen and Nitrogen. It is a long chain molecule composed of amino acids ( R - CH ( NH) COOH) joined by peptide bonds.
60. (a) Thyroxine hormone and  tri-iodothyronine hormone are secreted by thyroid follicular cells of thyroid gland. The major component of thyroxine hormone is iodine.  Deficiency of iodine causes goitre in human.
61. (b) Linus Carl Pauling is much known for his controversial thesis  proposing that high dose of vitamin- C would help not only in prevention of common cold but also in prevention of cancer.  Linus Carl Pauling is the only person to have received two unshared Nobel prizes in 1954 for chemistry and in 1962 for peace.
62. (a) Cancer is a disease characterized by abnormal cell growth and later results to tumour when a tumour successfully spreads  to other parts of the body and starts invading and destroying other healthy tissues.  Cancers are classified as carcinomas,  sarcomas and melanoma according to the tissues.
63. (d) Invention Year Scientist Organ transplant - 1959 - Josep E. Murray Bypass surgerY - 1960 - Albert Einstein Test tube babY - 1978 - Louis Joy Brown Plastic surgerY - 1827 - Dr. John peter Mettauer
64. (b) Tuberculosis is caused by bacteria Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Infection is caused by drinking infected milk, breathing in infected dust, droplet infection through having germs coughed  in the face.
65. (c) Xerophthalmia is caused by vitamin A. Generally this disease is found in poorer section of the society.  The symptom includes night blindness and eye irritation.
66. (b) Vitamin A group includes retinol. Their parent carotene  is a vitamin substance as b- carotene.  Pepsin is an enzyme produced in stomach, which digest protein.  Progesteron is an hormone, produced in human  ovary.  Keratin is a protein. The main component of hair and nail is keratin.
67. (d) Diabetes mellitus is caused due to deficiency of insulin hormone. The hormone insulin maintains the blood sugar in body. Deficiency of insulin in human body causes increase the sugar level in blood, which leads to Diabetes mellitus.
68. (b) AIDS is a viral disease. The virus is called HIV.  This disease transmitted by sexual intercourse, blood transfusion and from pregnant mother to baby through placenta.
69. (d) Malnutrition is defined as the insufficient, excessive or imbalanced consumption of nutrients.  So under nutrition, over nutrition and imbalanced nutrition leads to malnutrition.
70. (d) Cholera, Typhoid and Jaundice are water born diseases. In shallow hand pumps there is possibility of microbial contamination ( bacteria) to water. But fluorosis occurs due to excess amount of fluorine found in water.
71. (b) Besides proteins and carbohydrates, approximately 67% of calcium, 35% of magnesium and 44% of the phosphorus found in milk.
72. (a) Fat present below the skin surface in our body, act as a insulator against loss of heat from the body.  The deposited fat works as barrier, which prevents loss of heat.
73. (c) The composition of kidney stone is Calcium  oxalate       -      80% Uric acid - 5% Amino acid cystine - 2 % Magnesium and - 13% ammonium phosphate
74. (d) Parathyroid gland is not controlled by pituitary.  The parathormone which secrets from this gland regulates calcium and phosphorus ion in body.
75. (c) In human body oxygen first comes through lungs.  From lungs to different tissue via blood.
76. (b) Corpus luteum is a mass of cells found in ovary.  It produces  progesterone hormone. If the ovary is not fertilised, the corpus-luteum degenerates after about two weeks and is gradually replaced by ordinary ovary tissue.
77. (b) Alpha keratin is a protein, found in skin, hair, nail, claws and hooves of animals.
78. (a) Average fat content in buffalo milk is 7.2% and average fat content in cow milk is 4.4%. As per the nutrient components, buffalo milk contains all the nutrients in higher proportion than cow's milk.
79. (d) The major component of honey is fructose.  Composition of honey in (percentage) Fructose - 38.2 Sucrose - 1.5 Glucose - 31 Minerals - 0.5 Water - 17.1 Maltose - 7.2 Carbohydrate - 4.2
80. (c) Coronary arteries supply blood to heart. Carotid arteries supply the blood to head region. Hepatic arteries supply to liver and pulmonary arteries supplies blood to the lungs.
81. (d) Daily intake of protein for active woman is 46 gram. But at pregnant women the protein requirement increase to 47 - 60 gm per day.
82. (b) Malaria is the parasitic  disease spreads through the sucking of blood through mosquitoes. The malaria parasite invades blood cells. The virus of encephalitis most active in brains. Filaria parasite found in blood lymph and leukaemia is cancer mainly the  abnormal cell growth in bone narrow.
83. (c) Antigen is a foreign molecule that invade the body of an organism. Antigen also induce immune response to stimulate lymphocyte to produce antibody. The majority of them are proteins and polysaccharides found on the wall of bacteria and on the cell coats of virus.
84. (d) The sequencing of the entire gensome (the totallity of all genes) was completed in 1996 of Plasmodium vivax.
85. (c) We can draw the inference that processed meat is always packed in sealed tins.
86. (d) Bacteria, microalgae and fungi is most widely used in industries. Bacteria like Lactobacillus  sp. is used in manufacturing of vinegar and alcohol by fementation process.  Most of algae are used as single cell protein (i.e.  Spirulina).Different drugs like penicillin is manufactured from fungi Penicillium notatum.
87. (b) Theory of mutation is postulated by de Vries.  Theory of evolution is by Charl's Darwin. Operon concept is given by Jacob and Monad. One gene and one enzyme hyoptheisis is proposed by Beadle and Tautum.
88. (b) Dodo birds species existed only on the island of Mauritius. Due to its short wings and bulky body the Dodo birds could not fly or flee in the face of danger. So human used to kill them for food. Later the species became extinct from Mauritius. This bird species was helpful in pollinating and propagating seed of trees.
89. (a) The complete conversion of glucose in presence of oxygen, into carbon dioxide, water and release energy is called aerobic respiration. Anaerobic respiration, occurs in the absence of oxygen.
90. (a) Polyunsaturated fatty acid is an anti oxidant, which helps in building of tissues.
91. (a) Malaria parasite is an protozoan. Tuberculosis is a bacteria. Ring worm is a fungus and Poliomyelitis is a virus.
92. (d) Haemophilia is a sex-linked recessive disorder.  Clotting of blood is abnormally delayed that even a simple or small cut will result non stop bleeding in affected individual.
93. (a) Endoscopy refers to looking inside the body through endoscope. Endoscope is an instrument used to examine interior of hollow organ of the body through bore scope technique.
94. (c) When ants bite, they inject formic acid in the muscle tissue. This formic acid is found at the mandible of ants.
95. (c) Generally blindness is caused by the dryness and hardness of c ornea. Cornea is a c lear layer whi ch hel ps passing of  light. It is an outer layer and can be transfer from one person to another.
96. (c) Adrenaline is the hormone prepares the body to deal with anger, fear  and danger.  Estrogen hormone releases from ovary of female.  Insulin controls the level of glucagon in blood.  Pheromones attracts partners through sense of smell.
97. (d) Ether is used as an anesthesia at the time of surgery to prevent pain.  Atropine is used as eye drops to dilate the pupil before eye examination.  Nitroglycerine is widely used in the treatment of heart. Pyrethrin  is biodegradable, non-persistent pesticide which is used to kill mosquitoes, fleas and other insects.
98. (a) Royal haemophilia is sex- linked disease. Clotting of blood is abnormally delayed even small cut will result in non stop bleeding in the affected individual.  Queen Victoria was a carrier of this disease and produce haemophilic descendents, so haemophilia is a royal disease.
99. (a) Lathyrism is caused by excessive consumption of khesari dal. Lathyrism gets its name from scientific name of khesari dal which is Lathyrus sativus. The symptom of the disease is paralysis of both the lower limbs.
100. (d) Assertion is false. In human, sex determination of offspring depends on male because male sperm contains XY chromosome, whereas female has XX chromosome in their ovum.
101. (c) Silk worm yield the fibre from pupa stage, which is commercially used to produce clothes.
102. (b) Haemophilia - Genetic disease caused in sexlinked gene.  Diabetes - Hormonal disorder disease caused by imbalance of insulin hormone.  Rickets - Nutritional deficiency disease caused by deficiency of vitamin-D.  Ringworm - Caused by fungus.
103. (b) The glucose level in blood is commonly expressed as milligram per decilitre.
104. (c) Progesterone secrets from gonads. Growth hormone secrets from pituitary gland. Insulin hormone secrets from pancreas. Cortisone secrets from adrenal gland.
105. (d) Fatigue is caused by excess anaerobic metabolism, which results in production of excess lactic acid. This lactic acid causes the muscle pain.
106. (c) Silica gel granule is a network of inter-connecting microscopic pores, which attract and hold moisture by the phenomena known as absorption.
107. (a) There is no A and B antigen on RBC of "O - "blood group, So O, Rh - is known as universal blood donor.
108. (b) Metast asi s is the spread of cancer from it s primary site to other places in the body (i.e. brain, liver). Cancer cells can break away from a primary tumour, penetrate in to lymphatic and blood vessels, circulate through the blood stream and grow to a normal tissues in the body.
109. (a) Ptyalin - It is present in sliva that catalyzes the hydrolysis of starch into maltose and dextrin.  Pepsin - It is an enzyme released in stomach that degrades food proteins into peptides.  Renin - It is an enzyme that is present in kidney and it converts angiotensinogen into angiotensin balancing sodium and potassium level in blood.  Oxytocin - It is a sex hormone that plays a role in sexual reproduction. It induces contraction of smooth muscles.
110. (d) Antigen is a foreign molecule, which invade the body of organism, and induce immune response to stimulate antibody.
111. (b) Ribosome and Endoplasmic reticulum are main site for protein synthesis. Ribosome, which serve as staging area where some RNA helps in protein synthesis. Endoplasmic reticulum is an irregular, double membrane network scattered in cytoplasm, also helps in protein synthesis.
112. (a) • Apoptosis is the process of programmed cell death in multicellular organisms. Apoptosis occurs during normal cell turnover, development and in immune system.  • Ageing is the accumulation of changes.  • Degeneration is the deterioration of a tissue or an organ in which its function is diminished or its structure impaired.  • Necrosis is the disorganized break down of flesh in some part of the body of multicellular organism.
113. (d) Breast bone - Sternum Collar bone - Clavicle Knee Cap - Patella Shoulder Blade - It connects the humerus (upper arm bone) with the clavicle. It is known as scapula.
114. (b) • Tape worms are hermaphrodite (both male and female reproductive organ present).  • Round worms are unisexual (separate sex).  • Filaria is caused by Wuchereria bancrofti which is a parasitic nematode.  • Guinea worm is a long and very thin nematode, not an annelid.
115. (a) In organic evolution, Lamarck believed that any particular part of the body that is put into more frequent use, has tendency to develop stronger and better while that part of body which is put into less or no use has tendency to gradually disappear. So, loss of limbs in snake is an example of use and disuse of organs.
116. (c) • Polyploidy occurs in cells and organisms when there are more than two paired (homologous) set of chromosome founds which controls more than one characters simultaneously.  • Apomixis is the process of asexual reproduction in which the embryo grow from egg cells without being fertilized.  • Pleiotropy occurs when a single gene influences multiple phenotypic traits.  • Polytene is a giant chromosomes found in some two-winged flies.
117. (d) • Testes of man produce hormone testosterone and progesterone hormone is secreted by ovary of woman.  • Adrenal hormone releases the hormone less amount of cortisol for avoid stress.
118. (d) Foot and mouth disease in animals (hoof and mouth disease) is a viral infection affecting cloven hoofed domestic and wild animals. The viruses belong to the same family picornaviridae.
119. (a) The sexes are separate except few echinoderm species. There is no sexual dimorphism. Fertilization is external and few forms are viviparous.
120. (c) • Viroids are plant pathogens that consists of a short stretch of highly complementary, circular, single-stranded RNA molecule.  • Prion is an infectious agent composed primarily of protein.  • Mycoplasma is a genus of bacteria that lack of cell wall.  • Rickettsias possess cell wall.
121. (a) Urination can be induced within some minutes after a person consumes alcohol, because when the kidney filters the waste, the capillaries constricts and affects the filtering ability of kidney. When the body needs to conserve water, the pituitary gland excretes a hormone called vasopressin, which causes the nephron filters to become permeable retaining more water in the blood stream and allowing less water to be excreted in the urine.
122. (d) Assertion is false, but reason is true. Essential amino acids are those which are taken form food and not synthesised in the body, whereas non-essential amino acids need not be supplied in the diet and synthesised in the body. Glycine serine and tyrosine are non-essential amino acids.
123. (a) Origin of new species depends on isolation of gene flow between new species and develop significant genetic divergence.
124. (a) Ticks and mites are categorized under order Arachnids of phylum Arthopoda of animal kingdom.
125. (d) Blood has more platelets than corpuscles. A microlitre of blood contains 5,000-10,000 of White blood cells (WBC) and 150,000-500,000 platelets.
126. (d) Octopus is an animal of class-Cephalopoda and phylum Mollusca. The shell is absent. It is found at bottom of the sea. It kills its prey with poisonous saliva. It can change its colour.
127. (d) AIDS is a viral disease. In this disease the immune system weakens and the body becomes prone to different type of infection by pathogens. Sweating at night, swollen lymph nodes, loss of memory and loss of weight are also symptoms of AIDS.
128. (a) Only crocodile is kept in the Red book or endangered species list.  
129. (b) A nephron consists of a network of tiny blood vessels, the glomerulus surrounded by Bowman's capsule. Pressure forces much of the blood plasma through the glomerulus and into Bowman's capsule.  The resulting tubular fluid, which contains water and dissolved chemicals then passes into convoluted tubule and loop of Henle. This capillary network provides a mean for pick up and delivery of materials that are reabsorbed and secreted by the kidney.
130. (a) Milk contains vitamin B (Thiamin) and vitamin B 2 1 (riboflavin). So, statement (a) is not correct.
131. (c) Both the statement is correct.  • HCl is secreted, providing an acid medium for pepsin action and kill most bacteria and helps in digestion of food. When the food enters in duodenum (small intestine), secretin is produced by intestine that stimulates pancreas for pancreatic juice secretion.  • Enterogastrone is produced in small intestine.
132. (d) Lachrymal is a tear produced gland which does not function due to deficiency of vitamin -A.  Deficiency of vitamin - B causes loss of appetite, heart disorders, muscular weakness etc.
133. (c) Insulin is a peptide hormone composed of 51 amino acids. Insulin secrets from pancreas (Islets of Langerhans).
134. (b) Gibbon is the only ape found in rain forests of Assam in India, whereas Pangolins are found in tropical Asia and Africa.
135. (b) Lymphocytes are the cells that determine the specificity of the immune response to infectious microorganisms and other foreign substances. In humans lymphocytes make up 25 to 33% of the total number of leukocytes. They are found in central lymphoid organs and tissues such as the spleen, tonsils and lymph nodes and large bones.
136. (c) Assertion is true because a balance diet is a diet which contains the correct amount of carbohydrates, proteins and fats. But the reason is false, because human body cells synthesize various fatty acids except linoleic and linolenic fatty acids.
137. (a) • The largest bone in human body is femur.  • Cholera is caused by a bacteria Vibrio cholerae, • Athlete's foot disease is caused by parasific fungus of genus Trichophyton.
138. (b) Dengue viruses are transmitted to humans through the bites of infective female Aedes mosquito.  The symptoms of disease is characterized by high fever, severe muscle pain, joint pain and rashes in body.
139. (c) Black Quarter is a disease which is found in horse.
140. (d) Assertion is false because protein digestion occurs in stomach and small intestine. But reason is true because the proteolytic enzyme from pancreas secretion immediately enters to small intestine from the stomach.
141. (a) Assertion is correct and reason is the correct explanation of assertion.  Amoeba is a unicellular animal. It reproduce by the process of asexual reproduction. Fission is one of the processes of asexual reproduction, where amoeba divides in half to produce off spring.
142. (c) Assertion is correct but the reason is false.  Deficiency of vasopressin results Diabetes insipidus. In this disease the patients produce enormous quantities of dilute urine and the patient consequently feels thirsty.
143. (b) Pneumoconiosis is a respiratory disease caused by the inhaling various type of dust, such as coal dust, silica dust, asbestos dust etc. So, it is very common in workers of coal mining industries and related industries.
144. (b) Bile duct and pancreatic duct both releases its contents into duodenum. The digestive enzyme (pancreatic juices) releases to duodenum from pancreatic duct.
145. (b) Ragi contains only 344 mg of calcium and in 100 gm of ragi protein is 7.3 gm., fat 1.3 gm, fibre 3.6 gms, carbohydrates 72 gms, moisture 13.1 gm.
146. (b) Caffeine also spelled caffei is most commonly consumed by humans in infusions extracted from the bean of the coffee plant and the leaves of the tea bush, as well as from various foods and drinks containing products derived from the kola nut. Acids are added to soft drinks for extra bite and mouth feel. The primary acid used in colas is phosphoric acid, while the one used in citrus flavoured drinks is usually citric acid. Citric acid is a good substitution of ascorbic acid as per nutritional value.
147. (d) ELISA Test is employed as the first and most basic test for an indivisual to detect HIV/AIDS. 85% of human beings possess Rh and Rh - + and and 15% are Rh - . Rh are the factors present in blood, discovered by Karl Landsteiner.
148. (d) Hepatic portal vein deliver the nutrient rich blood from the stomach and small intestine to the liver. It is the largest gland in the body.
149. (b) Cloning a human embryo for the first time took place in U.SA. Cloning is a process when identical types of progenies are produced from one individual.
150. (b) Meningococcal meningitis is transmitted from person to person through cough and having a body contact on a regular basis. It is called droplet transmission.
151. (b) Robert Webster is a scientist, his interests include the structure and function of influenza virus proteins and development of new vaccines and antivirals.
152. (a) Appendix is attached to the first portion of large intestine. The appendix has no function in modern human.
153. (c) Parathyroid hormone secrets from parathyroid gland. This hormone regulates calcium and phosphate level in blood. Parathyroid hormone raises the level + of calcium in the blood and decreases the level of phosphorous in the blood.
154. (d) Most insects respire through tracheal system that lies on a network of small tubes that channel O directly to the different part of the body. The tracheal system is composed of chitin-ringed tubes called trachea that connect directly to the air through opening in the body wall called spiracles.
155. (b) Fallopian tube is a tube like structure that carries egg from the ovary to uterus. In this tube the sperm meets to ovum and fertilization occurs.
156. (c) The bottom part of the brain stem is called the Medulla oblongata. The medulla oblongata has nerve centres to control many vital body processes like swallowing, vomiting, breathing and heart beat etc.
157. (b) Urea is the main nitrogenous excretory product of Ureotelic animals, produced by liver cells from de-aminated excess amino-acids via the urea cycle.
158. (b) Gastrin is a hormone, which stimulates secretion of digestive enzyme in stomach. Trypsin, Pepsin and Ptyline are the digestive enzymes of human system.
159. (d) The correct sequence in the order of decreasing length of the three structural parts are Ileum - Jejunum - Duodenum of small intestine.
160. (c) Sexual cannibalism is identified only in spiders.  In which female organism kills the male before during or after copulation. In most species in which it occurs, sexual connibalism is related to the larger size of female due to sexual dimorphism.
161. (c) Rattle snake eats small snakes, mice, lizards, birds and insects. The average snake will consume 2-3 times its own weight in various food items during the spring to fall months when the snake is away from its winter den. A snake swallows its prey in one piece.
162. (c) Blood is slightly alkaline and the pH of blood varies from 7.35 - 7.45.
163. (c) The liver secretes bile that forms and stores glycogen and plays an important role in metabolism of protein and fat. It does not contain digestive enzymes and as such does not take part directly in digestion.
164. (d) Whales are viviparous, they give birth to live young, some whales lay eggs. Like all mammals, whale calves are nourished with milk from their mothers.
165. (c) Gambusia affinis is an larvivorous fish. This fish  is released into ponds and wells to controlling the mosquitoes by eating mosquito larvae, insects and crustaceans.
166. (c) Gibbon, Gorilla and Orangutan are apes, but Langur is not an ape, it is prosimians.
167. (d) From the above graphical presentation we concluded that the son is the colourblind but the daughter is the carrier.
168. (a) Bats are commonly known as fruits bats or flying foxes. In India these are present in North-Eastern parts or in Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
169. (c) According to evolution of living organisms Salamander-Python-Kangaroo, because the evolution started from amphibians 350 million years ago, reptiles appeared 300 million years ago and 200 million years ago first small mammals appeared.
170. (a) Panda and bear belongs to family Ursidae. Pandas are medium sized bears. Of all the endangered bear species they have the most distinguished colour combination.
171. (d) Dugong is a large marine mammal. Dugong has a fusiform body with no dorsal fin or hind limbs, instead of possessing paddle. Dugong is heavily dependent on seagrass for subsistence. Dugong bear one calf at a time after an approximately 13 month gestation.
172. (b) It is difficult to develop an effective malaria vaccine, because repeated natural infection does not produce detectable resistance to exo-erythrocytic cycle of malaria in man.
173. (c) Hepatitis-B is a potentially life-threatening liver infection caused by the hepatitis B virus. It can cause chronic liver disease and puts people at high risk of death from cirrhoris of liver and liver cancer.  Hepatitis-B virus is transmitted between people by contact with blood or other body fluid of an contact with the blood or other body fluid.
174. (d) Human Genome Project is NOT at all limited to only genetic diseases. There are some 30K genes and the genome sequence would provide great help to build the tools to conquer diseases. Here we must note that all diseases have a genetic component, whether inherited (genetic) or resulting from the body's response to environmental stresses like viruses or toxins. The successes of the HGP have even enabled researchers to pinpoint errors in genes-the smallest units of heredity-that cause or contribute to disease.  Thus second statement stands correct.
175. (d) A typical microbial fuel cell consists of anode and cathode compartments separated by a cation (positively charged ion) specific membrane. In the anode compartment, fuel is oxidized by microorganisms, generating electrons and protons.  Electrons are transferred to the cathode compartment through an external electric circuit, while protons are transferred to the cathode compartment through the membrane. Electrons and protons are consumed in the cathode compartment, combining with oxygen to form water.
176. (c) Since CO is heavier than air, it sinks in ocean than moving up. Also, during winter, it is observed that CO 2 2 is trapped in ice caps.  
177. (c) Upwelling brings nutrient-rich water towards the ocean surface, replacing the warmer, usually nutrient-depleted surface water. This is to do with the phytoplankton's and nothing to do with the decomposer microorganisms.
178. (d) A type of trans fat occurs naturally in the milk and body fat of ruminants (such as cattle and sheep) at a level of 2-5% of total fat. Natural trans fats, which include conjugated linoleic acid (CLA) and vaccenic acid, originate in the rumen of these animals.
179. (a) The blood group of the parents are AB and O; the child's blood group may be A or B and since the boy is adopted and it is given in the question that " the blood group of the three sons are A + , B + , O + ".
180. (c) Oxidation reactions can produce free radicals. In turn, these radicals can start chain reactions. When the chain reaction occurs in a cell, it can cause damage or death. When the chain reaction occurs in a purified monomer, it produces a polymer resin, such as a plastic, a synthetic fibre, or an oil paint film.  Antioxidants terminate these chain reactions by removing free radical intermediates, and inhibit other oxidation reactions. They do this by being oxidized themselves, so antioxidants are often reducing agents such as thiols, ascorbic acid, orpolyphenols.
181. (d) All of them are employed as Biopesticides.
182. (b) Carbon, Hydrogen, Nitrogen.
183. (d) All of them are pollinating agents.
184. (c) Aflatoxins are produced by many species of Aspergillus, a fungus. Aspergillus Flavus and Aspergillus Parasiticus are weedy moulds that grow on a large number of substrates, in particular under high moisture conditions.
185. (c) Excretion of urea by animals adds nitrogen to the soil, as urea is the main nitrogen containing substance in the urine of mammals, therefore urea is widely used in fertilizers as the convenient source of nitrogen.  Death of vegetation adds up in soil organic matters including humus. As organic matters decompose inorganic nitrogen is released into the soil.
186. (b) Body piercing or getting one's body tattooed may cost one a huge price- Infection of Hepatitis B and C virus is absolutely possible. The needle used in the act may just be infected with the said virus causing liver disease, which in its ultimate stage often turns c ancerous. Thi s is deemed to happen if the needle is not properly sterilized.
187. (c) Calcium is the most common and abundant mineral in the body. It is important for healthy bones and teeth, helps muscle relax and contract, important in nerve functioning, blood clotting etc. Sodium is needed for proper fluid balance, nerve transmission and muscle contraction.
188. (d) Recombinant DNA are DNA sequences, which result from bringing genetic material form different sources. The genes can be transferred between any species, that is across differetn species of plants, from animals to plants and from microorganisms to higher organisms.
189. (b) Sea cow is a mammal. It is a herbivore and it grows up to 9 meters. It looks like a large seal. Sea horse is a fish not a mammal. Sea lion is a mammal. It is a carnivore. It is also known as eared seal.
190. (a) Viruses have no metabolic enzymes and cannot generate their own energy. Viruses require a growth medium containing living cell therefore cannot be cultured in any synthetic medium. Viruses are transmitted from one organism to another not only by biological vectors but also by mechanical vectors.  Mechanical vector like an arthropod vector which transmit an infective organism from one host to another but it is not essential to the life of cycle of the parasite.
191. (d) Biometrics identification is used in computer science as a form of identification and access control.  Biometric identifiers are the distinctive, measurable characteristics used to label individuals. Biometric identifiers are categorized as physiological versus behavioral characteristics. Physiological Biometric identifiers are fingerprint, palm veins, face recognition, DNA, palm print, hand geometry, iris recognition, retina and odour/scent. Behavioural identifiers are typing rhythm, gait and voice.
192. (b) Smallpox is the only disease eradicated from India. The last known small pox case was reported in 1965 from Katihar district, Bihar.
193. (a) Deficiency of vitamin C causes Scurvy, disease of gums. Deficiency of vitamin D causes Rickets, disease of bones and Deficiency of Vitamin A causes night blindness, disease of eyes.
194. (d) H1N1 flu is also known as swine flu. The cause of swine flu is an influenza A virus type designated as H1N1.
195. (d) The bio-toilets are fitted underneath the lavatories and the human waste discharged into them is acted upon by a particular kind of bacteria that converts it into non-corrosive neutral water. The newage green toilets have been designed by Railways along with Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) keeping in mind the requirements of Indian trains.