1. Which of the following professional(s) are more likely to run the risk of a permanent change in their cell's DNA? [1996]
1. Researchers using Carbon 14 isotope
2. X-ray technician
3. Coal miner
4. Dyer and painter
Select the correct answer by using the codes given below
Codes:
(a) 2 alone (b) 1 , 2 and 3
(c) 1, 2 and 4 (d) 1, 3 and 4

2. Which one of the following techniques can be used to establish the paternity of a child? [1997]
(a) Protein analysis
(b) Chromosome counting
(c) Quantitative analysis of DNA
(d) DNA finger printing

3. Assertion (A) : Insect resistant transgenic cotton has been produced by inserting Bt gene.
Reason (R) : The Bt gene is derived from a bacterium.  [1999]
(a) Both A and R are true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) Both A and R are true but R is not a correct explanation of A
(c) A is true but R is false
(d) A is false but R is true

4. Assertion (A) : Dolly was the first cloned mammal.
Reason (R) : Dolly was produced by in vitro fertilization. [1999]
(a) Both A and R are true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) Both A and R are true but R is not a correct explanation of A
(c) A is true but R is false
(d) A is false but R is true

5. Assertion (A) : "DNA finger printing" has become a powerful tool to establish paternity and identity of criminals in rape and assault cases.
Reason (R) : Trace evidences such as hairs, saliva and dried semen are adequate for DNA analysis. [2000]
Codes:
(a) Both A and R are true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) Both A and R are true but R is not a correct explanation of A
(c) A is true but R is false
(d) A is false but R is true

6. Insect-resistant cotton plants have been genetically engineered by inserting a gene from a/an [2000]
(a) virus (b) bacterium
(c) insect (d) plant

7. Hybridoma technology is a new biotechnological approach for commercial production of [2000]
(a) monoclonal antibodies
(b) interferon
(c) antibiotics
(d) alcohol

8. Match List-I with List-II and select the correct answer using the codes given below: [2001]
List-I List-II
(Achievement in genetics)  (Scientists)
A. Discovery of transduction 1. Khurana
and conjugation in bacteria
B. Establishing the sex-linked 2. Korenberg
inheritance
C. Isolation of DNA polymerase 3. Lederberg
from E. coli
D. Establishing the complete 4. Morgan
genetic code 5. Ochoa
Codes:
(a) A - 4; B - 3; C - 2; D - 1
(b) A - 3; B - 4; C - 1; D - 5
(c) A - 4; B - 3; C - 1; D - 5
(d) A - 3; B - 4; C - 2; D - 1

9. Which of the following features of DNA makes it uniquely suited to store and transmit genetic information from generation to generation? [2001]
(a) Complementary of the two strands
(b) Double helix
(c) Number of base-pairs per turn
(d) Sugar-phosphate backbone

10. The American multinational company, Monsanfo, has produced an insect-resistant cotton variety that is undergoing field trials in India. A toxic gene from which one of the following bacteria has been transferred to this transgenic cotton? [2001]
(a) Bacillus subtilis
(b) Bacillus thuringiensis
(c) Bacillus anyloliquifanciens
(d) Bacillus globlii

11. Match List-I (Scientists) with List-II (Achievements) and select the correct answer using the codes given below: [2002]
List-I (Scientists) List-II (Achievements)
A. Arber and Smith 1. Developed transgenic
plants with Agrobacterium
T-DNA
B. Feldman 2. Discovered
endonucleases
C. Mullis 3. Discovered reverse
transcriptase
D. Temin and 4. Discovered polymerase
Baltimore chain reaction
(a) A - 2; B - 1; C - 4; D - 3
(b) A - 1; B - 2; C - 4; D - 3
(c) A - 2; B - 1; C - 3; D - 4
(d) A - 1; B - 2; C - 3; D - 4

12. With reference to the latest developments in stem cell research, consider the following statements [2002]
1. The only source of human stem cells are the embryos at blastocyst stage.
2. The stem cells can be derived without caisining destruction to blastocysts.
3. The stem cells can regenerate themselves in vitro virtually forever.
4. Indian research centres also created a few cell lines which can be developed into many types  of tissues.
Which of these statements are correct?
(a) 1, 2 and 4 (b) 1, 2 and 3
(c) 1, 2 and 4 (d) 3 and 4

13. Consider the following statements: [2004]
1. Adam Osborne introduced the first portable computer.
2. Lan Wilmut created the first cloned sheep.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 only (b) 2 only
(c) Both 1 and 2 (d) Neither 1 nor 2

14. Which one of the following is the landmark performance of Dr. V. Mohan Reddy, an Indian, born doctor working in U.S.A. during February, 2005?  [2005]
(a) Research on human stem cell which is likely to revolutionise treatment of deadly disease like cancer.
(b) Successful open heart procedure called arterial switch performed on an infant.
(c) Research on genetic engineering which can help in treatment of deadly disease like AIDS.
(d) Successful brain surgery to revive the function of nearly dead brain of a premature born infant.

15. Consider the following statements : [2006]
1. ELISA test is employed as the first and most basic test for an individual to detect cancer.
2. Almost 50 per cent of human beings have Rh blood while the remaining have Rh - blood.  + 
Which of the statements given above is / are correct ?
(a) 1 only (b) 2 only
(c) Both 1 and 2 (d) Neither 1 nor 2

16. Consider the following statements: [2008]
1. Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) in respect of carbon credits is one of the Kyoto Protocol Mechanisms.
2. Under the CDM, the projects handled pertain only to the Annex-I countries.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 only (b) 2 only
(c) Both 1 and 2 (d) Neither 1 nor 2

17. Which one of the following Union Ministries is implementing the Biodiese1 Mission (as Nodal Ministry)? [2008]
(a) Ministry of Agriculture
(b) Ministry of Science and Technology
(c) Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
(d) Ministry of Rural Development

18. WiMAX is related to which one of the following [2009]
(a) Biotechnology
(b) Space technology
(c) Missile technology
(d) Communication technology

19. In the context of alternative sources of energy, ethanol as a viable bio-fuel can be obtained from [2009]
(a) Potato (b) Rice
(c) Sugarcane (d) Wheat

20. In the context of CO emission and Global Warming, what is the name of a market driven device under the 2 UNFCC that allows developing countries to get funds/ incentives from the developed countries to adopt better technologies that reduce greenhouse gas emissions? [2009]
(a) Carbon Footprint
(b) Carbon Credit Rating
(c) Clean Development Mechanism
(d) Emission Reduction Norm

21. The concept of carbon credit originated from which one of the following? [2009]
(a) Earth Summit, Rio de Janeiro
(b) Kyoto Protocol
(c) Montreal Protocol
(d) G-8 Summit, Heiligendamm

22. With reference to the treatment of cancerous tumours, a tool called cyberknife has been making the news. In this context, which one of the following statements is not correct ? [2010]
(a) It is a robotic image guided system
(b) It delivers an extremely precise dose of radiation.
(c) It has the capability of achieving sub-millimetre accuracy.
(d) It can map the spread of tumour in the body

23. Genetically modified "golden rice" has been engineered to meet human nutritional requirements.  Which one of the following statements best qualifies golden rice ? [2010]
(a) The grains have been fortified with genes to provide three times higher grain yield per acre than other high yielding varieties
(b) Its grains contain pro-vitamin A which upon ingestion is converted to vitamin A in the human body
(c) Its modified genes cause the synthesis of all the nine essential amino acids
(d) Its modified genes cause the fortification of its grains with vitamin D.

24. A genetically engineered form of brinjal, known as the Bt-brinjal, has been developed. The objective of this is [2011 - I]
(a) to make it pest-resistant.
(b) to improve its taste and nutritive qualities.
(c) to make it drought-resistant.
(d) to make its shelf-life longer.

25. With reference to 'stem cells', frequently in the news, which of the following statements is/are correct?  [2012 - I]
1. Stem cells can be derived from mammals only.
2. Stem  c el ls  c an  be  used  for sc reening new drugs.
3. Stem  cells  can be  used  for medical therapies.
Select the correct answer using the codes given below :
(a) 1 and 2 only (b) 2 and 3 only
(c) 3 only (d) 1, 2 and 3

26. There  is some  concern  regarding the nanoparticles of some chemical elements  that  are  used by the industry in the  manufacture  of various products.  Why? [2014 - I]
1. They can accumulate in the environment, and contaminate water and soil.
2. They can enter the food chains.
3. They can trigger the production of free radicals.
Select the correct answer using the code given below.
(a) 1 and 2 only (b) 3 only
(c) 1 and 3 only (d) 1, 2 and 3
