1. (c) Yes, it is true that information technology is fast becoming a very important field of activity in India because now a days it is used everywhere in development of every sector. It is applied in field of medicine, research, banking etc. It is also true that software is one of major exports of the country but India does not have strong base in hardware.
2. (a) The byte, is a unit of digital information in computing and telecommunications, that most commonly consists of eight bits.
3. (b) A digital library is a library in which collections are stored in digital formats (as opposed to print, microform, or other media) and accessible by computers. The digital content may be stored locally, or accessed remotely via computer networks. Thus, it can be available extra then internet also. Thus, statement 3 is wrong while 1 and 2 are correct. A smart card, chip card, or integrated circuit card (ICC), is any pocket-sized card with embedded integrated circuits. American engineers began developing digital technology in the mid-twentieth century. Digital technology enables immense amounts of information to be compressed on small storage devices that can be easily preserved and transported. Digitization also quickens data transmission speeds. Telecommunications has relied on digital methods to transmit messages.  In the early 1980s, enhanced fibre optics enabled the development of digital communication networks.  Communication  satellites known as direct broadcast satellite (DBS) transmitted compressed digital signals for viewers to receive several hundred television programming choices.
4. (d) Microwaves are electromagnetic wages with wavelengths ranging from as long as one meter to as short as one millimeter, or equivalently, with frequencies between 300 MHz (0.3 GHz) and 300 GHz.  A microwave oven passes (nonionizing microwage radiation (at a frequency near 2.45 GHz) through food, causing dielectric heating by absorption of energy in the water, fats and sugar contained in the food.  Bluetooth and Wi-Fi have many applications: setting up networks, printing, or transferring files. They also work in the given frequency range. All cordless sold in the US use the 1.9 GHz or 2.4-GHz bands.
5. (d) In order to under go LASIK procedure one should be at least 18 years old, as the vision of people younger than 18 usually continues to change.
6. (c) More than 3.8 billion people worldwide used the Global System for Mobile Communications (GSM) family of technologies as of May 2009. GSM is the most widely usesd wireless technology in the world. GSM has strainghtforward, cost-effective migration path to 3G through GPRS, EDGE and UMTS-HSPA, as well as beyond 3G via the HSPA Evolution (HSPA+). LTE and System Architecture Evolution (SAE) initiatives.
7. (a) Bluetooth networking transmits data via lowpower radio waves.  It communicates on a frequency of 2.45 gigahertz (actually between 2.402 GHz and 2.480 GHz, to be exact).  Wi-Fi -IEEE 802.11 is a set of standards for implementing wireless local area network (WLAN) computer communication in the 2.4, 3.6 and 5 GHz frequency bands.
8. (c) LED bulbs are grouped in clusters with diffuser lenses which have broadened the applications for LED use in the home.
9. (a) The oil zapper feeds on hydrocarbon compounds present in crude oil and oily sludge (a hazardous hydrocarbon waste generated by oil refineries) and converts them into harmless CO and water. The scientific term for the above-mentioned process is bioremediation.  2
10. (b) Statement 3 is incorrect as the thickness of BD is 1.1 mm while that of DVD is 1.2 mm. The difference lies in capacity so statement 2 is correct. As far as statement 1 is concerned.
11. (b) VPN is all about maintaining privacy over the public internet.
12. (c) Targeted drug delivery is made possible by nanotechnology. Medical nanotechnology can largely contribute to genetic therapy and improvement.  Diseases can be easily treated if approached at the genetic level. So instead of treating diseases based on the symptoms, nanotechnology will help medical practitioners treat the problem by looking at the root cause.
13. (c) Near field communication utilizes electromagnetic radio fields while technologies such as Bluetooth and Wi-Fi focus on radio transmissions instead. Near Field Communication is an offshoot of Radio-Frequency Identification (RFID) with the exception that NFC is designed for use by devices within close proximity to each other. When a secure channel is established, the information is encrypted and only an authorized device can decode it. NFC users should ensure that the companies do their business with the use of secure channels.