1. (a) All the statements about the Indian satellite given in the question are correct.
2. (c) Artificial satellite always launched from the earth to eastward direction because earth rotates from west to east, which makes it Geosynchronus. But the escape velocity is given by the booster of the rocket.
3. (c) METSAT was the first Indian (ISRO), Meterological geostationary satellite designed to simultaneously obtain atmospheric cloud cover, water vapour and temperature data. PSLV-C4 carried a payload of 1060 kg in to a geosynchronous orbit.
4. (d) Deep Impact was a NASA space probe launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station  on January 12, 2005. It was designed to study the interior composition of the comet Tempel 1.
5. (d) Atlantis  was a Space Shuttle orbiter of National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA).
6. (c) Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, Ltd. and the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) launched the Lunar Orbit Explorer "KAGUYA" (SELENE) at on September 14, 2007, from the Tanegashima Space Center. The major objectives of the mission are to understand the Moon's origin and evolution and to observe the Moon in various ways in order to utilize it in the future.
7. (c)
8. (b) Cassini is an unmanned spacecraft sent to the planet Saturn.
9. (c) The Themis mission, comprising five identical probes, aims to gain new insights into the colourful displays in high-latitude skies.  In particular, scientists want to understand what triggers a sudden bri ghtening of t he l ights. A US space agency (NASA) has blasted off from Cape Canaveral in Florida.
10. (a) A jet engine combines oxygen from the air with fuel at high temperature. There is usually a spark to ignite the fuel vapor, but once the engine begins turning, it will continue running until it runs out of fuel or air.  A rocket, in contrast, carries both fuel (which may be solid or liquid) and oxygen.
11. (d) Oceansat-2 continues with the service of oceansat-1. The main objectives of oceansat-2 are to study surface winds and ocean surface strata, observation of chlorophyll concentration, monitoring of phytoplanktion blooms, study of atmospheric aerosol and suspended sediments in wath.  
12. (a) A geostationary orbit (or Geostationary Earth Orbit - GEO) is a geosynchronous orbit directly above the Earth's equator (0° latitude), with a period equal to the Earth's rotational period and an orbital eccentricity of approximately zero. It is the part of space about 35,786 km (22,236 miles) above sea level, in the plane of the equator, where near-geostationary orbits may be implemented.
13. (d) An artificial satellite moving round the Earth in a circular orbit possesses an acceleration which is "constant" in magnitude but "changing in direction".  An artificial satellite revolves round the earth under centripetal acceleration. By the launch rocket, immediately before the satellite is established in the predetermined orbit, the speed given to it is 30, 000 km/hr. The speed must be great enough so gravity doesn't bring the satellite back to Earth, but not so great that the satellite escapes gravity out into space.  This means that the speed, which is provided by the rocket is the source of the centrifugal force, and the attraction of the earth holds it from moving away from this centrifugal force.
14. (b) Cassini-Huygens is an unmanned spacecraft sent to the planet Saturn. Therefore, option 1 is wrong, this eliminates option (a), (c) and (d). Now we are left with final answer B only 2 and 3. MESSENGER  is a robotic NASA spacecraft orbiting the planet Mercury.  Voyager 1 (September 1977) and voyager 2 (Aug 1977) were launched to study the outer Solar System.
15. (c) Bhuvan, is a software application which allows users to explore a 2D/3D representation of the surface of the Earth. ISRO launched the beta version of its web-based GIS tool, Bhuvan, on August 12, 2009.  Bhuvan offers detailed imagery of Indian locations compared to other Virtual Globe Software, with spatial resolutions ranging up to 1 metre