1. (c) X-Ray technique, C 14 and Dyer technique is very important technique for permanent change in DNA.  But in coal miner, C 14 amount is very very less. So, there is no risk of change in DNA.
2. (d) DNA finger printing technology is the process of establishing the biological paternal relationship between individual and his alleged child on the analysis of sample cells taken from each of them.  DNA finger printing can solve cases of rape murder etc.
3. (b) Bt-cotton is a transgenic crop of bacterium, Bacillus thuringiensis. This gene confers  the genetically modified plant, resistance against a variety of insects and pests.
4. (d) Cloning is a process, which artificially performed in laboratory ( in vitro). Dolly was a clonned animal, but not the first cloned mammal. In 1984 a mice was cloned first.
5. (a) DNA finger printing is the technique which identify paternity and criminals in rape cases, by the help of any tissue sample, hair, saliva or dried semen.
6. (b) Insect resistant cotton plants have been genetically engineered by inserting a gene from bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis.
7. (a) Hybridoma technology is used to commercially production of monoclonal antibodies. The monoclonal antibodies are protective protein produced by the clone of single immune cell.
8. (d)       Achievement                      Scientist A. Discovery of transduction - 3. Lederberg and conjugation in bacteria B. Establishing the sex linked - 4. Morgan inheritance C. Isolation of DNA Polymerase - 2. Korenberg from E. coli D. Establishing the complete - 1. Khurana genetic code
9. (b) Double helix structure of DNA transmits genetic information from generation to generation and the process is called semiconservative process.
10. (b) Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) is an insecticide with unusual properties that make it useful for pest control in certain situation. Bt is a naturally occurring bacterium common in soils throughout the world.  Several strains can infect and kill insects.
11. (a) Scientist Achievementes A. Arber and Smith 2. Discovered endonuclease B. Feldman 1. Developed transgenic plants with Agrobacterium T-DNA C. Mullis 4. Discovered polymerase chain reaction.  D. Temin & Baltimore 3. Discovered reverse transcriptage
12. (d) Stem cells are a class of undifferentiated cells, that are able to differentiate into specialized cell types.  Sources are : (i) Embryo formed during the blastocyst phase of embryological development.  (ii) From adult tissue
13. (c) Adam Osborne introduced the first portable computer in 1981 and Lan Wilmut, an English embryologist first clonned a mammal (Lamb) in year 1996.
14. (b) Dr. V. Mohan Reddy in February 2005 performed successful open heart surgery of premature baby of 700 gms.
15. (d) ELISA (Enzyme-Linked Immuno Sorbent Assay) is most widely used in detecting the presence of HIV antibodies. Rh + blood group is found in more than 85% of people.
16. (a) The Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) is one of the Flexible Mechanisms defined in the Kyoto Protocol (IPCC, 2007) that provides for emissions reduction projects which generate Certified Emission Reduction units which may be traded in emissions trading schemes. The CDM is defined in Article 12 of the Protocol and is intended to meet two objectives: (1) to assist parties not included in Annex I in achieving sustainable development and in contributing to the ultimate objective of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change(UNFCCC), which is to prevent dangerous climate change; and (2) to assist parties included in Annex I in achieving compliance with their quantified emission limitation and reduction commitments (greenhouse gas (GHG) emission caps).
17. (d) The Committee on Development of Bio-fuels setup by the Planning Commission in July, 2002, in its report of April, 2003, recommended launching of the National Commission on Bio-diesel.  Ministry of Rural development was designated as the Nodal Ministry for this Mission.
18. (d) WiMAX is one of the hottest broadband wireless technologies around today. WiMAX systems are expected to deliver broadband access services to residential and enterprise customers in an economical wa y.
19. (c) Sugarcane ethanol is an alcohol-based fuel produced by the fermentation of sugarcane juice and molasses. Because it is a clean, affordable and lowcarbon biofuel, sugarcane ethanol has emerged as a leading renewable fuel for the transportation sector.
20. (c) The Clean Development Mechanism (CDM), defined in Article 12 of the Protocol, allows a country with an emission-reduction or emission-limitation commitment under the Kyoto Protocol (Annex B Party) to implement an emission-reduction project in developing countries.
21. (b) The Kyoto Protocol invented the concept of carbon emissions trading, whereby carbon credits were a "flexibility mechanism". Under this flexibility mechanism Annex 1 (developed countries) could use the carbon credits to meet their emission reduction commitments.  A carbon credit is a generic term for any tradable certificate or permit representing the right to emit one tonne of carbon dioxide or the mass of another greenhouse gas with a carbon dioxide equivalent (tCO2e) equivalent to one tonne of carbon dioxide.
22. (d) Cyber knife is a frameless robot radiosurgery system is a non-invasive alternative to surgery for the treatment of both cancerous and non cancerous tumour.
23. (b) Golden rice is genetically modified rice. It contains Beta carotene and other carotenoids. Provitamin A (Beta carotene) which upon ingestion converted to Vitamin A in the body.
24. (a) Bt Brinjal is a transgenic brinjal created by inserting a gene cry1Ac from the soil bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis into Brinjal. This is said to give the Brinjal plant resistance against lepidopteran insects like the Brinjal Fruit and Shoot Borer Leucinodes orbonalis and Fruit Borer Helicoverpa armigera.
25. (c) Stem cells can be used for medical therapies.
26. (d) All are correct