1. Assertion (A) : Information technology is fast becoming a very important field of activity in India.
Reason (R) : Software is one of the major exports of the country and India has a very strong base in hardware. [1999]
Codes:
(a) Both A and R are true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) Both A and R are true but R is not a correct explanation of A
(c) A is true but R is false
(d) A is false but R is true

2. The memory of a computer is commonly expressed in terms of kilobytes or megabytes. A byte is made up of: [2000]
(a) eight binary digits
(b) eight decimal digits
(c) two binary digits
(d) two decimal digits

3. Consider the following statements: [2004]
1. Smart card is a plastic card with an embedded microchip.
2. Digital technology is primarily used with new physical communication medium such as satellite and fibre optics transmission.
3. A digital library is a collection of documents in an organized electronic form available on the internet only.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 3 only (b) 1 and 2
(c) 2 and 3 (d) 1, 2 and 3

4. Consider the following: [2010]
1. Bluetooth device 2. Cordless phone
3. Microwave oven 4. Wi-Fi device
Which of the above can operate between 2.4 and 2.5 GHz range of radio frequency band?
(a) 1 and 2 only (b) 3 and 4 only
(c) 1, 2 and 4 only (d) 1, 2, 3 and 4

5. Recently, LASIK (Laser Assisted In Situ Keratomileusis) procedure is being made popular for vision correction.  Which one of the following statements in this context is-not correct? [2010]
(a) LASIK procedure is used to correct refractive errors of the eye
(b) It is a procedure that permanently changes the shapes of the cornea
(c) It reduces a person's dependence on glasses or contact lenses
(d) It is a procedure that can be done on the person of any age

6. Which among the following do/does not belong/ belongs to the GSM family of wireless technologies?  [2010]
(a) EDGE (b) LTE
(c) DSL (d) Both EDGE and LTE

7. What is the difference between Blue-tooth and Wi-Fi devices? [2011 - I]
(a) Bluetooth uses 2.4 GHz radio frequency band, whereas Wi-Fi can use 2.4 GHz or 5 GHz frequency band
(b) Bluetooth is used for Wireless Local Area Networks (WLAN) only, whereas Wi-Fi is used for wireless wide area networks (WWAN) only
(c) When information is transmitted between two devices using Bluetooth technology, the devices have to be in the line of sight of each other, but when Wi-Fi technology is used the devices need not be in the line of sight of each other
(d) The statements a and b given above are correct in this context

8. What is the difference between a CFL and an LED lamp ?
(1) To produce light, a CFL uses mercury vapour and phosphor while an LED lamp uses semiconductor material
(2) The average life span of a CFL is much longer than that of an LED lamp
(3) A CFL is less energy-efficient as compared to an LED lamp [2011 - I]
Which of the statements given above is/are correct ?
(a) 1 only (b) 2 and 3 only
(c) 1 and 3 only (d) 1, 2 and 3

9. Recently , "oil zapper" was in the news. What is it ?  [2011 - I]
(a) It is an eco-friendly technology for the remediation of oily sludge and oil spills
(b) It is the latest technology developed for undersea oil exploration
(c) It is a genetically engineered high biofuel yielding maize variety
(d) It is the latest technology to control the accidentally caused flames from oil wells.

10. A new optical disc format known as the Blu-ray Disc (BD) is becoming popular. In what way is it different from the traditional DVD ? [2011 - I]
1. DVD supports Standard Definition video while BD supports high definition video
2. Compared to a DVD, the BD format has several times more storage capacity
3. Thic kness of BD i s 2. 4 mm whil e t hat of DVD is 1. 2 mm.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 only
(b) 1 and 2 only
(c) 2 and 3 only
(d) 1,2 and 3

11. What is "Virtual Private Network" ? [2011 - I]
(a) It is a private computer network of an organization where the remote users can transmit encrypted information through the server of the organization.
(b) It is a computer network across a public internet that provides users access to their organization's network while maintaining the security of the information transmitted.
(c) It is a computer network in which users can access a shared pool of computing resources through a service provider.
(d) None of the statements is correct description of Virtual Private Network.

12. With reference to the use of nano-technology in health sector, which of the following statements is/are correct? [2015-I]
1. Targeted drug delivery is made possible by nanotechnology.
2. Nanotechnology can largely contribute to gene t he r a py.
Select the correct answer using the code given below.
(a) 1 only (b) 2 Only
(c) Both 1 and 2 (d) Neither 1 nor 2

13. With reference to 'Near Field Communication (NFC) Technology', which of the following statements is/are correct? [2015-I]
1. It is a contactless communication technology that uses electromagnetic radio fields.
2. NFC is designed for use by devices which can be at a distance of even a metre from each other
3. NFC can use encryption when sending sensitive information.
Select the correct answer using the code given below.
(a) 1 and 2 only (b) 3 Only
(c) 1 and 3 only (d) 1, 2 and 3
