1. (c) Prithvi Air Defence( (PAD) missile was tested in November 2006, followed by AAD in December 2007.  With the test of the PAD missile, India became the fourth country to have successfully developed an Anti-ballistic missile system, after United States, Russia, and Israel. On 6 March 2009, India again successfully tested its missile defence shield, during which an incoming "enemy" missile was intercepted at an altitude of 75 km.  Prithvi  is a tactical surface-to-surface short-range ballistic missile (SRBM) developed by DRDO of India under the Integrated Guided Missile Development Program (IGMDP) .It is also a single-stage liquidfuelled missile having a maximum warhead mounting capability of 500 kg, but with an extended range of 250 km (160 mi).
2. (d) Galileo is the global navigation satellite system (GNSS) that is currently being created by the European Union (EU) and the European Space Agency (ESA).
3. (a) Barak is an Israeli surface-to-air missile (SAM) designed to be used as a ship-borne point-defense missile system against aircraft, anti-ship missiles, and UAVs. India and Israel jointly developed and produced it.
4. (b) ITER (International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor ) is an international nuclear fusion research and engineering megaproject, which is currently building the world's largest experimental tokamak nuclear fusion reactor adjacent to the Cadarache facility in the south of France.
5. (c) Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) has developed the Dhruv advanced light helicopter (ALH), a light (5.5t class) multirole and multimission helicopter for army, air force, navy, coastguard and civil operations  for both utility and attack roles by day and night.
6. (d) The missile flew at 7.5 Mach, that is 7.5 times the speed of sound and covered its full range of 700 km in 500 seconds.
7. (d) INS Sindhughosh (S55) i s t he lead ship of her c lass of diesel-electric submarines of the Indian Navy. INS Viraat is a Centaur-class aircraft carrier in service with the Indian Navy.
8. (a) Agni IV is a surface-to-surface missile. It is fuelled by solid propellant. It can deliver one-tonne nuclear warheads about 4000 km away.
9. (d) IndARC stands for India's underwater observatory to scientifically study the Arctic region.  This is the country's first underwater moored observatory in the Kongsfjorden fjord, half way between Norway and the North Pole. It represents a maj or milestone in India' s scientific endeavours in the Arctic region.  It is developed by Earth System Science Organisation (ESSO), National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research (NCAOR), National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT) and Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS). IndARC was deployed from RV Lance which is  a research vessel belonging to the Norwegian Polar Institute.