1. (b) The nitric acid in polar stratospheric clouds reacts with CFCs to form chlorine, which catalyzes the photochemical destruction of ozone.
2. (a) The Bhitarkanika Mangroves are a mangrove wetland in India's Orissa state. The Bhitarkanika Mangroves cover an area of 650 km2 in the river delta of the Brahmani and Baitarani rivers.
3. (c) To qualify as a hotspot, a region must meet two strict criteria: it must contain at least 1,500 species of vascular plants (> 0.5 percent of the world's total) as endemics, and it has to have lost at least 70 percent of its original habitat. So we choose Species richness as well as Endemism. Along with this Threat perception is necessary to take , because it makes the base of this concept. Adaptation of flora is an arbitrary option, Ethno-botanical importance does nothing with the Biodiversity Hotspot selection criteria, vegetation Density is also discarded.
4. (b)  Himalayas and its adjoining areas are marked as a confluence of several biogeographical realms. It has varity of forest type and is rich in zoobiogeographic region.
5. (d) Algea multiply rapidly when nutrients are present there. So, discharge of nutrients favour algea growth from estuaries to sea. The run off the land during the monsoon bring salts which favours the growth of algea. Upwelling of the sea water from the sea flow brings the nutrients on tap level leading in fast algea multiplication.
6. (c) Photosynthesis by plants removes about 120 billion tons of carbon from the air per year, but plant decomposition returns about the same amount. When the organic matter is oxidized through respiration, the reverse of photosynthesis takes place. Respiration releases CO into the atmosphere. Respiration and photosynthesis occur at nearly equal rates over one 2 year. Volcanic eruptions and metamorphism release gases into the atmosphere. Volcanic gases are primarily water vapor, carbon dioxide and sulphur dioxide.
7. (b) The Indian wild ass are also called as ghudkhuer in local Gujrati language, is a subspecies of the onager native of South Asia. It is unknown how they disappeared though they have never been hunting target during any emperors in India. The history speaks that their number has been declining after due to diseases such as surra and horse sickness. The process related to salt activities have also been a reason behind it.
8. (d) Biological diversity helps in the formation and maintenance of soil structure and the retention of moisture and nutrient levels. Biodiversity supports ecosystem services including air quality, climate water purification, pollination, and prevention of erosion.
9. (b) Zoo and botanical gardens are the most conventional methods of ex-situ conservation, rest all options are natural habitats so are of in-situ conservation.
10. (d) The mangrove trees do not get uprooted by storms and tides because of their extensive roots.
11. (b) The red data book contain only 8 lists of threatened plant and animal species.
12. (c) Biodiversity is higher in the low latitudes as compared to the higher latitudes as the habitat tolerance level is very narrow at greater latitude.  Mountains have high range of species at the low latitude as they can support larger number of species due to climatic condition.
13. (c) There are 35 act of Indian Government which have relevance to Biodiversity conservation which includes all the four option given in this question.
14. (d) National Biodiversity Authority (NBA) checks the biopiracy and protects the indigeneous and traditional genetic resources. It directly monitors and supervises the scientific research on genetic modification of crop plants application for intellectual property Rights related to genetic biological resources cannot be made without the approval of NBA.
15. (a) The National Green Tribunal Act, 2010 was enacted in consonance with the Right to healthy environment, construed as a part of Right to life under Art. 21.
16. (b) If National Water Mission is properly and completely implemented, then the part of the water needs of urban areas will be met through recycling of waste water and the water requirements of coastal cities with inadequate alternative sources of water will be met by adopting appropriate technologies that allow for the use of ocean water.
17. (c) The combustible gas produced during gasification process includes carbon monoxide hydrogen, carbon dioxide and possibly hydrocarbons like methane (CH).
18. (d) 1, 2, 3 and 4 are correct.  4 Marine organism like coral and phytoplankton are affected by ocean acidification. It decrease growth, reproduction and survival of these species the acidification of ocean may lead to cloud formation.  Sulfuric acid seeds the cloud formation which is emitted from ocean in the form of dimethylsulfide (DMS) produce by phytoplankton. These phytoplankton produces less DMS when ocean water is acidified and result less cloud formation.
19. (d) Carton dioxide absorbs the Infra Red part of Solar Radiation
20. (b) Bandipur, Manas and Sunderbans are declared Tiger Reserves
21. (b) In national parks, local people are not allowed to collect and use the biomass available in the areas.
22. (a) Red Panda and Asiatic Wild Ass, are endangered species.
23. (d)
24. (a) Oryx has adapted to live in hot and arid areas whereas Chiru is adapted to live in steppes and semidesert areas of cold high mountains.
25. (a) Except promotion of vegetarianism all other acts are threats to the biodiversity of a geographical area.
26. (c) All the given agricultural practices help in carbon sequestration.
27. (a) If phytoplankton of an ocean is completely destroyed for some reason then (i) The ocean as a carbon sink would be adversely affected.  (ii) The food chains in the ocean would be adversely affected as the fishes live on them.
28. (b) A drug used by cattle owners for treating their diseased cattle.
29. (b) Electronic waste or E-waste has ferrous and non- ferrous metals both. Non-ferrous metals like copper, aluminium, silver, gold, platinum, palladium etc. The presence of elements like lead, mercury arsenic, cadmium, selenium and hexavalent chromium are classified as hazardous waste.
30. (a) A food chain illustrates the order in which a chain of organisms feed upon each other.  A food chain is the sequence of who eats whom in a biological community to obtain nutrition.  Sample:- Grassland Biome GRASS > GRASS HOPPER > RAT> SNAKE > HAWK
31. (a) Lion-tailed Macaques are found in the mountain forests scattered across three Indian states stated above. The lion-tailed Macaques are endangered as per IUCN.
32. (b) Ecological Niche is a term that describes the way of life of a species. Each species is thought to have a separate unique niche. The ecological niche describes how an organism or population responds to the distribution of resources and competitors. A niche is the sum of the habitat requirements that allow a species to persist and produce offspring.
33. (a) Star tortoise is found in India in the dry and scrub forests. Pygmy Hog is an endangered species found in Assam. Only 150 animals are left. Monitor Lizard is found in India, Sri Lanka and Pakistan. Spider Monkey is the inhabitant of tropical forests of Central and South America.
34. (a) Drinking water in some parts of India has contaminants like Arsenic, Fluoride other than many other contaminants. The sources of Arsenic are run off from orchards. The sources of fluoride are erosion of natural deposits, discharge from fertilizers and aluminum factories.
35. (a) Nokrek Biosphere Reserve is situated in Garo Hills in Meghalaya. Logtak Lake is in Manipur. Barail Range is in Assam. Though Namdapha National Park and Dafla Hill both are in Arunachal Pradesh, the two are separate entities.
36. (c) The trees cannot replace the grasses as a part of an ecological succession because of water limits and fire.
37. (d) The plant life in an ecosystem support the animal life and vice versa. So the sequence of ecosystems in the order of decreasing productivity is Ocean>mangroves> lakes>grasslands. Ocean or marine ecosystems usually have a large biodiversity.  Mangrove is a part of that ecosystem. So are lakes.  Grasslands are areas where vegetation is dominated by grasses hence biodiversity is in the decline.
38. (c) Gharial is critically endangered according to IUCN. Overhunting for skin and trophies, habitat loss due to construction of dams and barrages has been the reason for their decline. Leather back turtles are endangered due to human carelessness. Swamp deer occupies a place in the list of the endangered species of the world. Deforestation, draining of swamps and marshes for farming has led to the destruction of their natural habitat.
39. (b) Bacteria and Fungi both are known as decomposer organisms. Bacteria are important decomposers; they can break down any kind of organic matters. Fungi are primary decomposers, they not only decompose the surface organisms but they can also penetrate deep into the organic matters.
40. (c) In photosynthesis food is oxidized to form energy , oxygen and water. Thus the free energy is converted into potential energy and stored.
41. (a) Mite, Spider and Scorpion belong to the category of Arachnids, while Crabs belong to the category of crustaceans.
42. (d) The International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture aims at guaranteeing food security through the conservation, exchange and sustainable use of the world's plant genetic resources for food and agriculture. The United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification  is a Convention to combat desertification and mitigate the effects of drought. The World Heritage Convention is concerned with the protection of the world cultural and natural heritage.All three of them have a bearing on the biodiversity.
43. (c) Earth Hour is a worldwide movement for the planet organized by the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF). The event is held worldwide annually encouraging individuals, communities, households and businesses to turn off their non-essential lights for one hour, from 8:30 to 9:30 p.m. to raise the awareness about the climate change and the need to save the planet.
44. (a) Diatoms are autotrophs which prepare their own food. Crustaceans are herbivorous animals which feed on diatoms. Herrings are carnivorous animals which feed on Crustaceans. This completes the food chain.  Diatoms are autotrophs, prepare their own food.  Crustaceans eats diatoms. Crustaceons members of zooplants and are eaten by Herring fish when small.
45. (a) The Montreux Record is a register of wetland sites on the List of Wetlands of International Importance where changes in ecological character have occurred, are occurring, or are likely to occur as a result of technological developments, pollution or other human interference.
46. (c) The Bombay Natural History Society is one of the largest non-governmental organizations in India engaged in conservation and biodiversity research. It strives to conserve nature through action-based research, education and publicawareness. It organizes and conducts nature trails and camps for the general public.
47. (a) The Global Environment Facility (GEF) unites 183 countries in partnership with international institutions, civil society organizations (CSOs), and the private sector to address global environmental issues. It serves as financial mechanism for 'Convention on Biological Diversity' and 'United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change' It undertakes scientific research on environmental issues at global level. It is not an agency under OECD.
48. (a) Photovoltaics' is a technology that generates electricity by direct conversion of light into electricity, while 'Solar Thermal' is a technology that utilizes the Sun's rays to generate heat which is further used in electricity generation process. Both Photovoltaic cells and solar thermal  generate direct current (DC). India has a manufacturing base for both.
49. (c) Dampa Tiger Reserve, the largest wildlife sanctuary in Mizoram. Saramati  peak is in  Nagaland.  It is located near Tuensang town with a height of 3,826 m. Gumti Wildlife Sanctuary is famous wildlife reserve in Tripura.
50. (b) This organization is in partnership but not formed by Ramsar convention. The organization  was formed in 1954 and Ramsar convention was signed in 1971. "Wetlands International", It is an intergovernmental organization formed by the countries which are signatories to Ramsar Convention.It works at the field level to develop and mobilize knowledge, and use the practical experience to advocate for better policies.
51. (c) Statement 1, 3 and 4 are correct as per wwf and environment ministry.
52. (c) Brominated flame retardants used in many household products are highly resistant to degradation in the environment and they are able to accumulate in humans and animals.
53. (c) Hibernation is a state of inactivity and metabolic depression in endothermsis characterized by low body temperature, slow breathing and heart rate, and low metabolic rate.It is found in Bat ,bear and rodents etc.
54. (c) Volcanic action, Respiration and decay of organic matter adds/add carbon dioxide to the carbon cycle on the planet Earth. However, photosynthesis uses Carbon di oxide to produce food.
55. (b) Common Myna are  birds stalking alongside the cattle to seize the insects disturbed by their movement through grasses. The common myna is readily identified by the brown body, black hooded head and the bare yellow patch behind the eye.
56. (b) Eco-sensitive zones are ecological important area under environment protection Act 1986 around national parks and wildlife sanctuaries prohibiting all kinds of human activities in those zone except agriculture by the natives of the area.
57. (b) The Animal Welfare Board of India was established in 1962 under Section 4 of The Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960. The National Tiger Conservation Authority is set up under the Chairmanship of the Minister for Environment and Forests and is a statutory body. National Ganga River Basin Authority was established by the Central Government of India, on 20 February 2009.The Prime Minister is the chair of the Authority.
58. (a) Coral reefs are diverse underwater ecosystems held together by calcium carbonate structures secreted by corals. Andaman and Nicobar,Gulf of Kachchh and Gulf of Mannar have coral reefs.  However Sunderbans do not have coral reef.
59. (b) In India, the problem of soil erosion is associated with deforestataion. Terace cultivation helps in less erosion of soil.
60. (a) Biosphere reserves are established under UNESCO's Man and Biosphere (MAB) Programme.
61. (d) Rise in temperature by 3°C to that of preindustrial leue would reverse the carbon cycle instead of absorbing CO vegetation and soil would start releasing it.  2
62. (b) In organisms called lichens, a chlorophy llcontaining partner, which is an alga, and a fungus live together fungus provides shelter, water and minerals to the alga and, in return, the alga provides food which it prepares by photosynthesis.
63. (d) In steel furnace coke reacts with iron to release pollutants like Oxides of sulphur, Oxides of nitrogen, Carbon monoxide and Carbon dioxide.
64. (b) The festival starts with the green march celebrating the beginning of the rains and how souring season planting sapling of fruit bearing trees.
65. (c) As both the statement are true.
66. (d) Namdapha National Park is located in Arunachal Pradesh. The climate of this area varies from tropical to subtropical, temperate and arctic. It is tropical and subtropical in southern regions and arctic type found in northern part of the park.
67. (d) Housed within the Carbon Finance Unit of the World Bank, the BioCarbon Fund is a public-private sector initiative mobilizing financing to help for development of projects that sequester or conserve carbon in forest and agro-ecosystems. It was created in 2004.
68. (c) The Forest Carbon Partnership Facility  is a global partnership of governments, businesses, civil society, and Indigenous Peoples focused on reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, forest carbon stock conservation, the sustainable management of forests, and the enhancement of forest carbon stocks in developing countries (activities commonly referred to as REDD+).
69. (c) BirdLife international is a global partnership of conservation organisations that strives to conserve birds, their habitats and global biodiversity. It is working with people towards sustainability in the use of natural resources. It is the World's largest partnership of conservation organisations, with over 120 partner organizations. An Important Bird and Biodiversity Area (IBA) is an area recognized as being globally important habitat for the conservation of bird populations. The program was developed and sites are identified by BirdLife International.
70. (a) The tropical moist deciduous forests are found in Sahyadris, the north-eastern parts of the peninsula and along the foothills of the Himalayas. Teak and sal are found in these forests.
71. (a) An ecosystem includes all of the living things (plants, animals and organisms) in a given area, interacting with each other, and also with their nonliving environments (weather, earth, sun, soil, climate, atmosphere).
72. (c) IREDA is a Public Limited Government Company which was established as a Non-Banking Financial Institution in 1987 under the administrative control of MNRE to promote, develop and extend financial assistance for renewable energy and energy efficiency /conservation proj ects with the motto: "ENERGY FOR EVER".  
73. (b) The Keibul Lamjao National Park is a national park located in Manipur. It is 40 km in area and the only floating park in the world which is located in North East India, and an integral part of Loktak Lake.
74. (b) IUCN is not an organ of UN. It has observer and consultative status at the United Nations.
75. (c) The dugong is a medium-sized marine mammal.  Dugong is listed under schedule 1 of India Wildlife Protection Act, 1972. In 2008, a MoU was signed between the Ministry of Environment and Forests and the Government of India, in order to conserve dugongs. In fact the highest level of legal protection is accorded to dugongs in India.
76. (c) The Gangetic dolphins have been declared as the National Aquatic Animal of India .River Dolphin is the National Aquatic Animal of India. The Ministry of Environment and Forests notified  the Ganges River Dolphin as the National Aquatic Animal on 18th May 2010. This mammal is also said to represent the purity of the holy Ganga as it can only survive in pure and fresh water.
77. (b) The Montreal Protocol is an international treaty designed to protect the ozone layer by phasing out the production of numerous substances that are responsible for ozone depletion.
78. (a) The United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), also known as the Rio Summit or Earth Summit. It was a major United Nations conference held in Rio de Janeiro from 3 to 14 June 1992. In 2012, the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development was also held in Rio, and is also commonly called Rio+20 or Rio Earth Summit 2012.
79. (a) The Green Climate Fund (GCF) is a fund within the framework of the UNFCCC founded as a mechanism to redistribute money from the developed to the developing world, in order to assist the developing countries in adaptation and mitigation practices to counter climate change. The Fund is governed by the GCF Board. The assets of the GCF will be administered by a trustee only for the purpose of, and in accordance with, the relevant decisions of the GCF Board. The World Bank was invited by the COP to serve as the interim trustee of the GCF, subj ect to a review three years after operation of the Fund.