1. (b) VSL Bhadravati located in Karnataka is the only iron and state plant which does not have capative coal mines and is situated outside the coal producing area. The plant switched over to electric furnaces after the completion of Mahatma Gandhi Hydel Power Station.
2. (*) As per the present list of 2012, 18 industries require compulsory licensing. These include; 1. Coal and lignite, 2. Petroleum (other than crude) and its distillation products, 3. Distillation and brewing of alcoholic drinks, 4. Sugar, 5. Animal fats and oils, partly or wholly hydrogenated, 6. Cigars and cigarettes of tobacco and manufactured tobacco substitutes, 7. Asbestos and asbestos-based products, 8. Plywood, decorative veneers, and other woodbased products such as particle board, medium density fiber board, and black-board, 9. Raw hides and skins, leather chamois and patent leather, 10.  Tanned or dressed fur skins, 11. Motor cars, 12. Paper and Newsprint except biogases-based units (i.e.  except units based on minimum 75% pulp from agricultural residues, biogases and other non conventional raw materials), 13. Electronic aerospace and defence equipment: all types, 14. Explosives including detonating fuses, safety fuses, gunpowder, nitrocellulose and matches, 15. Hazardous chemicals, 16. Drugs and Pharmaceuticals (according to Drug Policy), 17. Entertainment electronics (VCR's, colour TV's, CD players, tape recorders), 18. White goods (domestic refrigerators, domestic dishwashing machines, programmable domestic washing machines, microwave ovens, air conditioners)
3. (b) The Nehru Rozgar Yojana (1989) has been designed to provide employment to the urban unemployed and under-employed poor.
4. (a) The contribution of small scale industries to employment and exports is substantial. The sector contributes over 40 per cent of the gross turnover in the manufacturing sector, 45 per cent of manufactured exports and 25 per cent of total exports. As in 2015.
5. (b) Yamuna Nagar, Guwahati and Ballarpur are famous for paper manufacturing industry. Yamuna Nagar is in Haryana, Guwahati is in Assam and Ballarpur is in Maharashtra.
6. (a) Hazardous industries Location A. Glass Industry - Firozabad B. Brassware Industry - Moradabad C. Slate Industry - Marakpur Expl anations D. Handmade Carpet - Mirzapur Industry All these industries use child labour filling of a public interest petition in the Supreme Court is pending.
7. (c) White goods are large electrical goods used domestically such as air conditioners, refrigerators, cooking range etc., which had a white enamel finish.  Despite their availability in varied colours now, they are still called white goods. The term is used where British English is spoken. In the year 1993 the govt. of India had decided to de-licence these goods.
8. (b) In the rough outline map of India show centres of cement industry : '1' Sikka  in Gujarat.  '2' Katni  in Madhya Pradesh '3' Churk  in Uttar Pradesh '4' Tirunelveli  in Tamil Nadu.  14 INDIA 23 All the places have cement industries.
9. (b) SSI contribution to Indian exports is 35% and in the total manufacturing turnover contribute approximately 40%. Small scale, industries have a low capital output ratio and give employment to larger number of workers. As they use raw material they can be dispersed over a wider area.
10. (a)         Industries Industrial centres A. Pearl fishing Tuticorin B. Automobile industry Pune C. Ship building Marmagao D. Engineering goods Pinjore
11. (b) A large scale industry will employ more capital, have a large turn power and will use more of power.  It will use less labour as it is capital intensive. India has a very high rate of savings. It is the structural constrains which limit the rate of growth.
12. (d) India due to its handicrafts, culture and monuments is a preferred destination. However, there is a lack of tourist infrastructure.
13. (d) Atlas cycle company is situated at Sonepat in Haryana. Bharat Earth Movers Limited is in Banglore, Karnataka. Indian Farmers Fertilizers Co-operative Ltd is present in Kalol in Gujarat and National Aluminium Company Limited is located at Bhubaneswar.
14. (c) India does not have a strong base in computer hardware.
15. (b) Among various factors entrepreneurial skills, availability of finance turnover and power consumption etc. decides the natural and size of an industry.
16. (a) The only negative factor is the time difference which causes large turn over as most IT work is conducted during night shift.
17. (*) According to 2011-12 data the correct order isMaharashtra (101314 INR), Tamil Nadu 84496 (INR), Gujarat (75115 INR), Karnataka (68374 INR)
18. (a) Minerals and Metals Trading Corporation Limited (MMTC) is one of the two biggest foreign exchange earner for India. It is a leading international trading company with a turnover of over 68,885 crore rupees in 2010-11. It is the largest international trading company of India and the first Public Sector Enterprise to be accorded the status of FIVE STAR EXPORT HOUSE by Govt. of India for long standing contribution to exports. MMTC is the largest non-oil importer in India.
19. (b) HINDALCO, an aluminium factory located at Renukut due to abundant supply of power from National Thermal Power Station, Rihand and a capative power plant at Renu Sagar. It has a cogeneration unit at the plant itself.
20. (a) Abid Hussain Committee (1997) recommended total dereservation and desired replacing policy of reservation with a policy of promotion and strengthening of small scale units.
21. (a) ONGC is India's largest petrochemical company.  IPCL is the second largest petrochemical company. It produces around 69% of India's crude oil and around 62% of its natural gas.
22. (a) India is the 3rd largest producer of and exporter of nitrogenous fertilizer behind China and USA. It has 9th rank in production of steel in world. Coal production of India ranks 3rd after China and U.S.A.  India is the 2nd only to China in silk production.
23. (d) The steel industry recorded highest growth rate of 7%,  electricity, generation growth rate was 4%, coal industry growth was 3.3%.  
24. (a) Alliance Air was formed in 1996 and was complelety owned by Indian Airline. Then are plans to convert it into a Cargo Airline.
25. (a) Rourkela Steel Plant (RSP) is the first intergrated steel plant in the public sector in India. It was set up with German collaboration with an installed capacity of 1 million tonnes.
26. (a) A limited liability partnership (LLP) is a partnership in which some or all partners (depending on the jurisdiction) have limited liability.  LLP shall be a body corporate and a legal entity separate from its partners. It will have perpetual succession. Indian Partnership Act, 1932 shall not be applicable to LLPs and there shall not be any upper limit on number of partners in an LLP unlike an ordinary partnership firm where the maximum number of partners can not exceed 20, LLP Act makes a mandatory statement where one of the partner to the LLP should be an Indian.
27. (c) These two initiatives helped to grow manufacturing sector.
28. (c) Except textiles, all are core industries.
29. (b) 2nd and 3rd are correct statements.
30. (d) Thermal power plants use water to turn into steam (heat energy) to generate electricity (electrical energy).
31. (c) Disguised unemployment is a situation  when people do not have productive full-time employment, but are not counted in the official unemployment statistics.
32. (c) The coal found in India is mainly of non-coking quality and hence coking coal has to be imported. 70% of the steel produced today uses coal. Coking coal is a vital ingredient in the steel making process.
33. (a) Kalamkari painting is a type of hand-painted or block-printed cotton textile which are  produced in parts of India and in Iran. The Machilipatnam Kalamkari craft made at Pedana nearby Machilipatnam in Krishna district of Andhra Pradesh. It evolved with patronage of the Mughals and the Golconda sultanate.
34. (b) Electricity generation (weight: 10.32%) increased by 3.5% in July, 2015. Its cumulative index during April to July, 2015-16 increased by 2.0 % over the corresponding period of previous year.
35. (a) The Fair and Remunerative Price (FRP) of sugarcane is approved by Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs.
36. (a) The town of Srisailam is reputed for the shrine of Lord Mallikarjuna on the flat top of Nallamala Hills.  Omkareshwar is one of the Dwadasa jyotirlingas situated on the Mandhata hills in Vindhya Mountains of Madhya Pradesh. Pushkar is located along Ratnagiri Hills in Rajasthan.
37. (c) The labour Bureau brings out consumer price index numbers.