1. (c) The lead character in the film "The Bandit Queen" has been played by Seema Biswas.
2. (b) The Nobel Prize for deciphering the language of bee was awarded to K.V. Frisch.
3. (c) In Goa, Polygamy is legal for Hindus and illegal for Muslims.
4. (c) Ankia Nat is a folk play of Assam. This art form makes use of large masks of gods, goddesses, demons and animals.
5. (a) Bharatnatyam is the dance of Tamil Nadu. The dance involves solo performances by devadasis or the temple dancer.
6. (d) The Himachal Pradesh Maintenance of Parents and Dependents Bill, 1996 was passed to provide speedy relief to old parents unable to maintain themselves-it makes it mandatory for children to maintain their elderly parents.
7. (c) The Rashtriya Mahila Kosh (National Credit Fund for Women) was set up in 1993 to make credit available for lower income women in India. The Mahila Samridhi Yojana (MSY) was launched on 2nd October, 1993 with the objective of empowering the rural women through building thrift habit, selfreliance and confidence.  The Indira Mahila Yojana (IMY) aims at organizing at the grass-root level to facilitate their participation in decision-making and their empowerment was launched on 20 August 1995.  Pursuant to the objectives of the NPE(National Policy on Education), 1986, the Mahila Samakhya Scheme was started in 1989 to translate the goals enshrined in the NPE into a concrete programme for the education and empowerment of women in rural areas particularly those from socially and economically marginalized groups.
8. (d) Abdul Kalam was the recipient of Bharat Ratna 1997.
9. (c) Austric group (Nishada) spoken by 1.38% of total Indian population, this group includes mainly tribal languages and dialects of the central tribal belt, Khasi and Jaintia hills of Meghalaya and Nicobar island.
10. (a) In the given map 'Central Drug Research Institute' is marked by '4' which is situated in Lucknow of Uttar Pradesh.  'National Atlas and Thematic Mapping Organisation' is situated in Calcutta which is marked as '3'.  National Institute of Ocean Technology is situated in Chennai, which is marked '2' and Temperate Forest Research Centre is situated in Shimla which is marked as '6' on the map.
11. (c)
12. (d) The record of highest aggregate runs in Test Cricket of Sunil Manohar Govaskar was broken by Alan Border.  
13. (d) Pandit Vishnu Digambar Paluskar introduced the scheme of Raga classification of Indian music, Venkatamahi wrote the music of the song 'Vande Matram', Shyama Shastri was a proponent of Karnatic music and Amir Khusrau was the proponent of Khyal form of Hindustani music.
14. (a) Shashi Tharoor is the writer of "Show Business, Amitabha Ghosh wrote "Circle of Reason", Anita Desai wrote "Clear light of Day" and Vikram Chandra wrote" Love and longing in Bombay". These were best selling novels of 1998.
15. (a) Libraries Location State A. Saraswati Mahal Thanjavur Tamil Library Nadu B. Library to Dharamshala Himachal Tibetan works Pradesh and Archives C. Raza Library Rampur Uttar Pradesh D. Khuda Baksh Oriental Public Patna Bihar Library
16. (a) Transchart is the chartering wing of the Minister of Surface Transport. This wing also looks after trading through ships by private sectors.
17. (d) Konkan Railway was the missing link between India's commercial capital Mumbai and Manglore.  This railway line connects Maharashtra, Goa and Karnataka State. 49% equity is from four states governments of Goa, Maharashtra, Kerala and Karnataka and 51% of equity of Konkan Railway corporation.
18. (c) Chakrata holiday resort is situated in Uttaranchal. Haflong resort is present in Assam, Kalimpong resort is present in West Bengal and Kufri resort is present in Himachal Pradesh.
19. (c) Mandarin is spoken in people's Republic of China, Taiwan, Singapore, Malayasia, some part of United States. This language covers 885 million people.  English is spoken by 500 million people.
20. (c) Thali is the folk dance of Rajasthan, not the folk dance of Himachal Pradesh.
21. (c) 'A' marked area in the given map is Punjab and Haryana, where Sikhs as the largest religious minorities.  'B' marked area denoted part of Rajasthan and Gujarat, where Jains are the largest religious minority.  'C' marked area denoted Sanchi area of Madhya Pradesh, where Buddhist are the religious minority.  'D' refers the part of Andhra Pradesh where Christians are religious minority.
22. (b) • Mettur Dam is located across the river Cauvery.  It is present at Salem district of Tamil Nadu.  • Almatti Dam is a dam project on the river Krishna in north of Karnataka.  • Sardar Sarovar Dam is a dam project on the river Narmada, it is situated in Gujarat.  • Gandhi Sagar Dam is the first dam on the river Chambal. It is located in Madhya Pradesh.
23. (b) Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute is located in Cochin of Kerala, which is marked as '5' in the given map. Central sheep breeding farm is located in Hissar of Haryana, which is marked as '2'. National Dairy Research Institute is situated in Karnal of Haryana is marked by '1' in the map. National Institute of Agricultural Extension is situated at Hyderabad of Andhra Pradesh and is marked by '4' in the given map.
24. (b) • About trench is an oceanic trench is present in north pacific ocean. It is measured 7, 679 metre depth.  • Kermadec trench is present in South Pacific Ocean. It is 10, 047 metre depth.  • Sunda trench is present in Indian ocean, It is also called Java trench and maximum depth is 7,725 metre • Sandwitch trench is present in South atlantic ocean and the maximum depth is 8,428 metre.
25. (b) • Central institute of Higher Tibetan studies is present at Varanasi of Uttarpradesh in the year 1967.  • Indira Gandhi Institute of Development Research is located in Mumbai of Maharastra.  • National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences is located in Banglore and • Central institute of English and foreign languages is located in Hyderabad of Andhra Pradesh.
26. (a) Major producer of mineral oil is Venezuela of South America. Coal reserve in Venezuela is 10.2 billion. Major producer of copper is Zambia and Zambia is ranked as world's seventh largest producer of copper. Gabon is ranked as five global producers of manganese.  Guyana is the major producer of bauxite, the production of bauxite is 1.5 million tons per year.
27. (c) M/s Gowthami solvents oil Limited is a power generation plant, which uses Rice husk. M/s K.M. sugar mills uses Distillery spent wash in power generation plant as feed material. M/s Satia paper mills of Punjab uses black liquid as feed material in power plant. M/s Al Kabeer Exports limited uses slaughter house waste as feed material in power plant.
28. (a) Balamurali Krishna is famous carnatic vocalist, Mita Pandit is famous Hindustani vocalist, Kanyakumari is famous for Ghatam from of singing and Nikhil Banerjee is famous sitar player.
29. (c) "Yayati" is not written by Grisih Karnad but it is written by Sakharam Khandekar.
30. (a) Raga Todi which was invented by Mian Tansen is sung early in the morning.
31. (d) Chakiarkoothu is the famous folk dance of Kerala regarding which statement 1, 2 and 4 are correct.
32. (b) GATT - General agreement on tariff and trade.  GATT came into force on 1 Jan 1948 with HQ at Geneva. WTO was set up as a result of aid from 8 round of GATT talks (Uruguay round, 1986-93). WTO was formed on 1 Jan 1995 at Marrakesh, Morocco.
33. (d) ISRO is situated in Banglore, which is marked as '4', Indian Institute of Remote Sensing (IIRS) is located in Dehradun which is marked as '1', National Remote Sensing Agency (NRSA) is situated in Hyderabad, marked as '3'  and Space Application Centre (SAC) is situated in Ahmedabad which is marked as '2' in the map.
34. (c) Maharashtra is the state 6.39% of population is Buddhist. They are 5.84 million Buddhists found in Maharashtra according to 2001 census. It is 73.5% of total Buddhist population.
35. (b) The central Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic plants is located in Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh center for DNA finger printing and diagnosis is located in Hyderabed of Andhra pradesh, Institute of Microbial technology is situated  in Chandigrah and National Institute of Immunology is located in New Delhi.
36. (d) India has the largest population of Zorastrians than anywhere else in the World
37. (d) All the four organisations are under the department of Atomic energy.
38. (a) The Southern Command of Indian may has its headquarters at Cochin not in Chennai. The Regional Headquarters of Coast Guard is located at Mumbai, Chennai and Port Blair.
39. (c) The correct match is as follows: Kalamandalam Kshemavaty - Mohiniattam Kottakkal Sivaraman - kathakali Lakshmi Vishwanathan - Bharatanatyam N Madhabi Devi - Manipuri
40. (d) Narasimhan committee was constituted on financial sector reforms in 1991 and on banking sector reforms in 1998.
41. (b) The Vijay Kelkar Committee on Direct Taxes first submitted its report in year 2003.
42. (d) VSNL - Tata communications limited
43. (d) Zia Mody - founder partner of AZB & Partners; Anuradha J. Desai - Chairperson of Venkateshwara Hatcheries Private Limited; Villoo Morawala Patel - Chairperson of Avesthagen; Meena Kaushik - Chairman of Quantum mechanic research; Kiran Mazumdar Shaw - Chairman of Biocon India
44. (b) The world's highest ground based telescopic observatory is located at Leh in India.
45. (c) Chapchar kut is a festival celebrated in the state of Mizoram.
46. (d) In the given statements only 1' 8 ' 4 ' are correct, because ONGC, IOC, HPCL are the major LPG producers. But '3' is wrong because all the refineries are not run by Indian oil corporation. Many private companies also have their own refineries.
47. (b) The first Indian lady actress to receive the Padma Shri Award was Nargis Dutt. She was awarded in 1958.
48. (b) "Autobiography of an Unknown Indian" is written by Nirad C. Chaudhuri, "India: A Wounded Civilization is written by V.S. Naipal, "Confessions of a Lover" is written by Mulk Raj Anand and "The English Teacher" is written by R.K. Narayan.
49. (c) Hira Bhatacharya is associated with Puppetry.  Malini Rajurkar is associated with Bharatnatyam, Pratiba Prahlad is associated with Hindustani vocal music and Vampati Chinna Satyam is associated with Kuchipudi dance.
50. (a)
51. (c) Brijmohan Lal Munjal is chief of Hero Honda i.e., he is related to Automobile Industry. Kiran Karnik is chief of NASCOM i. e. , he is related to Software Industry.  Kiran Muzumdar Shaw is related to biotechnology and Sunil Mittal is chief of Bharti Group i.e., related to Telecom industry.
52. (a) National Song was composed originally in Sanskrit (not in Bengali).
53. (c) Bokaro thermal power plant is located in Jhadkhand, near Konai Dam.
54. (b) Kochi shipyard is the largest shipyard in India.
55. (d) Organisation Location A. National Sugar Institute Kanpur B. Mishra Dhata Nigam Limited Hyderabad C. Institute of military law Kamputee D. Institute of Nationals Intergration Pune
56. (a) Amrita Patel is related to National Dairy Development Board. Anu Aga is related to Thermax Limited, Mallika Srinivasan is related to Tractors and Farm Equipment and Priya Paul is related to Park Hotels.
57. (a) Dr. Dalip Kaur Tiwana is a foremost novelist and short-story writer of contemporary Punjabi literature.
58. (d) The Lahore Declaration is a bilateral agreement and governance treaty between India and Pakistan.  The treaty was signed on February 21, 1999, at the conclusion of a historic summit in Lahore and ratified by the parliaments of both countries the same year.  Islamabad Summit was held between Rajiv Gandhi and Benazir Bhutto.
59. (b) B. P. Mishra i s the Executive Director of IMF, Suresh Kalmadi is the president of Indian Olympic Association, Praful Patel is the Vice President, South Asian Region, World Bank and V.S. Jain is the chairman of Steel Authority of India Limited.
60. (c) Ronu Mazumdar is well known exponent of flute whereas Debu Chaudhuri is an exponent of sitar and Sahafaat Ahmad is an exponent of tabla.
61. (a) The largest Buddhist Monastry is in Tawang in Arunachal Pradesh not in Assam.
62. (d) The Islamic calendar began in AD 622, during which the emigration of Muhammad from Mecca to Medina, known as Hijra occurred. It is a lunar calendar consisting of 12 lunar months in a year of 354 or 355 days. It is also called Hijri calendar.  The Gregorian calendar is a lunar calendar.
63. (c)
64. (b) Central Organisation for Railway Electrification is present in Allahabad, Ambala, Bhubneshwar, Chennai, Banglore, Secunderabad, Lucknow, Kota and Gorakhpur not in Varanasi.
65. (a) Hukum Singh (April 1962-March 1967), GS Dhillon (April 1969-Dec 1975), Baliram Bhagat (Jan 1976-March 1977)
66. (c) The Department of Women and Child Development was set up in the year 1985 as a part of the Ministry of Human Resource Development. With effect from 30 January 2006, the Department has been upgraded to a Ministry. Department of official language comes under Ministry of Home Affairs.
67. (a) The diplomatic relation between India and Isreal was established in 1992 under the Narsimha Rao regime. Ariel Sharon happened to be the first Prime Minister of Israel to visit India.
68. (d) Voltas, Titan Industries, Rallis India and Indian Hotels are all companies under Tata Group.
69. (b) Jhumpa Lahiri is related to novel writing, Sunita Narain is related to science and environment, Naina Lal Kidwai is related to banking and Ravina Raj Kohli is related to television media.
70. (d) should come under General Knowledge
71. (c) Armoured corps centre and school is located at Ahmednagar, Maharashtra.
72. (a) Satora is well known for Thermal Power Plant.  Satara is famous for Thermal Power Plant.
73. (c) India has world's largest postal network with 1,55,837 post office (1,39,280 in rural areas). A post office serves an area of 21.09 sq kms and population of 6,602.
74. (b) Upamanyu Chatterjee is the winner of Shaitya Award winner and not Lalit Kala Award winner.
75. (b)
76. (d) Kiran karnik was former President of NASSCOM.
77. (d) The Liberhan Commission was commissioned by the Government of India to investigate the destruction of the disputed structure Babri Masjid in Ayodhya in 1992.
78. (b) Phalcon is radar system provided by Israel to India.
79. (d) Lata Mangeshkar 2001, Bismillah Khan 2001, and Satyajit Ray 1992.
80. (d) Dhankar Monastery is present at 12,774 feet above sea level of Lahaul and Spiti of Himachal Pradesh.  Rumtek monastery is importand and largest monastery of Sikkim, 24 km away from Gangtok.  Tabo monastery is situated at a distance of about 50 kilometres from Kaza in Lahual district of Himachal Pradesh.  Kye Monastery is situated 12 kms north of Kaza of Himachal Pradesh, not in Arunachal Pradesh.
81. (b) The head office of South-Eastern Railway is Kolkata, not Bhubaneshwar.
82. (a)
83. (d) Agitation by both Gujarati and Marathi nationalists for their own linguistic states led to the split of Bombay state on linguistic lines and on 1 May 1960, it became the new states of Gujarat and Maharashtra.
84. (c)
85. (a) The correct match is as follows : C N R Rao - Solid State Chemistry Jagdish Natwarlal Bhagwati - Economist G. N ramchandran - Physics Ashok  Jhunjhunwala - Telecommunications
86. (a) The Nobel Peace Prize is awarded in a solemn ceremony in the Oslo City Hall, Norway on December 10.
87. (c) 
88. (c) 
89. (d) 
90. (b) 
91. (d)
92. (c) The correct order is as follows : Formation of Bangladesh - Aug 1947 Sl-3 Launch July 28, 1973 Pokhran First Nuclear Test - 18 May 1974.  Sikkim becomes twenty second State of the Indian Union- 16 May 1975.
93. (b)
94. (a) Raja Rao was an Indian writer of English language novels and short stories, whose works are deeply rooted in Hinduism.
95. (d)
96. (a) Central water and Power Research Station is located in Khadakwasla Pune, Maharashtra in the year 1936. CWPRS is a part of Union of Water Resources, is the foremost organisation in the world in the field of hydraulics and allied research.
97. (d) Projects and Development India Limited (PDIL), an ISO-9001-2000 certified company, is a leading design engineering and consultancy organization having experience of 40 years in design, detailed engineering, procurement, project management, construction supervision and comissioning of fertilizer and allied chemical, power etc.
98. (c)
99. (a) Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development is located in Tamil Nadu.
100. (c) A.M. Khusro was Chairman of eleventh Finance Commission of India
101. (b) Nagaland-1962, Haryana-1966, Sikkim-1975, Arunachal Pradesh-1986
102. (a) The Global Automotive Research Center (GARC) ,Chennai, is situated in the SIPCOT Industrial Growth Center at Orgadam near Chennai in the close proximity of manufacturing facility of Indian and Global automotive giants.
103. (d)
104. (d) Raghuram Govind Rajan is currently the Eric J.  Gleacher Distinguished Service Professor of Finance at the Booth School of Business at the University of Chicago. He is also an honorary economic adviser to Prime Minister of India Manmohan Singh (appointed 2008). He previously was the chief economist of the International Monetary Fund and headed a committee appointed by the Planning Commission on financial reforms in India.
105. (c) 
106. (b)
107. (c) The Pulitzer Prize is an award for achievements in newspaper and online journalism, literature, and musical composition in the United States.  It was established in 1917 by provisions in the will of American (Hungarian-born) publisher Joseph Pulitzer and is administered by Columbia University in New Yo r k Ci t y.
108. (b) Raghu Rai is an Indian photographer and photojournalist.
109. (d)
110. (d) V. P Menon  authored a book on the political integration of India, "The Story of the Integration of Indian States" and on the partition of India, "Transfer of Power".
111. (a)
112. (a) The Palitana temples of Jainism are located on Shatrunjaya by the city of Palitana in Bhavnagar district, Gujarat, India.
113. (c) Board of Radiation and Isotope Technology in short known as "BRIT" is a unit of the Department of Atomic Energy, headquartered in Navi Mumbai. It is involved in production, development, and supply of radioisotope based products and provision of isotope applications, radiation processing, radioanalytical services etc.
114. (b) Rajiv Gandhi National Flying Institute is located in Maharashtra.
115. (a) The Nuclear Suppliers Group has 48 members in 2014. India is not among them.
116. (d) Dharamchakra has 24 spokes, it is navy-blue in colour and lies in the middle of white band. Its design is that of the wheel which appears on the abacus of the Saranath Lion capital of Ashoka.
117. (b) Andhra attained statehood on 1 November 1953, with Kurnool as its capital. On 1 November 1956, the States Reorganization Act merged the Telugu-speaking areas of the former Hyderabad state with the Teluguspeaking areas of the former Madras state to form the state of Andhra Pradesh.  The city of Hyderabad, the former capital of the Hyderabad State, was made the capital of the new state.
118. (b) Laddakh (Jammu and Kashmir) is the largest areawise LS constituency and then comes Barmer (Rajasthan), Kutch (Gujarat), Arunachal West (Arunachal Pradesh). Delhi-Chandni Chowk is the smallest areawise LS constituency.
119. (b) 
120. (c)
121. (c) Ebrahim Alkazi is one of the most influential Indian theatre directors and Drama teachers in 20thcentury Indian theatre.
122. (a)
123. (a) Bimbavati Devi is a Manipuri dancer.
124. (c) Sarosh Zaiwalla is a legal expert.
125. (c) 
126. (c)
127. (b) He translated the autobiography of Madam Curie into Hindi.
128. (c) Elizabeth Hawley is an American former journalist and chronicler of Himalayan expeditions.
129. (a) Umakant Gundecha and Ramakant Gundecha, known as the Gundecha Brothers, are leading Dagarvani dhrupad singers.
130. (a) Chevron Corporation is an American multinational energy corporation.
131. (b) 
132. (c)
133. (b) On July 8, 2008, the Kalka-Shimla Railway became part of the World Heritage Site Mountain Railways of India.
134. (c) Golden Thresold is a collection of poems by Sarojini Naidu.
135. (a) The Hinduja Group is a global conglomerate company headquartered in London, United Kingdom.  Ashok Leyland is one of its companies. Hindalco Industries Limited, the metals flagship company of the Aditya Birla Group, is the world's largest aluminium rolling company and one of the biggest producers of primary aluminium in Asia.
136. (a) The DAE is under the direct control of PM with its Headquarter in Mumbai.)
137. (b) The Animal Welfare Board of India was set up in 1962 with its headquarter at Madras, under the provisions of the "Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act. 1960" (PCA Act. 1960).
138. (c)
139. (c) The Shanti Swarup Bhatnagar Prize for Science and Technology (SSB) is a science award in India given annually by the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) for notable and outstanding research, applied or fundamental, in biology, chemistry, environmental science, engineering, mathematics, medicine and Physics.
140. (c) Giani Zail Singh was the 7th president of India.  He also became 9th Secretary General of Non-Aligned Movement.
141. (d)
142. (b) Tabo Monastery is located in the Tago village of Spiti Valley, Himachal Pradesh.
143. (c) The Mahamastakabhisheka is an important Jain festival held once every twelve years in the town of Shravanabelagola in Karnataka, India.
144. (c) Gatka is an Indian martial arts focused primarily on weapons, especially swords and stick fighting.  Gatka martial artists consider this ancient martial arts style as the "mother of all martial arts". This martial arts was developed in Punjab, India. It is often associated with Punjabi or Sikh forms of combat.  
145. (d) The Agaria are a Muslim community found in the state of Gujarat in India.
146. (a) Private medical institutions do not come in this c a t e g o r y.
147. (b) Only 3rd and 4th are correct thus the option (b) is right.
148. (a) Thorium is for more abundant in nature than uranium.
149. (b) 2nd and 3rd statements are  correct hence the option (b) is right.
150. (a) Only statement 1, is correct
151. (b) Cheetah is not naturally found in India.
152. (a) Limbu tribe is from Sikkim and Dongaria Kondh tribe is from Odisha ( Karbi is from Assam and Bonda is in Odisha).
153. (d) Sattriya dance form was introduced in the 15th century A.D by the great Vaishnava saint and reformer of Assam, Mahapurusha Sankaradeva as a powerful medium for propagation of the Vaishnava faith. It is a neo-Vaishnava treasure of Assamese music,dance and drama. Music of Sattriya dance comprises of classical ragas (melodies), talas (rhythms) and traditional songs. Tulsidas, Kabir and Mira were Vaishnavite.
154. (d) Kalaripayattu is an ancient martial art and a living tradition in some parts of Kerala/ South India.
155. (c) Yakshgana is a theatre form of Karnataka.  Mohiniattam is  from Kerala and Garba is a dance form from Gujarat.
156. (d) Statement 1 is wrong because Kabir founded a community - Kabirpnathi, who consider Bijak, a collection  of his verses, as their scripture. Statement 2 is wrong because Vallabhacharya's philosophy came to be known as Pushtimarga (the path of grace).
157. (a) The World Economic Outlook (WEO) database contains selected macroeconomic data series from the statistical appendix of the World Economic Outlook report prepared by IMF.
158. (c) Panchayatana  is a style of temple  construction that has a central shrine surrounded by four subsidiary shrines.
159. (b)  At present, India is not a member of APEC and ASEAN. The East Asia Summit (EAS) is a forum held annually by leaders of 16 countries in the East Asian region. The first summit was held in Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia) on 14 December 2005. India is the member of this forum.
160. (a) National Innovation Foundation India (NIF) is an autonomous body under the Department of Science and Technology , Government of India. It was set up in February 2000 at Ahmadabad, Gujarat, India to provide institutional support for scouting, spawning, sustaining and scaling up the grassroots innovations across the country.