1. (c) The alpine vegetation in eastern himalayas isfound upto 4000 meters because in eastern himalayas the monsoon rainfall is higher than western Himalayas.
2. (d) The given map indicates the coastal region underwater relief contours of India. In this region some islands like Andaman, Nicobar and Lakshyadeep are present.  -  Qman basin -  Arabian basin -  Chapo Ridge 
3. (d) In the given map the marked places indicates :'1' indicates Ukai in Gujarat, '2' indicates of Dondapadu in A. P.,  '3' indicates Korba of Chhattisgarh
4. (a) The quotation referred to Sundarban of West Bengal. Sundarban is famous for mangrove forest and tiger population. It is present at the delta region of Ganga. Sundarban is world's largest delta.
5. (a) The palaeomagnetic results indicates that, the Indian land mass has moved to the north breaking from Africa.
6. (d) From the given figure '1'  indicates Calcutta port which is a tidal port, situated at river Hoogly.  '2'  indicates Paradeep port of Orissa.  '3'  indicates Kochi of Kerala '4'  indicates Kandla port of Guj arat is tidal port.  Paradeep, Kochi and Kandla are natural ports on the sea coast.
7. (d) Geologists believes that the Indian peninsula was a part of the Gondwanaland (continent) which drifted northwards and India, Africa and other parts separated from each other.
8. (c) Ajanta mountain range a short range, which spreads within Maharashtra.  - Aravali ranges covers Rajasthan, Haryana and Delhi - Satpura ranges are found in Gujrat and Madhya Pradesh.  - Sahyadris ranges starts from Gujrat, Maharastra border and crossing Goa, Karnataka it reaches Kerala tip upto Cape Comrin.  - Ajanta is found in the Aurangabad district of Maharastra.
9. (b) National Highway from Amritsar to Calcutta via Delhi is called National highway No. 2. It was called Grand Trunk road and was constructed by Sher Shah.  
10. (b) According to the physiography map of India the mountains ranges found in Jammu and Kashmir is Karakoram which is marked as '1' in figure. Ladakh range which is marked as '2', Zanskar range which is marked as '3', and Pir Panjal which is marked as '4'.
11. (b) Due to intensive low pressure belt developed in the north-western plains, the south-west monsoon enters the Indian subcontinent. It blows from Bay of Bengal and the Arabian sea.
12. (c) The state which produce maximum amount of metal ores are : A. Manganese 1. Madhya Pradesh, B. Nickel 2. Orissa, C. Lead-Zinc 3. Rajasthan, D. Asbestos 4. Andhra Pradesh
13. (a) Idukki is a hydro-electric project of Kerala. So, the '1' option is not correct.
14. (c) Western and Southern India produces largest cotton : Maharashtra (26.63%), Gujarat (17.67%), Andhra Pradesh (13.75%) and Madhya Pradesh are the leading producers in India.
15. (a) The New Jerusalem Church was bult by Royal Danish missionary Bartholomaus Ziegenbalg in a coastal town of Tharangambadi, Tamil Nadu in 1718.
16. (a) Kishenganga river is called Neelam river in Jammu & Kashmir. Ganga river originates from Gangotri glacier in Uttarakhand.  Wainganga originates about 12 km from Mundara village of Seoni district in southern slopes of Satpura range of Madhya Pradesh.  Penganga is river found in Yavatmal District of Maharashtra.
17. (c) Madras is warmer than Calcutta. Madras lies 13°08'17" N latitude which is much near to equator than Calcutta, which is 22°56'67" N.  Show fall occurs in Himalayas due to its higher attitude.  Rainfall decreases from West Bengal to Punjab due to distrance from sea West Bengal is near to sea than Punjab. Sutluj-Ganga plain gets some rain in winter due to western distrubance.
18. (b) Major Geological Eras: Peninsular and Periods-> A. Deccan Traps - Cretaceous era B. Western Ghats - Late cenozoic era C. Aravalli - Pre-cambrian era D. Narmada-Tapti - Pleistocene period alluvial deposits
19. (d) The January isotherm taken as a basis for dividing India into tropical and subtropical zones is 15°C.  Geography of India
20. (b) Coal is found in Karanpura of Jharkhand. Gold is found in mines of Hutti in Karnataka. Mica is found in Nellore district of Andhra Pradesh. Manganese is found in Bhandara of Maharashtra.
21. (c) The Alamatti dam is build on the river Krishna in Karnataka. It is a multi-purpose project. The water is used in canal irrigation and hydroelectric production.
22. (c) Acc ordi ng t o the gi ven map t he area marked 'A' is Mathura area of Uttar Pradesh, where Brajbhasha is spoken.  'B' is marked by Faizabad of U.P., and the language spoken  is 'Awadhi'. 'C' area is 'Arah' area of Bihar where 'Bhojpuri' is spoken. 'D' refers to north Bihar where 'Maithili' is predominantly spoken.
23. (c) The canal carrying capacity of Farakka barrage is 40,000 cusec. Farakka barrage is a 2245 metre long barrage across the river Ganga.
24. (d) Sundari tree is found in Sundarban area of West Bengal. Sundarban is a largest wetland area in the world. Sundarban got its name itself due to abundance of 'Sundari' tree in this area.
25. (c) The place marked in the given map are: Option 'A' Rift valley region Narmada and Tapti, 'B' Chhattisgarh plain Mahandi river, 'C' Chhota Nagpur Jharkhand plateau, 'D' Rain shadow area Eastern part of western ghat
26. (d) The tribal population of Andaman and Nicobar belong to Negroid race. A small population of Shompen and Nicobars are Mongoloid descent.
27. (a) Kori, Gomati, Ghaghara and Gandak.
28. (a) Damodar is a east flowing river with rift valley due to down warping. Down warp denotes a segment of the earth's crust that is broadly bent downward.
29. (c) Sal forest of Madhya Pradesh indicates '3' in the given India map. In 1997 Sal forest were badly affected by the insects which cause destruction of Sal forest by turning the trees dry.
30. (*) Barmer in Rajasthan has been discovered to have new off shore commercial production in India in 2013.
31. (b) Minerals Mining area: Graphite ® Bellary, Lead ® Zawar, Salt ® Didwana, Siler ® Rampa
32. (a) The Oak Tasar silk is produced in Assam, which is used in Sericulture. The Oak flora was discovered in 1966 in Assam.
33. (b) Places & Industries State: A. Jamnagar- Woollen textiles Gujarat, B. Hospet- Iron and Steel Industry, C. Korba Aluminium Industry Chhattisgarh, D. Haldia Fertilizers Assam
34. (d) A libag - Holiday Resort, Balapur - Fishing Centre, Nhave Sheva - Port, Ratnagiri - Petrochemical complex
35. (a) Arrangement of descending order of the surface roads per 100 sq. km of their area.  Tamil Nadu has 158.78 km, Punjab has 127.78 km, Maharashtra has 117.61 km, Haryana has 63.70 km.
36. (b)
37. (c) Some people in Manipur live in house built on floating Islands of weeds and decaying vegetation held together by suspended silt. These islands are called "Phoomdis".
38. (d) Uttar Pradesh is the state where 9,384,000 hectare are covered by ground water irrigation.  Maharashtra covers 1,912,000 hectare, West Bengal covers 1,397,000 hectares, Assam covers hectare for ground water irrigation.
39. (b) According to Census of India 2001, schedule tribe population in Mizoram is 94.75%, Arunachal Pradesh has 63.66% as schedule tribe, Manipur with 34.4% and Orissa with 22.21% of tribal population.
40. (a) Konkan Railway route connects Roha in Maharashtra with Mangalore in Karnataka. Konkan Railway established with partnership of three states Maharashtra, Goa and Karnataka. The state of Goa, Karnataka, Maharashtra and Kerala benefit most from Konkan railway.
41. (a)
42. (b)
43. (b) For proper ecological balance 33% of forest land is recommended, but in India we have only 20.14% of forest coverage.
44. (c) In the given map the site of Tehri Dam is "C" which lies in Uttaranchal. It is an earth and rock-fill dam on the Bhagirathi rivers in Tehri district.
45. (b) Koodankulam is the site for 1000 MW nuclear power plants under construction in Tirunelveli district of Tamil Nadu. In the given figure Koodankulam plant is labelled as 'B'.
46. (c) Gulf of Kutch in 1980, 270 km from Obha to Sadiya.
47. (d) Lambada tribes are found in Rajasthan and not in Madhya Pradesh.
48. (c) In the given figure 'A' is Baramula,  'B' is Srinagar, 'C' is Anantnag and 'D' is Kargil.
49. (b)
50. (a) The Ravva offshore block is in Krishna-Godavari basin of Andhra Pradesh. It is the area of a great reserve of petroleum and natural gas.
51. (d) At 'M' position of the diagram the height of the tide is at maximum, because in this position earth, moon and sun lies in a straight line.
52. (a) Indira Gandhi Canal originated from Harike barrage at Sultanpur on Sutlej but Ghaggar is a tributary of river Saraswati, which ends in the Thar desert.
53. (b) In the given map 'A' marked ports is Veraval of Gujarat, 'B' marked port is Karwar of Karnataka, 'C' marked port is Tuticorin of Tamil Nadu and 'D' marked port is Kakinada of Andhra Pradesh.
54. (d) Korba tribe in found in chhotanagpur of Chhattisgarh and Jarkhand, whereas Kodagu in a district in Karnataka.
55. (a) Siltation is the process of deposition of silt on the river bed through rain water, by which the depth of the river reduces. The flood water crosses the river embankment, by which flood occurs in most part of north India.
56. (b) The Ganga plain is most important plain of India.  The gangetic plain covers more than a fourth of the country's total surface. The alluvial fertile soil is very suitable for cultivation of different cereals, pulses and nuts. So bulk of the population resides in this plain area.
57. (a) A - Mahe B - Karaikal C - Podicherry D - Yaman
58. (d) In the given figure of India, Mica is found in all the states of India like Jharkhand, Orissa, Bihar, Rajasthan, Bombay, Karnataka, West Bengal and Andhra Pradesh.
59. (c) In the given map, the shaded area indicates the tropical wet and dry region, where the mean temperature for the month of July varies between 27.5ºC - 30ºC.
60. (b) Mekong - Ganga Cooperation (MGC) was established on November 10, 2000 at Vientiane in the First MGC Ministerial Meeting. It comprises six Member countries namely, India, Thailand, Myanmar, Cambodia, Laos and Vietnam. They emphasised four areas of cooperation, which are tourism, culture, education, and transportation linkage in order to be solid foundation for future trade and investment cooperation in the region.
61. (a) Both assertion and reasons are true and reason is correct explanation of assertion. In north India, a feeble high-pressure region develops, with light winds moving outwards from this area. Influenced by the relief, these winds blow through the Ganga valley from west and north west, which forms an anticyclonic condition in northern part of India.
62. (a) According to the data of 2000, the power generation is 95000 MW. Nuclear plants  contribute 2% of total power generation.  Hydroelectricity plants contribute 25% of total production and 73% is contributed by thermal power plants.
63. (a) The Aravallis range are the oldest mountain in India. The approximate age of the Aravallis is 370 million years.
64. (a) The correct sequence of eastward flowing river of the peninsular India from north to south is Subarnarekha, Mahanadi, Godavari, Krishna, Pennar, Cauvery and Vagai.
65. (d) Indian railway is the fourth largest railway in the world after USA, Russia and China. National Highways is nearly 2% (1.96%) of total roads, but it carries nearly  40 - 45% of road traffic of India.  Maharashtra has the highest density of the surface roads, not Kerala, National Highway No. 7 is the longest in the country which joins Varanasi to Kanyakumari.
66. (b) The climatic condition of Chennai is tropical savanna type where the average annual temperature of meterological station is 26ºC and average rainfall is  63 cm and annual range temperature is 9ºC.
67. (c) The sea coast of Orissa is famous as a nesting place for giant olive Ridley turtles from South America.
68. (b) With reference to India, the dominant source of irrigation is by canals. About 45% land is irrigated by canals.
69. (d) Open stunted forests with bushes and small trees having long roots and sharp thorns or spines are commonly found in the area where the rainfall is less than 80 cm. Such areas are found in Rajasthan, Gujarat, Haryana and western Andhra Pradesh.
70. (d) Achra Ratnagiri Mangrove is in Maharashtra, Coondapur Mangrove is in Karnataka, Pichavaram Mangrove is in Tamil Nadu and Vembanad  Mangrove is in Kerala.
71. (b) The correct sequence of the river in descending order of their lengths are Godavari (1465 km), Narmada (1312 km), Mahanadi (858 km) and Tapti (724 km).
72. (b) Nanda Devi peak are a part of Kumaon Himalayas located in Chamoli district of Uttaranchal.
73. (a) Bangalore is the city which is 937 metres above sea level, Delhi is 218 metres sea level, Jodhpur is 230 metres and Nagpur is 247.5 metres above the sea level.
74. (c) The longitude of Jabalpur's location is to the east of Bhopal, Bangalore is north of Channai.
75. (d) The area of Andhra Pradesh is 160,205 sq km, area of  Gujarat is 196,024 sq km, the area of Karnataka is 191, 791 sq km and Tamil Nadu is 130, 058 sq km.
76. (b) The Tropic of Cancer located at 23.5° north.  Location of Kolkata is 22°33' N. So, Kolkata is nearer to Tropic of Cancer. Delhi is 28.38°N.
77. (a) Onge is the major tribes of the union territory of Andaman and Nicobar. They were fully dependent on hunting and gathering. They belong to the Negrito race.
78. (a) Statement '1' is correct, because National Thermal Power Corporation has diversified into the hydro projects. Presently it has undertaken Koldem project in Himachal Pradesh.
79. (a) Damodar Valley Corporation's is first multipurpose river valley project of independent India was in the year 1954.  The joint venture projects are Maithon Power Limited, Panchat and Tilayiya are hydroelectric power station.  It not a gas power station.
80. (c)
81. (c) Minerals Location: A. Coal 1. Giridih B. Copper 3. Alwar C. Manganese 4. Dharwar D. Lignite 2. Jayamkondam
82. (c) Length of Agra-Mumbai NH - 1161 km, Length of Chennai-Thane NH - 1235 km, Length of Kolkata-Hajira NH - 1946 km, Length of Pune-Machilipatnam NH - 841 km.
83. (c)
84. (b) Sambhar is India's largest salt lake which is located 96 km south west of city of Jaipur.
85. (b) National Park/ Sanctuary A. Kanger Ghati National Park - Chhattisgarh B. Nagerhole National Park - Karnataka C. Kugti Wildlife Sanctuary - Himachal Pradesh D. Sultanpur Bird Sanctuary - Haryana
86. (d)
87. (d) Bangalore receives lesser rainfall than Mangalore.  Mangalore is located in windward slope and receives 2000 mm of rainfall, whereas Bangalore present in rain shadow area receives less than 500 mm of water.
88. (a) West flowing rivers Narmada and Tapti do not form delta, because topography of western peninsular India is rocky without loose sediments and no alluvial sediments carried by the rivers.
89. (a) All the statements are correct according to Atomic developments in India.
90. (b) Beach in India States-> A. Gopinath Beach : Gujarat, B. Lawsons Bay Beach : Andhra Pradesh, C. Devbagh Beach : Karnataka, D. Sinquerim Beach : Goa
91. (d) Similipal biosphere reserve is in Orissa. Dehong Deband biosphere reserve is in Arunachal Pradesh, Nokrek biosphere reserve is in Meghalaya and Kanchenjunga biosphere reserve is situated in Sikkim.
92. (c) Haryana has 6.83% of area is forest cover area of the total land coverage, whereas Sikkim has 36%, 38.5% in  Goa and 28.9% of  Kerala has forest area of their total land mass.
93. (b) Out of the total forest cover, dense forest constitute around 2.54%; very dense forest and 8.77% are moderately dense forest. National Forestry Action Programme aims a long term plan to achieve the target of 33% forest cover.
94. (c) Area of Chhattisgarh is 1,36,03489 km and Area of West Bengal is 88,572 sq km but the population density in Chhattigarh is 154, whereas the population density in West Bengal is 904.
95. (d) Atomic Power Plant &    State: A. Thal Maharashtra, B. Manuguru Andhra Pradesh, C. Kakrapar Gujarat, D. Kaiga Karnataka
96. (a) Western Ghats are are relationship higher in the Southern region.
97. (a) Gandhi Sagar Dam is situated on the river Chambal in 1960,  near Bhanpura of Madhya Pradesh.
98. (c) The correct sequence of the given hills starting from north and going towards to south is Nallamalai Hills, Javadi Hills, Nilgiri Hills, Anamalai Hills
99. (b) Nallamalai is not a biosphere reserve. It is hill of Eastern ghats which stretches over Kurnool, Mahabubnagar, Guntur and Kadapa districts of the state of Andhra Pradesh.
100. (c) The correct sequence of the given Indian cities in the decreasing order of their normal annual rainfall is Kochi (3228.3 mm) - Kolkata (1,582 mm) - Patna (1000 -1237 mm) - Delhi  (707 mm).
101. (b) Uttar Pradesh is bounded by Haryana, Delhi, Rajasthan in west; Madhya Pradesh in the south and Bihar in the east. The northern boundary is with Nepal.
102. (b) Power Station: State-> A. Kothagudem : Andhra Pradesh, B. Raichur : Karnataka, C. Mettur : Tamil Nadu, D. Wanakbori : Gujarat
103. (b) National Park/ Wildlife Sanctuary: Bondla Wildlife Sanctuary - Goa, Kangerghat National Park - Chhattisgarh, Orang Sanctuary - Assam, Ushkothi Wildlife Sanctuary - Orissa.
104. (b)
105. (d) Maharashtra is ranked 2nd after Uttar Pradesh among 28 Indian states. So, option '3' is correct. But option '1' and '2' are incorrect, because Goa is the smallest state based on area (i.e., 3702 sq km), not the Sikkim. Highest literacy rate is of Union territory is Lakshadweep i.e. 86.7%.
106. (a)
107. (c)
108. (b) By virtue of section 110 of the Electricity Act 2003, an Appellate Tribunal for Electricity having jurisdiction throughout India has been set up to hear appeals or original petitions against the order of the Adjudicating officer. But in states like Delhi and Orissa electricity has been privatized. So, the statement '1' is wrong. It is not present in Jammu and Kashmir.
109. (d)
110. (c) Cauvery is a river of southern India, rises on Brahmagiri Hill in Western Ghats in Coorg district of Karnataka.
111. (c)
112. (b) The correct sequence of the rivers in India from north towards south is Shyok - Zaskar  - Spiti - Satluj .  Shyok flows through northern Ladakh in India.  Zaskar river flows in north-eastern part of Ladakh.  Spiti river is situated at Kaza in Himachal Pradesh at an elevation of 12500 feet.  Satluj river rise from slopes of Kailash and flows in south-westerly direction to Himachal Pradesh & Punjab.
113. (b) Payali and Behradein in Raipur, Chhattisgarh has large reserves of diamond bearing kimberlite. It has 28% of the total diamond reserve of India.
114. (c) Vizag Steel Plant was declared as a Mini Ratna company on 11th Feb 2006. Merger of IISCO wi th SAIL has been completed on 29th September 2004.
115. (b) The Stilwell Road built in 1940s by Americans to connect Ledo in India and Kunming in China via Myanmar during Second World War.
116. (d) Indira Gandhi Wildlife Sanctuary and National Park is known as top slip. It is a part of Western Ghats is located above 300 metres from the sea level on the Anamalai mountain ranges.
117. (d) Shevaroy hill is situated near Salem of Tamil Nadu. This hill range covers an area of fifty square kilometers.
118. (d) River Kalinadi is a west flowing river in the southern part of India. So, the assertion is wrong.  Deccan Plateau has elevation ranging from 1,500 to 2,500 ft and gently slopes towards the Bay of Bengal in the east. So, the reason is correct.
119. (c) National Highways passes through Gujarat, Maharashtra, Chhatisgarh, Orissa, Jharkhand and West Bengal. This road is 1,949 km long.
120. (d) Balaghat of Madhya Pradesh is known for its manganese mines. Majhgawan is famous for diamond.
121. (c) The Narmada river originates from a tank 1057 m high west of  Amarkantak plateau in Madhya Pradesh. River Damodar originates from Chhota Nagpur plateau, Mahanadi originates from Bastar plateau and Tapti originates from Satpura hills.
122. (c) Lucknow is the city most east in the list.
123. (c) Both Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka shares boundaries with maximum number of Indian states.
124. (b)
125. (b) Indravati National Park is located in the Bastar region. The park is situated at the distance of 97.4 km Bastar.
126. (a) Guru Shikhar Peak is the highest point in Rajasthan. The altitude of peak 5676 feet (1722 mt).  
127. (b)
128. (b) Red Panda is found in mountains of Nepal, north- eastern India, China, Bhutan and Slow Loris lives in dense forest of north-east, dense forest of Assam.  Red Panda is found in Eastern Himalayas, China, Bhuan and slow loris in the dense forest of north-east Assam.
129. (b) Mahogany is a species of tree found throughout the Caribbean, central and south America but not in Himalayas.
130. (c) Nilgiri hills are at the junction of the eastern and western ghats of the Sahayadri hills. The heights of the hills range varies between 2,280 and 2,290 metres.
131. (d) Tributaries of Brahmaputra in India the Manas, Pagladiya, Puthimari, Dhanisri, Jia Bhariti and Subansiri.  Manas is a tributary of Brahmaputra Chambal is the chief tributary of Yammuna and sone is a tributary of Ganga.
132. (c) Salt water crocodile was common and found throughout the Andaman and Nicobar Islands living in the mangrove habitats. Shrew and Tapir are found in western ghats of the Malabar region.
133. (a) Namchik-Namphuk coalfields are located in Arunachal Pradesh.
134. (d) The minerals deposits in Chhatisgarh is Bauxite (96 million ton), Dolomite (606 million ton) and iron ore (2336 million ton). Tin is not found in Chhatisgarh.
135. (b) The Tehri Hydropower complex is located on the Bhagirathi river of Uttar Pradesh.
136. (b) Shivasamudram falls is located on river Cauvery.  Jog waterfall is the highest waterfall in India of 253 metres on Sharavathi river.
137. (d) Damanganga water project is in Gujarat. Girna irrigation project is in Jalgaon area of Maharashtra.  Pamba river is located in Kerala.
138. (d) Chikmagalur is famous for coffee. Mandya is famous for sugar and paper production.
139. (c) Tapovan and Vishnugarh hydroelectric project are located in Chamoli district of Uttarakhand.
140. (d) According to the Census of 2001 of India, the population of Ludhiana is 1,398,467, Surat is 2,433,835 and Nagpur is 2,052,066.
141. (a) Andaman and Nicobar has 9 national parks; Assam has 6, Arunachal Pradesh and Maghalaya both have 2 each.
142. (b) Eastern Himalayas and Eastern Mediterranean region are Biodiversity hotspots.  South west part of Australia has hotspots.
143. (d) Rajasthan has the largest inland saline wetland, area of Sambhan Salt lake.
144. (b) Dahej is a not a major port of India.
145. (b) The Dul Hasti Power Station is on the Chenab river in Jammu and Kashmir.
146. (c) Putrajaya is new federal administrative centre of Malaysia.
147. (c) In India, the south-west monsoon causes high rainfall in east Himalayan region.
148. (d) Sutlej originates from the central Sulaiman range in Pakistan.
149. (a) Amarkantak is the origin of River Narmada and Sone.
150. (d) India has 12% of thorium deposits of the world.
151. (d) Three east flowing rivers found in Kerala is Kavari, Tapti, Narmada and Mahi rivers flows westward, and also flows through Madhya Pradesh.  East flowing rivers of Kerala are Kabani, Bhavani and Pambar. The west flowing rivers in M.P. are Narmada, Tapti, Mahi.
152. (c) The fix boundary of a National Park is described in the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972. The legislation states the actual area of the National Park which is notified by the state government. A biosphere reserve conserves an ecosystem and not just few specific species of plants and animals.
153. (c)
154. (a) Tungsten is found in Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan, Andhra Pradesh and Jharkhand.
155. (d) Ramsar convention describes to conserve all the sites through ecosystem approach and allow their simultaneous sustainable use.
156. (b) Hoolak found in North eastern reigon of India.  It covers 38% of the forest area. Hoolak Gibbon is found in North Eastern region of India.
157. (c) In India tropical moist deciduous forest occupies the largest area. It includes Deccan plateau, the north eastern region of Deccan plateau and the lower slopes of Himalayas and covers the part of Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Orissa, Bihar, Chhatisgarh, Jharkhand, Karnataka and Kerala.  In India, tropical moist deciduous forest covers 38% of the total forest area. It covers the region of Bihar, Uttar Pradesh,  Odisha, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Jharkhand, Karnataka and Kerala.
158. (b) The predominant soil in Tamil Nadu is red which supports cotton cultivation and a rich pool of skilled labour is available in Tamil Nadu.
159. (c) About 2.75 percent of water is fresh water in earth and about 95% is frozen in glaciers. Less than 1% of the world's fresh water is readily accessible.
160. (d) Rivers like Beas, Chenab, Ravi, Sutlej and Yamuna passes through Himachal Pradesh.
161. (c) Red soil in India is largely found in Deccan plateau.  Red soil is less clayey and sandier in nature and has a rich content of iron and small  amount of humus. Red soil is also known as yellow soil. The redness is the soil is due to Jerric oxide, is 2nd largest soil found in India from south of Bundelkhand to North of Raj mahal hill.
162. (b) More than 90% of India's coal reserves are found in Gondwana rock system.
163. (b) Kolleru lake is one of the largest shallow fresh water lakes in Asia, is located between Krishna delta and the Godavari in Andhra Pradesh.
164. (d) All the statements given in the question are correct.
165. (a) The latitude that passes through Sikkim also pass through Rajasthan.
166. (a) Global warming is the increase in the average temperature of Earth's near-surface air and oceans by increasing concentrations of greenhouse gases, which result from human activity such as the burning of fossil fuel and deforestation. Climate change mitigation is action to decrease the potential effects of global warming. At a time rate of mitigation is less in India because appropriate technologies are limited and costly. Moreover India don't have huge funds required for research and development in that area.
167. (d) The approximate representation of land use is classified as net area sown 46%, forests 23%, other areas 30%.
168. (d) Ambient temperature simply means "the temperature of the surroundings" and will be the same as room temperature. Indoor the common range of 20°C (68°F) to 27°C (80 °F).  Similarly, ambient pressure on an object is the pressure of the surrounding medium, such as a gas or liquid, which comes into contact with the object. The soot sulphur hexaflouride, soot and water vapour all three can be found at ambient atmosphere which corresponds to ambient temperature and pressure.
169. (b) Opening a new canal in Kra Isthums can reduce the navigation time and distance. The first statement in this question requires an explanation. Its worth note that the Malacca strait is the main shipping channel between the Indian Ocean and the Pacific Ocean and links the India, China, Japan and South Korea. The issue of deepening of the Malacca strait is "linked" to its economic importance rather than "time of navigation and distance". The issue is that most of the ships can not pass through it and the size of the biggest ships which can enter through it is called Malaccamax. Now the deepening of the strait would certainly help in "Increasing the volume of the business" because ships of larger sizes can pass through it, there is no significance of distance and navigation.
170. (c) The low and deltaic plains of the Ganges is characterised by swamps and Sundarbans. So, the people out there grow Paddy and Jute.
171. (b) Brahamputra originates near Mt. Kailash and is known to take a U turn near Mount Namcha Barwa.  This U turn is also known as Great Bend. The U Turn is because of the 180° bend of the Himalayan structural trends.
172. (b)
173. (a) Arunanchal Pradesh
174. (a) The countries total geographical area under the category of wetlands is more in Gujarat as compared to other states. India has 60% of in land wetland out of total wetland.
175. (d) All are correct.
176. (c) Both statements are correct.
177. (d) Through Corbett National Park Ramganga flows (not Ganga) which is a tributary of Ganges. Through Silent Valley National Park river Bhavani flows which is a tributary of Kaveri.  Kaziranga and Manas are both national parks.
178. (a)
179. (a) Indian coal  has high ash content and low calorific value. It has low sulphur and low phosphorous content but high ash fusion temperature.
180. (c) Laterite soil is rusty red in colour due to iron oxide present in it. In the lateritic soil cashews and tapiocas can be grown.
181. (b) Dharwar rocks are non fossilliferous  rather they are metalliferous. They bear out gold, iron ore, manganese mica, cobalt, chromium, copper, tungsten, lead, nickel, precious stones and budding stones.  Kodarma is a store house of mica and Gondwana beds has coal and not natural gass.
182. (b) Chanderi in Madhyapradesh and Kancheepuram in Tamil Nadu are famous for Silk sarees.
183. (d) NH 4 is a major National Highway in Western and Southern India. It connects Mumbai with Chennai. NH 6, runs through Gujarat, Maharashtra, Chhattisgarh, Odisha, Jharkhand and West Bengal state in India. It connects Surat with  Kolkata. NH 15 is a major National Highway in Western and Northwestern India. NH 15 connects Samakhiali in Gujarat with Pathankot in Punjab.
184. (c) Monsoon is the only climate which is having reversal of wind between seasons.
185. (b) Rivers Lohit and Subansiri flow through Arunachal Pradesh. River Barak flows in south Assam and Manipur.  River lohit and subanseri flows through Arunachal Pradesh. Barak river flows in sourth Assam and Manipur.  
186. (a) Harike Wetlands is at Confluence of Beas and Satluj/Sutlej. The Keoladeo National Park  formerly known as the Bharatpur Bird Sanctuary in Bharatpur is at the confluence of two rivers, the Gambhir and Banganga. Kolleru Lake is one of the largest freshwater lakes in India located in state of Andhra Pradesh.  Kolleru is located between Krishna and Godavari delta.
187. (c) The Cardamom Hills are southern hills of India and part of the southern Western Ghats located in southeast Kerala and southwest Tamil Nadu. They are not in coromandel coast. Kaimur Range  is the eastern portion of the Vindhya Range extending from Madhya Pradesh to Bihar. They are not in konkan coast. The Mahadeo Hills are  in Madhya Pradesh, state of central India.Mikir hills are in assam i.e. in North East India.
188. (a) Oak and Rhododendron is found in Himalayan region while sandalwood is found in South India.
189. (b)  The Changpa  are a semi-nomadic Tibetan ethnic group found mainly in Zanskar region of Jammu and Kashmir. They rear the Pashmina goats that yield a fine wool. They are kept inthe category of Scheduled Tribes.
190. (a) In the present-day Meghalaya state of northeast India is a form of tree shaping, which creates these suspension bridges, they are handmade from the aerial roots of living banyan fig trees.
191. (c) Tropical Wet Evergreen Forests are found in Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Tripura, West Bengal and Andaman and Nicobar Island and on the eastern and western slopes of the Western Ghats in such states as Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Kerala and Maharashtra.
192. (d) Arunachal Pradesh and Gujarat are the easternmost and westernmost States.
193. (d) Major tributaries of the river include the Purna (South), Pravara, Indravati, Manjira River, Bindusara River, Sabari River, Wainganga, and Wardha River.  Pranahita is the name given to the combined flow of the rivers Wardha and Wainganga.
194. (d) Andaman and Nicobar Islands is rich in biodiversity. Different types of forests as Tropical Evergreen forests, Moist Deciduous forests, Mangrove forests, Littoral forests are found here.  