1. (a) Elections in India are conducted according to the constitutional provisions, supplemented by laws made by Parliament. The major laws are Representation of the People Act, 1950, which mainly deals with the preparation and revision of electoral roll s, t he Represent at ion of t he Peopl e Ac t, 1951 whic h deals, in detail, with all aspects of conduct of elections and post election disputes.
2. (b) In Gujarat and Maharashtra the Chief Ministers come under the ambit of Lok Ayukta Act.
3. (d) All the parties mentioned are state level parties.
4. (d) A defeated candidate who fails to secure more than one sixth of the valid votes polled in the constituency will lose his security deposit. When a very large number of candidates contest the election, due to distribution of votes, the winning candidate may get less than 1/6 th of valid voters.
5. (*) Incomplete question. In this question no data is provided for percentage of SC population. That's why the number of reserved seats for SCs cannot be predicted.  Allocation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Tribes in the Lok Sabha are made on the basis of proportion of Scheduled Castes and Tribes in the State concerned to that of the total population, vide provision contained in Article 330 of the Constitution of India read with Section 3 of the R. P. Act, 1950.  Article 332 Reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assemblies of the States : (1) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, except the Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous districts of Assam, in the Legislative Assembly of every State.  (2) Seats shall be reserved also for the autonomous districts in the Legislative Assembly of the State of Assam.  (3) The number of seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of any State under clause (1) shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of seats in the Assembly as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the State or of the Scheduled Tribes in the State or part of the State, as the case may be, in respect of which seats are so reserved, bears to the total population of the State.
6. (a) Captain Charles Cunningham Boycott was a British land agent whose ostracism by the local community in Ireland as part of a campaign for agrarian tenants' rights in 1880 gave the English language the verb to boycott, meaning "to ostracise".  
7. (b) Both statements are correct but do not explain the assertion. At present, the Minorities Commission has a Statutory status. 103rd Constitutional Amendment Bill provides for granting constitutional status to the Minorities Commission. The bill has not passed by the Houses of Parliament.
8. (*) All the mentioned countries have more than two parties.
9. (b) This process is followed in Germany and known as Constructive vote of no-confidence motion.
10. (b) Political scientists speculate that proportional representation leads logically to multi-party systems, since it allows new parties to build a niche in the legislature.
11. (d) Party funding in Austria has been subject to public regulation and public subsidies since 1975.  Party finance in Germany is the subject of statutory reports, which up to 35 parties file annually with the administration of the German parliament.
12. (c) PIL originated in USA. It seeks to protect and promote interest of the public at large.
13. (d) Judicial review is one big difference. In India, the judiciary system can take up an act passed by parliament and has the power to nullify it. In Britain, law passed by House of Commons can't be overturned.
14. (d) It is the sole prerogative of Parliament under Article 253 of the Constitution.
15. (d) Madhya Pradesh is the state, where the largest number of seats are reserved for scheduled tribe in the Lok Sabha.
16. (c) Chief Justice of India, Union Cabinet Minister, Chief Election Commissioner and Cabinet Secretary is the correct order of precedence.
17. (a) Parliamentary Committees are formed to dispose off the large volume of work in time but with detailed scrutiny. Their appointment, terms of office as well as functions etc are regulated by provisions under Article 118(1). These are of 2 kinds: Standing Committees and Ad-hoc Committees.
18. (a) The State government does not have control over its local bodies in matters of Citizens' grievances.
19. (d) All the statements are correct.
20. (b) The Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners enjoy equal powers and salaries. The term of office of the Election Commissioner is 6 years or till he attains the age of 65 years or whichever is earlier.
21. (d) The purpose of Directive Principles of State Policy is to establish the social and economic democracy.  Political democracy is established by the Fundamental Rights.
22. (a) This comes under Directive Principles of State Policy under part IV of the Constitution. Article 51 states that the state shall endeavour to promote international peace and security.
23. (c) As per the given options the right answer is (c).  But for general candidates the amount of security deposit is ` 20,000. In case of elections of state legislatures, the amount of security deposit is as given in option (a) above.
24. (c) In Rajya Sabha, 12 members are nominated by the President from the persons who have special knowledge in art, science, literature and social service.  In Lok Sabha,  2 members are nominated by the President from the Anglo-Indian community (Art 331). A nominated member can vote only in the VicePresidential elections.
25. (c) Order of precedence is President, Vice President, PM, Governor of State within their respective states, Former Presidents and Deputy PM, CJI and Speaker of LS.
26. (b) Article 280 of the Constitution of India provides for a Finance Commission as a quasi-judicial body. It is constituted by the President of India every fifth year or at such earlier time as he considers necessary. The commission makes recommendations to the president with regard to the distribution of the proceeds of taxes between the union and the states. The principles which should govern the grants-in-aid to be given to the states. Any other matter referred to the Commission by the President in the interest of sound finance.
27. (b) The value of a MP's vote is calculated by dividing the total value of all MLAs' votes by the number of MPs.  Value of an MP vote = The sum of vote value of elected members of all the Legislative Assemblies The sum of elected members of both the h ouse of Parliament
28. (a) The PAC is formed every year with a strength of not more than 22 members of which 15 are from Lok Sabha, the lower house of the Parliament, and 7 from Rajya Sabha, the upper house of the Parliament. The term of office of the members is one year.  The Estimates Committee, constituted for the first time in 1950, is a Parliamentary Committee consisting of 30 Members, elected every year by the Lok Sabha from amongst its Members. The Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs renders secretarial assistance to the Cabinet Committee on Parliamentary Affairs, which, interalia recommends prorogation of both the Houses of the Parliament, Govt's stand on Private Members' Bills and Resolutions.  Option 3 is not correct.
29. (d) Survey of India, The National Survey and Mapping Organization of the country under the Department of Science and Technology, is the oldest scientific department of the Govt. of  India. It was set up in 1767.  
30. (a) The High Court (and not the Election Commission) is the final authority to give a final verdict in case of election disputes. In the alternative special election benches may be constituted in high courts and earmarked exclusively for the disposal of election petitions and disputes.
31. (b) Opti on 2 and 3 are c orrect . But as t o opti on 1 t here are special provisions. The Speaker shall determine the time when a sitting of the House shall be adjourned sine die or to a particular day, or to an hour or part of the same day: provided that the Speaker may, if he thinks fit, call a sitting of the House before the date or time to which it has been adj ourned or at any time after the House has been adjourned sine die. It is not the President.
32. (a) In case of a No-confidence motion, there is no need to set out the grounds on which it is based. NoConfidence motion is introduced only in the Lok Sabha by the opposition and needs a support of not less than 50 members of LS for its introduction.  Rule 198 of the Lok Sabha specifies the procedure for a motion of noconfidence.  Any member may give a written notice; the speaker shall read the motion of no-confidence in the House and ask all those persons to rise who favours that the motion be taken up.  If there are 50 MPs in favour, the speaker allots a date for discussing the motion.
33. (d) Article 67(b) in the Constitution of India states, a Vice President may be removed from his office by a resolution of the council of States passed by a majority of all the then members of the council and agreed to by the House of the People; but no resolution for the purpose of this clause shall be moved unless at least fourteen days notice has been given of the intention to move the resolution.
34. (b) Stock Exchanges are listed in the Seventh Schedule (Article 246) List I-Union List, item no. 90 that reads, taxes other than stamp duties on transactions in stock exchanges and futures markets. Forests-Concurrent List, 17-A, Post Office Savings Bank -Union List-3, Public health and sanitation; hospitals and dispensaries - State List -6.
35. (b) The highest decision making body for planning in India is the Parliament, National Development Council is at second position and Planning Commission at third position. Economic and social planning is placed under Entry 20 in the Concurrent list.
36. (*) Haryana was founded in 1966 when the former state of Punjab was divided into Haryana and the modern Punj ab.  The 1967 general elections or the 4th Lok Sabha was held in February. Tripura, Manipur and Meghalaya became full-fledged states on Jan 21, 1972. Mysore state was renamed Karnataka in 197.
37. (*) Food and Nutrition Board works under Ministry of Women and Child Development. It is a technical support wing under Child Development Bureau of the Ministry. None of the given options is correct.
38. (c) Chairman of different Committees of Constituent Assembly: Union Power Committee - Jawaharlal Nehru, Drafting Committee - B R Ambedkar, Flag Committee - J B Kriplani, Fundamental Rights and Minority Committee - Vallabh Bhai Patel, Provincial Constitution Committee - Vallabh Bhai Patel.  Jawaharlal Nehru was the chairman of the Union Constitution Committee.
39. (a) Agriculture (Entry 14), Fisheries (Entry 21), Public Health (Entry 6) are in the State List. Regulation of Labour and safety in mines and oil fields is in the Union list under Entry 55 (Art 246).
40. (a) Statement 1 is correct as per provisions under Article 249. Statement 2 is incorrect as resolutions approving the proclamation of Emergency are passed by both Houses of Parliament (not only LS).
41. (d) Assertion is false, because the Council of Ministers in the Union of India is collectively responsible to the Lok Sabha only.
42. (b) GV Mavalankar (1952-56), Hukum Singh (196267); K.M.  Munshi and U.N.  Dhebar were never the Speakers of the Lok Sabha.
43. (a) Statement 1 is correct as under Article 360, any Proclamation of Financial Emergency issued shall cease to operate at the expiration of two months, unless before the expiration of that period it has been approved by the resolutions of both Houses of Parliament. If approved by both Houses, then it operates for 6 months.  Statement 2 is incorrect as it is excluding Judges of SC and High Courts; but under the provisions of effects of article 360, Judges of SC and HCs are included.
44. (a) Statement 2 is incorrect as Public Accounts Committee consists of 22 members: 15 from Lok Sabha and 7 from Rajya Sabha.
45. (b) Mohd. Hidayatullah (1979-84); Shankar Dayal Sharma  (1987-92)
46. (b) Statement 2 is correct as per provisions given under Article 173. Statement 1 is incorrect as according to article 170, the legislative assembly of each state shall consist of not more than 500 and not less than 60 members chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies in the state.
47. (b) According to Article 70 the Prime Minister shall be appointed by the President and the other Ministers shall be appointed by the President on the advice of the Prime Minister.
48. (d) Statement 1 is incorrect as Advocate General of the state is appointed by the governor of the State.  Statement 2 is incorrect as High Courts have Original, Appellate and Writ jurisdiction (not advisory jurisdiction).
49. (b) Statement 1 is incorrect as CAT was set up in 1985 during the prime ministership of Rajiv Gandhi.
50. (a) The number of ministeries at the Centre can vary based on factors such as volume of work, importance attached to different sectors, changes of orientation of policy etc. On 15 Aug, 1947, the number of ministries at the centre was 18.
51. (b) According to Article 143 (Power of President to consult Supreme Court).
52. (c) The District Forum entertains the complaints where the value of goods or services does not exceed rupees twenty lakhs.
53. (b) Parliament shall have power to authorise by law the withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund of India for the purposes for which the said grants are made.
54. (a) Adjournment motion : (i) It is introduced in the Parliament to draw attention of the house to a definite matter of urgent public importance and needed to support of 50 members to be admitted.  (ii) It is regarded as an extraordinary device, because it interrupts the normal business of the house.  (iii) It involves an element of censure against the government and Rajya Sabha is not permitted to make use this device.  (iv) The discussion an adjournment motion should last for not less than two hours and thirty minutes.
55. (d) None of the above statements are correct (i) Union Territories (Delhi and Pondicherry) are represented in the Rajya Sabha.  (ii) It is not within the purview of the Chief Election Commissioner to adj udicate election disputes. It is the Supreme Court and High Court which look into the disputes.  (iii) According to the Constitution of India, the Parliament consists of the Lok Sabha the Rajya Sabha and the  President of India.
56. (b) If the Lok Sabha Speaker wants to resign, the letter of his / her resignation has to be addressed to the Deputy Speaker.
57. (c) 2nd, 3rd and 4th are correct.
58. (c) Only 2nd and 3rd are correct statements.  (2) CAG reports on execution of projects or programmes by the ministries are discussed by the Public Accounts Committee.  (3) Information from CAG reports can be used by investigating agencies to press charges  against those who have violated the law while managing public finance.
59. (a) Article 75(I) of the Indian Constitution provides that the Prime Minister shall be appointed by the President. The Constitution permits a person to be appointed PM without his\her being a member of either House of the Parliament at the of appointment.  Before expiry of this time, he has to become a member of either the Rajya Sabha or the Lok Sabha.
60. (a) Only 3rd and 4th are correct, thus the option (b) is right.
61. (a) When a money bill returns to the Loksabha with amendments made by the Rajyasabha, it is open to Loksabha to accept or to reject any or all of the recommendations. When the Loksabha chooses to accept or decline the money bill with or without the recommendation, the money bill is deemed passed in both houses.
62. (d) A lieutenant Governor is in charge of a Union Territory whereas a Governor is in charge of a State.  The rank of Lt.Governor is present only in the states of Delhi, Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Puducherry. So in the case of a Union Territory specified where there is a legislative setup, the Chief Minister is appointed by the Lieutenant Governor.
63. (c) The Attorney General of India has a post parallel to any minister in Parliament. He can take part in the proceedings of either house. He can be a member of any c ommit tee of Parl iament . He has the right t o speak in the Parliament but he has no right to vote.
64. (d) Parliament has exclusive power to make law with respect to any of the matters enumerated  with the Union List. According to entry no 14 in the Union List it reads- 'entering into treaties and agreements with foreign contries and implementing of treaties, agreement and convention with foreign countries'.
65. (a) Minister/ministers can be removed by issuing no confidence motion in the parliament.  All cabinet members are mandated by the constitution to be the member of either house of the parliament of India.  Cabinet is headed by the cabinet secretary not by the Head of the State.
66. (c) The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the parliament; the Prime minister shall communicate to the president about the proposals for legislation but the union. If a President were to dismiss the Council of Ministers on his or her own initiative, it might trigger a constitutional crisis. Thus, in practice, the Council of Ministers cannot be dismissed as long as it commands the support of a majority in the Lok Sabha.
67. (b) The nominated members of the Rajya Sabha have the right to vote in the election of the Vice President so far none from them has been inducted in the Council of Ministers.
68. (a) Clause (3) of Article 77 "Conduct of Business of the Government of India" of the Constitution of India lays down as follows:  "The President shall make rules for the more convenient transaction of the business of the Government of India, and for the allocation among Ministers of the said business.  The Constitution of India mentions that, "All executive action of the Government of India shall be expressed to be taken in the name of the President." Therefore, only option (a) is correct.
69. (c) It is under original jurisdiction the supreme court decides the disputes between centre and one or more states.
70. (b) It is the Parliament which has the  power to increase the number of judges in the Supreme Court of India. Parliament increased the number of judges from the original eight in 1950 to eleven in 1956, fourteen in 1960, eighteen in 1978, twenty-six in 1986 and thirty-one in 2008.
71. (b) The largest Committee is the committee of Estimates, given its 30 members Committee on No. of members Public Accounts 22 Estimates 30 Public Undertakings 22 Petitions LS(15) , RS(10)
72. (c) Finance commission is involved in distribution of taxes and grants. It is not involved in planning. So by just eliminating all options involving statement 1, we get answer (c) correct.
73. (c) The functions of the Cabinet Secretariat are preparation of agenda for Cabinet Meetings & Secretarial assistance to Cabinet Committees.  However Allocation of financial resources to the Ministries as per the provisions in budget is prepared by finance ministry.
74. (c) A constitutional Government needs to balance between individual liberty viz a viz State Authority.
75. (a) Britain's Prime Minister Clement Attlee was announced the dispatch of the Mission of three Cabinet Ministers Pethic Lawrence, Sir Stafford Cripps, and A.V. Alexander. According to the proposals of the Cabinet Mission announced, the country could have a Federal government consisting of the Indian provinces and princely states.
76. (c) All revenues received by the Government by way of taxes like Income Tax, Central Excise, Customs and other receipts flowing to the Government in connection with the conduct of Government business i.e. Non-Tax Revenues are credited into the Consolidated Fund constituted under Article 266 (1) of the Constitution of India. No amount can be withdrawn from the Fund without authorization from the Parliament.
77. (d) The executive in a Parliamentary system is responsible to the legislature for all its actions. The ministers are answerable to the parliament and responsi bl e t o the Lok Sabha. The Counc il of Ministers remains in office as long as they enjoy the support and confidence of the Lok Sabha.
78. (b) A Money Bill cannot be introduced in Rajya Sabha. Rajya Sabha has no power either to reject or amend a Money Bill. It can only make recommendations on the Money Bill. It has no power to vote on the Demands for Grants.
79. (a) In India, if a bill has been rej ected by any house of the parliament and if more than six months have elapsed, the President may summon a joint session for purpose of passing the bill. The bill is passed by a simple majority of a joint sitting.
80. (d) The Executive powers of the Union of India is vested in the President. The Cabinet Secretary (and not the Prime Minister) is the ex-officio head of the Civil Services Board.