1. The power of the Supreme Court of India to decide disputes between the Centre and the State falls under its: [1996]
(a) advisory jurisdiction
(b) appellate jurisdiction
(c) original jurisdiction
(d) constitutional jurisdiction

2. When the Chief Justice of a High Court acts in an administrative capacity, he is subject to : [1996]
(a) the writ jurisdiction of any other judges of the High Court
(b) special control exercised by the Chief Justice of India
(c) discretionary powers of the Governor of the state
(d) special powers provided to the Chief Minister

3. According to the Constitution of India the term 'district judge' shall not include: [1996]
(a) chief presidency magistrate
(b) sessions judges
(c) tribunal judge
(d) chief judge of a small cause court

4. Given below are two statements, one labelled as Assertion (A) and the other labelled as Reason (R).
Assertion (A) : Wilful disobedience or non-compliance of Court orders and use of derogatory language about judicial behaviour amount to Contempt of Court.
Reason (R) : Judicial activism cannot be practised without arming the judiciary with punitive powers to punish contemptuous behaviour.  In the context of the above two statements which one of the following is correct? [1997]
(a) Both A and R are true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b) Both A and R are true but R is not the correct explanation of A
(c) A is true but R is false
(d) A is false but R is true

5. The Supreme Court of India tenders advice to the President on a matter of law or fact: [2001]
(a) on its own initiative
(b) only if he seeks such advice
(c) only if the matter relates to the Fundamental Rights of citizens
(d) only if the issue poses a threat to the unity and integrity of the country

6. Consider the following statements regarding the High Courts in India: [2001]
1. There are eighteen High Courts in the country
2. Three of them have jurisdiction over more than one state
3. No Union Territory has a High Court of its own
4. Judges of the High Court hold office till the age of 62
Which of these statements is/are correct?
(a) 1, 2 and 4 (b) 2 and 3
(c) 1 and 4 (d) 4 only

7. The salaries and allowances of the Judges of the High Court are charged to the: [2002]
(a) Consolidated Fund of India
(b) Consolidated Fund of the State
(c) Contingency Fund of India
(d) Contingency Fund of the State

8. The power to enlarge the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of India with respect to any matter included in the Union List of Legislative Powers rests with: [2003]
(a) The President of India
(b) The Chief Justice of India
(c) The Parliament
(d) The Union Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs

9. Which one of the following High Courts has the Territorial Jurisdiction over Andaman and Nicobar Islands? [2003]
(a) Andhra Pradesh (b) Kolkata
(c) Chennai  (d) Orissa

10. Consider the following statements: [2004]
1. The highest criminal court of the district is the Court of District and Session Judge
2. The District Judge are appointed by the Governor in consultation with the High Courts
3. A person to be eligible for appointment as a District Judge should be an advocate or a pleader of seven years' standing or more, or an officer in judicial service of the Union or the State
4. When the sessions judge awards a death sentence, it must be confirmed by the High Court before it is carried out
Which of the statements given above are correct?
(a) 1 and 2 (b) 2, 3 and 4
(c) 3 and 4 (d) 1, 2, 3 and 4

11. According to the National Human Rights Commission Act, 1993, who amongst the following can be its Chairman? [2004]
(a) Any serving Judge of the Supreme Court
(b) Any serving Judge of the High Court
(c) Only a retired Chief Justice of India
(d) Only a retired Chief Justice of a High Court

12. Which one of the following is the correct sequence in the descending order of precedence in the warrant of precedence? [2004]
(a) Attorney General of India-Judges of the Supreme Court-Members the of Parliament-Deputy Chairman of Rajya Sabha
(b) Judges of the Supreme Court-Deputy Chairman of Rajya Sabha-Attorney General of India- Members of the Parliament
(c) Attorney General of India-Deputy Chairman of Rajya Sabha-Judges of the Supreme Court- Members of Parliament
(d) Judges of the Supreme Court-Attorney General of India-Deputy Chairman of Rajya Sabha- Members of Parliament

13. Consider the following statements: [2005]
1. There are 25 High Courts in India.
2. Punjab, Haryana and the Union Territory of Chandigarh have a common High Court.
3. National Capital Territory of Delhi has a High Court of its own.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 2 and 3 (b) 1 and 2
(c) 1, 2 and 3 (d) 3 only

14. Consider the following statements: [2005]
1. The Parliament cannot enlarge the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of India as its jurisdiction is limited to that conferred by the Constitution.
2. The officers and servants of the Supreme Court and High Courts are appointed by the concerned Chief Justice and the administrative expenses are charged on the Consolidated fund of India.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 only (b) 2 only
(c) Both 1 and 2 (d) Neither 1 nor 2

15. Assertion (A): In India, every State has a High Court in its territory.
Reason (R) : The Constitution of India provides a High Court in each State. [2006]
Codes:
(a) Both 'A' and 'R' are individually true and 'R' is the correct explanation of' A'.
(b) Both' A' and 'R' are individually true but' R' is not the correct explanation of' A'.
(c) 'A' is true but 'R' is false.
(d) 'A' is false but 'R' is true.

16. Who was the Chief Justice of India when Public Interest Litigation (PIL) was introduced to the Indian judicial system? [2006]
(a) M. Hidayatullah (b) A. M. Ahmadi
(c) A. S. Anand (d) P. N. Bhagwati

17. Consider the following statements: [2006]
1. A person who has held office as a permanent Judge of a High Court cannot plead or act in any court or before any authority in India except of the Supreme Court.
2. A person is not qualified for appointment as a Judge of a High Court in India unless he has for at least five years held a judicial office in the territory of India.
Which of the statement(s) given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 only (b) 2 only
(c) Both 1 and 2 (d) Neither 1 nor 2

18. Consider the following statements: [2007]
1. The mode of removal of a Judge of a High Court in India is same as that of removal of a Judge of the Supreme Court.
2. After retirement from the office, a permanent j udge of a High Court cannot plead or act in any court or before any authority in India.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 only (b) 2 only
(c) Both 1 and 2 (d) Neither 1 nor 2

19. How many High Courts in India have jurisdiction over more than one State (Union Territories not included)? [2008]
(a) 2 (b)3
(c)4 (d)5

20. With reference to Lok Adalats, consider the following statements: [2009]
1. An award made by a Lok Adalat is deemed to be a decree of a civil court and no appeal lies against there to any court.
2. Matrimonial/Family disputes are not covered under Lok Adalat.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 only (b) 2 only
(c) Both 1 and 2 (d) Neither 1 nor 2

21. With reference to Lok Adalats, which of the following statements is correct ? [2010]
(a) Lok Adalats have the jurisdiction to settle matters at pre-litigating stage and not those matters pending before any court
(b) Lok Adalats can deal with matters which are civil and not criminal in nature.
(c) Every Lok Adalat consists of either serving or retired judicial officers only and not any other person.
(d) None of the statements given above is correct.

22. Which of the following are included in the original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court? [2012 - I]
1. A dispute between the Government of India and one or more States
2. A dispute regarding elections to either House of the Parliament or that of Legislature of a State
3. A dispute between the Government of India and a Union Territory
4. A dispute between two or more States
Select the correct answer using the codes given below :
(a) 1 and 2 (b) 2 and 3
(c) 1 and 4 (d) 3 and 4

23. With reference to the Delimitation Commission, consider the following statements : [2012 - I]
1. The orders of the Delimitation Commission cannot be challenged in a Court of Law.
2. When the orders of the Delimitation Commission are laid before the Lok Sabha or State Legislative Assembly, they cannot effect any modifications in the orders.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 only (b) 2 only
(c) Both 1 and 2 (d) Neither 1 nor 2

24. What is the provision to safeguard the autonomy of the Supreme Court of India? [2012 - I]
1. While appointing the Supreme Court Judges, the President of India has to consult the Chief Justice of India.
2. The Supreme Court Judges can be removed by the Chief Justice of India only.
3. The salaries of the Judges are charged on the Consolidated Fund of India to which the legislature does not have to vote.
4. All appointments of officers and staffs of the Supreme Court of India are made by the Government only after consulting the Chief Justice of India.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 and 3 (b) 3 and 4
(c) 4 only (d) 1, 2, 3 and 4

25. With reference to National Legal Services Authority, consider the following statements: [2013 - I]
1. Its objective is to provide free and competent legal services to the weaker sections of the society on the basis of equal opportunity.
2. It issues guidelines for the State Legal Services Authorities to implement the legal programmes and schemes throughout the country.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 only (b) 2 only
(c) Both 1 and 2 (d) Neither 1 nor 2 

1. Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion etc. (Article 15 of the Constitution of India) is a Fundamental Rights classifiable under: [1995]
(a) the Right to Freedom of Religion
(b) the Right against Exploitation
(c) the Cultural and Educational Rights
(d) the Right to Equality

2. Consider the following statements: [1996]
No one can be compelled to sing the National Anthem since:
1. it will be violative of the Right to Freedom of Speech and Expression
2. it will be violative of the Right to the Freedom of Conscience and practise and propagation of religion
3. there is no legal provision obliging anyone to sing the National Anthem
(a) 1 and 3 are correct
(b) 2 and 3 are correct
(c) 1, 2 and 3 are correct
(d) none is correct

3. A British citizen staying in India cannot claim the right to: [1999]
(a) Freedom of trade and profession
(b) Equality before the Law
(c) Protection of life and personal liberty
(d) Freedom of religion

4. The following news item appeared in a National daily dated 1-12-1999 :
"...Parliament today rejected a Bill to grant women the right to vote and stand for office in parliamentary elections, by a margin of 32 to 30.  The National Assembly was split between liberal pro-government and Shiite Muslim deputies who were in favour of women's rights, while the opposition camp grouped Sunni Muslim fundamentalists and tribal MPs.  A total of 64 MPs and Ministers were present, of whom two abstained." [2000]
The Parliament referred to in this quotation is that of :
(a) Kuwait (b) Iran
(c) Bahrain (d) Saudi Arabia

5. In the Indian Constitution, the Right to Equality is granted by five Articles. They are: [2002]
(a) Article 16 to Article 20
(b) Article 15 to Article 19
(c) Article 14 to Article 18
(d) Article 13 to Article 17

6. Which one of the following rights was described by Dr. B.R. Ambedkar as the heart and soul of the Constitution? [2002]
(a) Right to Freedom of Religion
(b) Right to Property
(c) Right to Equality
(d) Right to Constitutional Remedies

7. Which one of the following authorities recommends the principles governing the grants-in-aid of the revenues to the states out of the Consolidated Fund of India? [2002]
(a) Finance Commission
(b) Inter-State Council
(c) Union Ministry of Finance
(d) Public Accounts Committee

8. Consider the following statements: [2005]
1. Article 301 pertains to the Right to Property.
2. Right to Property is a legal right but not a Fundamental Right.
3. Article 300 A was inserted in the Constitutional Amendment.
Which of the statement given above is/are correct?
(a) 2 only (b) 2 and 3
(c) 1 and 3 (d) 1, 2 and 3

9. Consider the following statements: [2006]
1. Free and compulsory education to the children of 6-14 years age-group by the State by the seventysixth Amendment to the Constitution of India.
2. Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan seeks to provide computer education even in rural areas.
3. Education was included in the Concurrent List by the Forty-second Amendment, 1976 to the Constitution of India'.
Which of the statements given above are correct?
(a) 1, 2 and 3 (b) 1 and 2
(c) 2 and 3 (d) 1 and 3

10. With reference to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, consider the following : [2010]
1. The Rights of Development
2. The Right to Expression
3. The Right to Recreation
Which of the above is/are the Rights of the child ?
(a) 1 only (b) 1 and 3
(c) 2 and 3 (d) 1, 2 and 3

11. In India, if a religious sect/community is given the status of a national minority, what special advantages it is entitled to? [2011 - I]
1. It can establish and administer exclusive educational institutions.
2. The President of India automatically nominates a representative of the community to Lok Sabha.
3. It can derive benefits from the Prime Minister 's 15-Point Programme.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct ?
(a) 1 only (b) 2 and 3
(c) 1 and 3 (d) 1, 2 and 3

12. India is home to lakhs of person with disabilities.  What are the benefits available to them under the law? [2011 - I] 
1. Free schooling till the age of 18 years in government- run schools.
2. Preferential allotment of land for setting up business.
3. Ramps in public buildings.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 only (b) 2 and 3
(c) 1 and 3 (d) 1, 2 and 3

13. Consider the following :
1. Right to education.
2. Right to equal access to public service.
3. Right to food. [2011 - I]
Which of the above is/are Human Right/Human Rights under "Universal Declaration of Human Rights'' ?
(a) 1 only (b) 1 and 2
(c) 3 only (d) 1, 2 and 3

14. With reference to consumers' rights/privileges under the provisions of law in India, which of the following statements is/are correct? [2012 - I]
1. Consumers are empowered to take samples for food testing.
2. When a consumer files a complaint in any consumer forum, no fee is required to be paid.
3. In case of death of a consumer, his/her legal heir can file a complaint in the consumer forum on his/her behalf.
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 1 only (b) 2 and 3
(c) 1 and 3 (d) 1, 2 and 3

15. 'Economic Justice' as one of the obj ectives of the Indian Constitution has been provided in [2013 - I]
(a) the Preamble and the Fundamental Rights
(b) the Preamble and the Directive Principles of State Policy
(c) the Fundamental Rights and the Directive Principles of State Policy
(d) None of the above

16. Which  of  the  following  are  the discretionary powers given to the Governor of a State? [2014 - I]
1. Sending  a  report  to  the President of India for imposing the President's rule
2. Appointing the Ministers
3. Reserving certain bills passed by the  State Legislature for consideration of the President of India
4. Making the rules to conduct the  business  of  the State Government
Select the correct answer using the code given below.
(a) 1 and 2 only (b) 1 and 3 only
(c) 2, 3 and 4 only (d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
