1. (c) According to Article 131, The SC has original jurisdiction in any dispute - (a) between the Government of India & one or more States; or (b) between the Government of India and any State or States on one side and one or more other States on the other; or (c) between two or more States
2. (a) It his administrative capacity he is subject to writ judiciary in (Article 1720-224).
3. (c) Under article 236 of the Constitution, The term "District Judge" includes judge of a city civil court, additional district judge, joint district judge, assistant district judge, chief judge of a small cause court, chief presidency magistrate, additional chief presidency magistrate, sessions judge and assistant sessions judge and additional sessions judge.
4. (b) Assertion and Reason as independent statements are true but does not explain each other.
5. (b) As per provisions under Article 143
6. (d) There are 21 High Courts in India. Six (Bombay, Calcutta, Guwahati, Kerala, Madras and Punjab and Haryana High Court) of them have jurisdiction over more than one state. National Capital Territory of Delhi has High Court of its own.
7. (b) The salaries and allowances of the Judges of the HC are charged to the Consolidated Fund of the state but their pensions are payable as Charged Expenditure /Art 112(3).
8. (c) Such is the prerogative of the Parliament.
9. (b) The U.T. of Andaman and Nicobar Islands comes under the j urisdiction of high court of Calcutta under its extended jurisdiction Act 1953.
10. (d) These provisions are given under Article 233-235 in the chapter of Subordinate Courts in the Constitution of India.
11. (c) According to NHRC Act 1993, only a retired CJI can become chairman of NHRC, appointed by President on the recommendation of a committee comprising of PM, Speaker of Lok Sabha, Home Minister, Leader of Opposition of both Houses of Parliament and Deputy Chairman of Rajya Sabha
12. (b) President comes first, Vice-President second, Prime Minister third and Governors of states with in their respective State comes fourth in the Warrant of Precedence.  According to Indian order of precedence, Judges of the Supreme Court - Rank 9 Deputy Chairman of Rajya Sabha - Rank 10 Attorney General of India - Rank 11 Members of Parliament - Rank 21 
13. (a) There were 21 High Courts in India with three new states created in 2000, having their own High Courts (Chattisgarh at Bilaspur, Uttarakhand at Nainital and Jharkhand at Ranchi). Punjab, Haryana and Chandigarh have a common HC at Chandigarh.  In the year 2013, three new High Courts in the northeast - Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura were created taking the total number of High Courts in the country from 21 to 24.  National Capital Territory of Delhi has a High Court of its own which was established in the year 1966.
14. (b) The statement (1) is not correct as according to Article 138(1) of the Constitution, Parliament can enlarge the j urisdiction and powers of the SC w.r.t. to any of the matters in the Union List. Whereas SC's jurisdiction w.r.t. to any other matter can be enlarged by a special agreement between Government of India and government of the concerned State.
15. (d) Article 214 of the Constitution says-There shall be a High Court for each State. Therefore, Reason (R) is correct. But for twenty-nine states and seven union territories we have only 24 High Courts.
16. (d) PN Bhagwati was CJI during July 1985-Dec 1986.  During his tenure as CJI, PIL was introduced to the Indian judicial system.
17. (d) Statement 1 is incorrect because after retirement a permanent judge of High Court shall not plead or act in a Court or before any authority in India, except the SC and a HC other than the HC in which he had held his office (Art 220).  Statement 2 is incorrect as according to Article 217, a person is not qualified for appointment as a j udge of a High Court in India unless he has for at least ten years held a j udicial office in the territory of India.
18. (a) Statement 2 is incorrect because after retirement a permanent judge of High Court shall not plead or act in a Court or before any authority in India, except the SC and a HC other than the HC in which he had held his office (Art 220).
19. (b) Bombay HC (Maharashtra & Goa); Guwahati (Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Tripura, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh); Punjab and Haryana HC (Punjab, Haryana)
20. (a) When statutory recognition had been given to Lok Adalat, it was specifically provided that the award passed by the Lok Adalat formulating the terms of compromise will have the force of decree of a court which can be executed as a civil court decree.
21. (d) Cases that are pending in regular courts can be transferred to a Lok Adalat if both the parties agree.  These are usually presided over by retired judges, social Activists, or other members of the legal profession. Lok Adalats can deal with any matter falling within the jurisdiction of civil, criminal etc.
22. (c) The Original Jurisdiction of the Supreme Court includes dispute between the Government of India and one or more States, and dispute between two and more States.
23. (c) Both are correct. Hence the option (c) is right.
24. (a) 1st and 3rd are correct statements thus option (a) is right.
25. (c) The National Legal Services Authority (NALSA) has been constituted under the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 to provide free Legal Services to the weaker sections of the society and to organize Lok Adalats for amicable settlement of disputes. In every state, State Legal Services Authority has been constituted to give effect to the policies and directions of the NALSA and to give free legal services to the people and conduct Lok Adalats in the State.
1. (d) Article 14-18 are covered under Right to Equality.  Article 23 and 24 - Right against Exploitation. Article 25-28 - Right to Freedom of Religion. Article 29 and 30 - Cultural and Educational Rights.
2. (a)  It is violative of the fundamental rights under Article 25(1).
3. (a) Fundamental rights under Article 15, 16, 19 and 30 are exclusive to the citizens of India. Freedom of Trade and Profession comes under article 19(1)(g).
4. (a) Kuwait's all-male Parliament rejected granting women full political rights. The vote was 32 to 30 with 2 abstentions. With 64 members present, the bill needed 33 votes to pass.
5. (c) There are 6 groups of Fundamental Rights:  Right to Equality (14-18), Right to Freedom (19-22), Right against Exploitation (23 and 24), Right to Freedom of Religion (25 and 28), Cultural & Educational Rights (29 and 30), Right to Constitutional remedies (32).
6. (d) Right to Constitutional Remedies under article 32 is a Fundamental Right. It was called the very soul of Indian constitution and very heart of it, by B.R.  Ambedkar.
7. (a) The finance commission will be governed by the principles to allocate grants-in-aid of the revenues of the states out of the consolidated fund of India.
8. (a) Article 301 pertains to Freedom of Trade, Commerce and Intercourse. In the original constitution right to property was a Fundamental Right under Article 19(1) (f). But 44 th Amendment Act, 1978 omitted sub clause f, and inserted Article 300A to make right to property a legal right. The Government at that time was Janta Party government.  
9. (c) Statement 1 is incorrect as this provision was added by 86th Amendment Act (not 76th ).
10. (d) The Convention on the Rights of the Child (adopted on Nov. 20, 1989) is the first legally binding international instrument to incorporate the full range of human rights i.e. civil, cultural, economic, political and social rights.
11. (c) Minority education institution has the power to reserve only upto 50% seats for students belonging to its own community. (Supreme Court Judgement on St. Stephens College Case, 1992, S.C.C. 558).
12. (d) Disable students come under the Right to Education and RTE Act provides for free and compulsory education to 'children' between the ages six and 14 years, though under the Persons with Disability (PWD) Act, a child refers to a person up to the age of 18 years. So statement 1 is correct. Please note that Persons with Disability (PWD) Act provides for ramps in public building; adaptation of toilets for wheel chair users; Braille symbols and auditory signals in elevators or lifts; ramps in hospitals, primary health centres and other medical care and rehabilitation institutions. The same Act also states that appropriate Governments and local authorities shall by notification frame schemes in favour of persons with disabilities, for the preferential allotment of land at concessional rates.
13. (d) Article 25 says everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health and wellbeing of himself and of his family, including food, clothing, housing and medical care and necessary social services, and the right to security in the event of unemployment, sickness, disability, widowhood, old age or other lack of livelihood in circumstances beyond his control.  Article 21(2) says- everyone has the right of equal access to public service in his country.  Article 26(1) says-Everyone has the right to education.  Education shall be free, at least in the elementary and fundamental stages.
14. (c) Consumers are empowered to take samples for food testing. In case of death of a consumer his/her legal heir can file a complaint in the consumer forum on his /her behalf.
15. (b) The Preamble to the Constitution of India in its introductory statement says- "Justice- Social, Economic and Political" and the Directive Principles of state policies aim to create social and economic condition under which the citizens can lead a good life. They also aim to establish social and economic democracy through a welfare state.
16. (b) The governor has Constitutional discretion in cases of Reservation of bill for consideration of the President and Recommendation of the imposition of President's rule.Therefore, statement 1 and 3 are definitely right. Moreover Governor only appoints those persons as ministers who are recommended by the Chief Minister. So Governor doesn't have "Discretion" in appointment of the minister.Therefore 2 is wrong .