1. (b) According to 73rd Amendment Act 1993, under Article 243D, not less than 1/3rd i.e. 33% seats should be reserved for women in locla bodies.
2. (c) According to 73rd Amendment Act, three-tier system of Panchayats exists: Village level, District Panchayat at the district level, the intermediate Panchayat which stands between the village and District Panchayats in the States where the population is above 20 Lakhs.
3. (a) Panchayati Raj System was first introduced in Nagaur district of Rajasthan on October 2, 1959 followed by Andhra Pradesh in 1959.
4. (d) Provision given in option (d) is not included under 73rd Amendment Act 1993.
5. (c) Name in the voters list is the important condition.
6. (d)
7. (c) Duration of Panchayats is five year. Fresh election to constitute a Panchayat shall be completed before the expiry of its t erm; or i n case of dissoluti on before the expi ry of a period of 6 months from t he dat e of its dissolut i on.
8. (b) In 1688, the first Municipal Corporation of India was set up in Madras.
9. (c) District planning committee comes under 74th Amendment not in 73rd Amendment.
10. (d) According to Panchayat Extension to the Scheduled Areas) Act 1996, Gram Sabha has the power to prevent alienation of land in the Scheduled Areas, has the ownership of minor forest produce and the recommendation of Gram Sabha is required for granting prospecting licence or mining lease for any mineral in the Scheduled Areas.
11. (d) Section C of the Forest Dwellerwws Act provides a transparent three step procedure for deciding on who gets rights.  Firstly, the Gram Sabha makes a recommendationi.e, who has been cultivating land for how long, which minor forest produce is collected; etc.  The Gram Sabha plays this role because it is a public body where all people participate and hence is fully democratic and transparent. The Gram Sabha's recommendation goes through two stages of screening committees- the Taluka and the District levels.
12. (d) PESA Act does not identify the freedom of tribal people from exploitation as its objectives, but it automatically becomes a byproduct of its objectives.
13. (a) The fundamental object to Panchayati Raj system is to ensure people's participation in development, political accountability and democratic decentralization.
1. (a) Option is not the obj ective of CACD.
2. (a) Abolition of Legislative Council of a state does not need the ratification of not less than one half states. Under Art. 169, it has been mentioned that Parliament can create or abolish the council if that every State passes a resolution to do so with special majority. So drop point 4.  
3. (d) Here the possible answer is (d) because Statement 2 is incorrect as it is not mandatory that each state must have a State Human Rights Commission. But statement 4 is correct as Chairperson of the National Commission on Women is also the member of NHRC.
4. (a) The Water (Cess) Act, 1977 related to water and irrigation and not the protection of environment.
5. (b)
6. (c) Main purpose of these Committees is to provide a forum for informal discussions between the Government and Members of Parliament on policies and programmes of the Government and the manner of their implementation.
7. (c) Madhya Pradesh publishes largest number of newspapers.
8. (b) The Indian Constitution provides for the establishment of a Consolidated Fund and a Public Account under Article 266 and a Contingency Fund for each State under Article 267. Disbursements from Public Accounts of India are not subject to a Vote of Parliament.
9. (a) The Archaeological Survey of India established in 1861 is a department of the Government of India attached to the Ministry of Culture. ASI is responsible for archaeological studies and the preservation of archaeological heritage of the country in accordance with the various acts of the Indian Parliament.
10. (c) Rural sanitation is not a subject in the Concurrent List. Public Health and Sanitation comes under the State List.
11. (d) Lok Adalats are being held in all the three areas .
12. (b) Statement 1 is incorrect as equal pay for equal work for both men and women is provided under Article 39(d) in Directive Principles of the State Policy under Part IV of the Constitution.
13. (b) NCLF is run by the Union Ministry of Labour and Employement.
14. (a)  Article 243ZE - Committee on Metropolitan Planning does not have a sole responsibility for implementing Government  sponsored schemes in metropolitan area.
15. (b) The committee consists of 15 members of Lok Sabha not 25 members. The function of the committee is to examine the accounts showing the appropriation of the sums granted by Parliament to meet the expenditure of the government of India and such other accounts laid before the House as the committee may think fit. Apart from the Reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on Appropriation Accounts of the Union Government, the Committee also examines the various Audit Reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General on revenue receipts, expenditure by various Ministries/Departments of Government and accounts of autonomous bodies.
16. (a) The fundamental object of Panchayati Raj system is to ensure people's participation in development, political accountability, and democratic decentralization.  