1. (b) Meteor is a small celestial body which has entered the earth's atmosphere by the gravitational force of earth, when they pass close to it. Meteors typically occurs in the mesosphere, and most range in altitude from 75 km to 100 km.
2. (a) In the graph the temperature ranges from 15° to 25°. So, the graph indicates wet and dry tropical region, and in this region rain fall does not exceed 25 cm.
3. (c) It is a tropical cyclone of north-west  Australia.  Willy Willy originates in the Timor sea and causes rainfall in different parts of Australia.
4. (d) Ionosphere is the top layer of the atmosphere.  Radio waves are deflected in the ionosphere of the atmosphere. Ionosphere is composed of D, E and F layers. D layer (60 km from earth) is good at absorbing AM radio waves.
5. (a) The assertion is correct and reason correctly explains the assertion because due to high temperature the atmospheric air gets heated and rises up. It cools down and precipitates while the cool air descends down to take the place of the vaccum.
6. (a) Both the statement are correct and reason is correctly explained.  Mangroves are found in the bordering region of tropical and sub-tropical sea coast. Mangroves stabilise the shoreline and act as bulwark against sea erosion which make the specialised forest ecosystem.
7. (c) Diamond ring is observed during solar eclipse, only along the peripheral regions of the totality trail.
8. (b) Due to the monsoon drift of Indian ocean, its regular direction of the ocean currents changes twice an year.
9. (d) The asteroids are group of small pieces of rock revolving round the sun between the orbit of Mars and Jupiter. They are approximately 40,000 in number.
10. (b) Iron ore is exported to Japan. Leather goods are exported to Russia. Tea is exported to U.K. Cotton fabric is exported to U.S.A.
11. (a) India is a large country spanning over 30° of longitude. It is unusual in having a single time zone all over the country, 5½ hours fast.  If the direction of rotation of earth is reversed then Indian Standard Time will be - 5½ hr.  When it is noon the time is 12:00; that will be 6:30 A.M.in place of 17:30 P.M. or 5:30 P.M.
12. (c) Sun is the star nearest to the earth. It is 150 million kilometer away from earth. Sun has temperatures of over 15 million ºC.
13. (c) Mars is the only planet with similar day time temperatures and an atmosphere similar to earth. The most relevant condition for presence of life on Mars is occurrence of ice caps and frozen water.
14. (a) In the given world map '1' refers the hot, dry summers, mild and moist winter in California (U.S.A).
15. (c) The asteroids are group of small pieces of rocky debris of different sizes. Some asteroids are small and some asteroids even have diameter 1000 km. The asteroids revolve between Mars and Jupiter.
16. (c) The correct sequence of different layers of atmosphere from the surface of earth is Troposphere, Stratosphere, Mesosphere and Ionosphere.  Troposphere extends upto 8 km from earth surface, but at equator it is 16-18 km.  Stratosphere extends above Troposphere 18-50 km.  Mesosphere extends up to 80 km and above Mesosphere Ionosphere is present, which extends up to 400 km.
17. (a) Red tides are a speical type of blooms, which are found at the estuaries. These blooms are pigmented dinoflagellates. These single celled organisms are able to swim short distances. When the algae present in high concentration, the water appears purple or pink in colour.
18. (a) The climatic conditions, which are given in the table denotes the climatic condition of China.
19. (d) A.  The smallest planet of the solar system is- Pluto B. The largest planet of the solar system is-Jupiter C. The planet second from the Sun in the solar system is-Venus D. Planet nearest to the Sun is - Mercury.
20. (a) In the given figure : • Andes is marked as '1', which is located at the western coast of South America.  • Brazilian shield is marked as '2', this area is located at the eastern part of South America. The shield extends over 8.5 million square.  • Guyana highland is marked as '3' Guyana highland is a plateau and low mountain region of South America located north of Amazon river and South of Orinoco river.  • Amazon basin is marked as '4', it is the tropical rain forest in the world. Amazon river drains more than half of Brazil, part of Bolivia, Peru and Ecuador.
21. (d) Anthracite is a dense, shiny coal that has a high carbon content. Very little volatile matter is present in it. It gives a clean flame while burning. Anthracite contains 91% of carbon; is very little volalile and has almost smokeless burning.
22. (d) O. Schmidt in 1943 gave Inter-Slellar Dust Hypothesis for the origin of the earth and solar system.
23. (d) Benguela is a cold current flows from south to north along the west coast of Africa.  Guinea current is a worm current flowing east of Guinea along the west coast of Africa.
24. (b) In the given figure 'B' lies between two cyclone zone 'A' and 'D'. At the 'B' marked region rainfall would be accompanied by thunder storms.
25. (d) The given data shows the climatic condition of Mediterranean type. In this climatic zone the temperature varies from 7 - 15°C and rainfall varies from 6 - 16 cm.
26. (d) Cedar is found in Canada, Douglas fir is found in Mexico, Mahagony is found in Myanmar. Teak is found in Honduras.
27. (d) The first light of the sunrise of new millenium in India experienced at Kathal island of Andaman and Nicobar, which is located at 92°30 E meridian.
28. (d) Statement 1 is right because it helps in navigation.
29. (b) The westerlies in the southern hemisphere is called as roaring forties; lies between 40°S to 50°S and is a permanent wind. It is slow over landmass.
30. (a) In stormy weather condition the pressure of atmosphere varies, which causes sudden fall in barometer reading.
31. (a) Aristotle in 340 B.C first stated that the earth was spherical in his book "On the Heaven".
32. (a) If the stars are seen to rise perpendicular to the horizon by an observer then the observer is at the equator because celestical equator is an imaginary circle around the sky directly above the earth's equator. It is always 90º from the pole. All the stars rotate in a path that is parallel to the celestical equator.
33. (d) All the statements are true about the sedimentary rock.
34. (a) The basathic rock found in Baltic sea is transported by glacier.
35. (c) Quartzite is a metamorphosed rock originally sandstone. Converted dut to heat and pressure.
36. (a) The correct order of soil erosion process is splash erosion, sheet erosion, rill erosion and gully erosion.  Splash occurs when the raindrop hits the surface; explosive impact soil into individual particles. Sheet erosion is the detachment of soil particles by rain drop and their removal down slope by water flowing overland as a sheet in definite channels. Rill erosion refers to the development of small ephemeral concentrated flow paths which function as both sedimentary source and sediment delivery systems for erosion on hill slopes. Sheet erosion removes the this top layer by raindrop kill or orion occurs in lines which are less than 30 cm deep when these rills are deeper than 30 forming channels are called as gully erosion. Gully erosion occurs when water flows in narrow channels after heavy rain and melting snow.
37. (c)
38. (b) Both the statements are correct, but reason is not the correct  explanation of the statement. The sun, the earth and t he moon come i n t he positi on of quadrature (form-a right angle) on seventh and eighth day of every fortnight of a month and thus the tide producing forces of the sun and the moon works in opposite direction, causing low tide. This is lower in height than the normal tide and is called neap tide. But the spring tide occurs during full moon and are called high tides.
39. (d) The ice crystals suspended in cirrus clouds (5-10 k.m.) in the upper atmosphere are responsible for sun's halo.
40. (b) Ocean currents are not slow most of the time and can be subsurface current also. So, statement '1' is wrong. But '2', '3' and '4' statements are correct.
41. (d) 1st statement is wrong: Equational region has only two seasons.  2nd statement : Mediterranean gets rainfall during winter season is also wrong.
42. (c) The average albedo of earth is 34%. It varies according to the colour and texture of the surface.  According to the ecosystem, the maximum albedo would be of Tundra, then Taiga, then tropical green forest and tropical deciduous forest respectively.
43. (c) A is true but R is false.  Sub-polar low pressure is located between 60- 65º latitude in both hemisphere. Low pressure is produced in this area, because the surface air spreads outward from this zone due to rotation of earth.
44. (a) The surface wind spiral inwards the centre of the cyclone, which create a low pressure area in the centre.
45. (d) Thunder cloud develops due to high temperature and humidity, which pushes the wind vertically up within the atmosphere. Water vapour condenses to form clouds which precipitate to  rain due to presence of orography.
46. (c) Movement of Jet stream affects the mansoon rain in India. Jet stream is a strong and rapidly moving circumpolar westerly air extending upto troposphere, having meandering course. The upper air westerly jet stream bifurcates into two as they flow over Indian sub-continent due to occurance of Himalayas. The northern jet stream washes the northern Himalayas and Tibetan plateau. The southern part moves south of Himalayas in a cyclone form from west to east, bring rain and lowering the temperature of the northern Indian plain. Usually this condition last from October to February but if presist longer then hinders the arrival of monsoon in India. Low pressure develops over north-west India in the months of April and May but t he upper hight pressure j et st ream dec ends down and obstruct the ascent of wind in the region of low pressure. This wind withdraws from North India by mid June but if the condition presists these wind obstructs the upward movement of surface wind and giving no way to monsoon to arrive.
47. (c) Periyar lake is not a lagoon. It is surrounded by mountain ridges of candaman hills.
48. (a) The earth is the densest of all the planet. Density of Earth is 5.52, Venus-5.50, Mercury 5.27, Mars - 3.95, Jupiter and Saturn - 0.69, Uranus - 1.27.
49. (a) The amount of moisture in atmosphere is related to latitude because the temperature depends upon the latitude and capacity to hold moisture is related to temperature.
50. (b) The primary productivity of tropical rain forest is very high as the tropical rain forest contains decayed leaves, plants, etc. which acts as organic fertilizers. Hence tropical rain forest can be productive farmland for several years even without fertilizers.
51. (a) Area lying with 5°-8° latitude is nearer to equator, where the temperatures are high and humidity is high throughout the year.
52. (a) Temperature coniferous forests covers the highest percentage of forest area in the world.
53. (b) Jupiter takes maximum time for one revolution i.e., 11 year 86 days. Mars take 687 days, Venus takes 267 days.
54. (d) The circulation of atmosphere and oceans is funda-mentally caused by the fact that the amount of incoming solar radiation varies from a maximum at the equator to a minimum at the poles. More reflection and absorption of incoming radiation takes place in high latitude because of the greater thickness of atmosphere that must be penetrated. Thickness of the earth is maximum over the pole.
55. (c) Biosafety protocol is an agreement designed to regulate the international trade, handling and use of any genetically engineered organism that may have adverse effects on the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity, taking also into account risks to the human health.  The first meeting was held in 2004 in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. India is a signatory member to it the Biosaflty protocol deals with genetically modified organism but they donot name them so. USA has sign it put not yet ratify this treaty.
56. (d) Volcanic mountain. St. Helen is located in United States of America.  
57. (a) We see the same face of the moon from earth in because the rotation of the earth is similar to moon 23½ hrs.
58. (a) The atmosphere of  Venus has carbon dioxcide primainly followed by nitrogen. Making it denser and hotter for the resistances of human life.
59. (d) A is false as the direction of wind in the northern hemisphere is anit clock wise and in southern hemisphere it is clock wise. The explaination is correct as this is mainly due to coriolis effect.
60. (a) Balearic islands are located in Mediterrian sea. It is an autonomous division of Spain and the North African Coast.
61. (c) Managua is the capital of Nicaragua, not Balmopan. Balmopan is the capital city of Balize.
62. (b) Earth magnetic field is inchined between -90° to 90°. In the northern hemisphere it points downwards and upward in the southern hemisphere.
63. (a) Total land area is area is 148226000 km square kilometers. So, the ratio of land area to water area of earth is approximately 1 : 3. The Pacific Ocean is the largest ocean, so maximum percentage of earth's water is present in it.
64. (c) Diamantine Trench is istuated in south-east part of Indian Ocean. The depth of Diamantine Trench is 8047 m.
65. (d) A is incorrect as the mars revolution round the sun takes 1.88 years of Earth's revolution. The diametre of earth is 12,742 km (7,918 miles) and the mass is 6,734 km (4,200 miles).
66. (d) The actual average distance between the sun and the earth is 152 × 10 6 2 km which is near to 150 × 10 km.
67. (a) 25°-35° N and S in both hemisphere is a high pressure belt and high temperature zone. This belt owes its origin to the rotation of the earth and sinking and setting down of winds. This zone is of high pressure is called horse latitude because in ancient times the merchant carrying horse in their ships had to throw out of some of the horse while passing through this zone of calm in order to lighten their ships.
68. (b) Climates in the Southern Hemisphere tends to be milder than those in the Northern Hemisphere.  Southern Hemisphere has significantly more ocean and less land. The water heats up and cools down more slowly than land. The annual range of temperature is higher in Atlantic Ocean than in Pacifica ocean.
69. (a) Albedo is the fraction of the incident sunlight that is reflected. When an object reflects most of the light that hits it and looks bright then it has high albedo.  Albedo of mercury  is 0.142 and that of the earth its 0.367.
70. (b) The correct sequence of the median age of their populations is India < China < USA < UK.  27 36.4 32.6 40.4
71. (b) Jupiter and Saturn are located between Mars and Uranus.
72. (a) Jupiter has maximum moons accounting to 63 whereas Satun has 61, Mars has 2 and Venus has none.
73. (c) The core of earth is made up of nickle and iron.
74. (d) Tropical rain forest temperature gets higher than 34°C and drops below 20°C and average rain fall 50- 260 inches yearly.
75. (b) Normal El Nino forms in south-eastern Pacific whereas as El Nino Modoki forms in central Pacific and causes greater number of hurricanes.
76. (d) Biodiversity hot spots are found in temperature regions only. Eastern Himalayas, Western Ghats and Andaman Islands are such hot spots.
77. (d) All are soil conservation methods.
78. (c) Snow's Albedo is highest.
79. (d) Luni river originates from Aravalli range and flows in south west direction through the hills and finally ends up in the marshy land of Rann of Kutch.
80. (a) Mediterrian climate have mild, rainy winter and hot, dry summers and Evergreen, Oak trees.
81. (c) Rotation of the earth causes wind to deflect towards left in the Southern Hemisphere.
82. (b) The sunlight which is very much important component for the growth of plant, donot reach the surface as the trees there are long and donot allow the sunlight to pass through them.
83. (d) Ionosphere has high concentration of free electrons and gases. These free electrons completely surrounds the earth.
84. (d) La Nina is a cold current flowing accross the west coast of South America. It is characterized by the low and high pressure prevai ling i n t he Pacific Ocean. Low pressure there brings good moonsoon to Indian subcontinent.
85. (b) Comets found beyond Neptune i.e. kupier belt.
86. (a) The speed of these winds are higher and persistence in southern hemisphere. The land mass in southern hemisphere is lesser in comparison on toss northern hemisphere. As these winds crosses the landmass its velocity decreases. Thus the effect of westerlies is less over northern hemisphere than in southern hemisphere.
87. (a) It is under the influence of cold ocean current. So given second statement is wrong.
88. (c) Jet fly in the lower stratoshpere to avoid the t urbul ence. There are no c louds and t he ai r is dry wit h little water vapour. These are no vertical convection in the stratosphere.
89. (b) It will help probe the possibility of the existence of stars and galaxies made of anti-mater. It will also help in understanding the evolution of the universe.
90. (a) Only 1st and 2nd  are correct.
91. (b) 1.    Rotation of the Earth 2.    Air pressure and wind 3.    Density of ocean water. Revolution has no impact on ocean current.
92. (c) 1. the atmosphere can be heated upwards only from the Earth's surface 2. there is more moisture in the upper atmosphere 3. the air is less dense in the upper atmosphere
93. (d) The characteristic of the Tropical Savannah Region is a definite dry and wet season.
94. (b) Atlas mountain ranges are situated in the north western part of Africa. They extend almost 2000 km.  They pass through Morocco, Algeria and Tunisia.
95. (b) Rotation of earth on its axis causes day and night but the revolution of earth in an elliptical manner around the sun causes seasons, equinoxes and solstices.
96. (c) The percentage of freshwater that exists on earth is 2.5-2.7% out of which almost 70% is icecaps and glaciers. And the remaining 30% is the ground water.
97. (d) From electromagnetic radiation to revolution of the earth, everything is responsible for bringing dynamic changes on the surface of the earth. For example: Electromagnetic radiation  brings  changes in the field of microwaves, wavelengths of radio, UV rays, infra red rays, X rays and gamma rays.  Geothermal energy is the heat received from the earth's core. This heat continuously flows outward. It transfers to t he surrounding layers of roc k, t he mantl e.  When temperature and pressure becomes very high some mantle rocks melt becoming magma.  It then either comes out as lava or  heat up the nearby rocks and water which comes out as hot springs  or geysers.  Gravitational force is constantly working on all physical bodies. It is giving weights to objects with mass and causes them to fall to the ground when dropped. Plate movement is a dynamic change on the surface of the earth. It explains many aspects of the interrelationship of volcanoes, earthquakes, climate change, and the evolution of life itself. Everything about our planet is related either directly or indirectly to plate tectonic. Rotation causes day and night.  Revoluti on causes seasons, c hange i n the lengt h of day and night.
98. (c) The mixing of warm and cold current in the region where planktons are found, is food for fishes. The temperature is just right for them to survive.  The temperature is just right for the growth of firsh food called planktons.
99. (d) The canopy  is the primary layer of the forest forming a roof over the two remaining layers. The densest of the biodiversity is found here along with a large variety of epiphytes.
100. (a) The first statement is correct. One major factor affecting the distribution of the temperature of Earth is distribution  of  Land  and  Oceans.  Since  there  is more  land  in  Northern  Hemisphere  and  more waters  in  Southern hemisphere  and  there  is  a  big difference  between  the  specific  heat  of  land  and water;  the  loss  of  heat  from  the continents  is  bigger than  the  oceans.  The  continents  get  heated  faster and  get  cooled  faster  in  comparison  to  the Oceans.  This is the reason that the temperatures of the Oceans are moderate while that of continents is extreme. The moderating effect on temperature of the land due to proximity of the seas is called Maritime influence. The increasing effect on temperature of the land at interior of the continents is called Continental Influence.
101. (b) The central Asian steppes run through Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and Mongolia. The climate here is harsh with dust storms, little to no rainfall and temperature ranging from - 4 to 50 degree Celsius.
102. (c) Continental drift has affect the evolution of animals. Pangoa split apart in the triassic period (245 to 208 million years ago) dividing landmass in gondwanaland and lavrasia. The rearrangement of landmass lead diversity among animals.  Glacial period helped int he evolution of many species as they provided a favourable condition for there growth.  The eventual warning caused by accumulation of CO , from volcano allowed melting of snow and triggered a cyanobacterial bloom and photosynthetic oxygen took place.  
103. (b) The Westerlies  are prevailing winds from the west toward the east in the middle latitudes between 30 and 60 degrees latitude. They originate from the high-pressure areas in the horse latitudes and tend towards the poles and steer extra tropical cyclones in this general manner. The moist air masses that cause winter rains in North-Western region of India are part of westerlies.
104. (d) Tides are the rise and fall of sea levels caused by the combined effects of gravitational forces exerted by the Moon, Sun, and rotation of the Earth.
105. (b) The passage points out equatorial region.
106. (a) In the South Atlantic and South-Eastern Pacific regions in tropical latitudes, cyclone does not originate because sea surface temperatures are low.
107. (a) The Earth's rotation on its axis explains the eastward flow of the equatorial counter-current. The earth would have been rotating east to west, the piled up water would have come down on the west side.  Therefore, essentially it's the earth's rotation that explains the eastward flow of equatorial counter current.