1. (d) The theme of the eighth Five Year Plan (19921997) was "Plan with a human face".
2. (d) Non-plan expenditures include nondevelopmental expenditure (interest payment, subsidies, defence expenditure, civil administration), developmental expenditure and expenditure incurred on projects which remained unfinished in the earlier plans.
3. (a) The targeted annual growth rate was 5.6% but the actual growth rate was 6.7%.
4. (d) Under Deficit financing, the government spends more money than it collects as revenue, the difference being made up by borrowing from the Reserve Bank of India by issue of Promissory notes.
5. (d) The New Exim Policy was for five years (April 1, 1992 - March 31, 1997).
6. (a) Both statements are correct and explain one of the instruments to liberalise the Indian economy .
7. (a) Eighth Five Year Plan (1992-97) had a bigger outlay with energy being given 26.6% of total outlay to a cheque a targeted growth rate of 6.78% per annum.
8. (b) A soft loan is a loan with a below-market rate of interest. This is also known as soft financing. Sometimes soft loans include other concessions to borrowers, such as long repayment periods or interest holidays. Soft loans are usually provided by to projects which are socially worthwhile. The World Bank and other development institutions provide soft loans to developing countries. Loans to Delhi metro by Japan is a soft loan.
9. (d) Petroleum will always top the list as its prices are very high.
10. (c) Period between 1990-92 was second plan holiday.  The first plan holiday was between 1966-69.
11. (d)
12. (d) Statement (a), (b) and (c) are true which explain the declining  important position of industries sector after nineties in the planning process.
13. (b)
14. (a) The concept of the National Renewal Fund was announced by the Government as a part of the New Industrial Policy, 1991. The Government established the National Renewal Fund (NRF) by a Government of India resolution on 3rd February , 1992.
15. (c) Increase in SENSEX reflects the overall mood of the economy. A rise in it means that investors and FIIs are positive about the growth of Indian economy and expect that it will be sustained in future. But a rise in SENSEX doesn't necessarily mean that the price of your stocks also moves up. It only changes in share prices due to short run factors. It does not reflect the actual economic conditions.
16. (a) Devaluation of currency is conscious decision taken by Central bank of country to lower the external value of domestic currency. As a result of this Indian goods become cheaper for Foreigners. Import would become costlier.
17. (a) National Council of Applied Economic Research bring out India Development Report.  A tool developed by the United Nations to measure and rank countries' levels of social and economic development based on four criteria: Life expectancy at birth, mean years of schooling, expected years of schooling and gross national income per capita.
18. (b) Community development programme was started in the year 1952.
19. (a) Economic liberalization in India started with industrial de-licensing.
20. (a) In respect of capital account of balance of payment, the indian rupee is partially convertible after 1991.
21. (b) National income calculated on the basis of current price levels whereas National income at constant prices means  that NI is being calculated by using a base year prices to arrive at real change in the NI National Income at constant prices indicates the actual performance of the economy.
22. (b) FDI is defined as investment by a foreign multinational or its subsidiary or a foreign company in terms of setting up a project in another country either by way of a 100% subsidiary or by way of a joint venture. Thus, FDI investment is long term in nature. Thus, it can not be pulled out of the country at short notice.  It is also non-debt creating.
23. (c)
24. (d) In India plans are formulated by Planning Commission and are finally approved by National Development Council. All state chief ministers are members of NDC. The NDC is headed by prime minister of India.
25. (b) All taxes which are the personal liability of an assessee come under direct taxes. They include income tax, professional tax,  wealth tax, securities transaction tax,  commodity transaction tax and the like. On the other hand, the taxes which a person can recover from some other person but the liability of which remains of the person collecting such taxes are indirect taxes.  These are custom duty, excise, service tax, vat, CST and the like.
26. (b) Participatory Notes (PNs / P-Notes) are instruments used by investors or hedge funds that are not registered with the SEBI (Securities and Exchange Board of India) to invest in Indian securities.  Participatory notes are instruments that derive their value from an underlying financial instrument such as an equity share and, hence, the word, 'derivative instruments'. SEBI permitted FIIs to register and participate in the Indian stock market in 1992.
27. (c) This all happened from 1975-78 during fifth five year plan  the period of which is (1974-78)
28. (a) India's Second Five-Year Plan (1956-61) was to set India on the path of industrialisation. P.C.  Mahalanobis was the moving spirit behind the second five year plan. He gave the highest priority to strengthening the industrial base of the economy.  India's Third Five-Year Plan (1961-66) emphasised on long-term development.
29. (d) It is published by Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, Central Statistical Organization.
30. (d) Fringe Benefits Tax (FBT) was the tax applied to most, although not all, fringe benefits. A new tax was imposed on employers by India's Finance Act 2005 and was introduced for the financial year commencing April 1, 2005. The Fringe Benefit Tax was abolished in the Finance Bill of  2009. Securities Transaction Tax (STT) is the tax payable on the value of taxable securities transaction. STT was introduced in India by the 2004 budget and is applicable with effect from 1st October 2004.
31. (c) Nationalization of State Bank of India - 1955; Introduction of First Five-Year Plan - 1951; Enactment of Banking Regulation Act - 1949; Nationalization of Insurance Companies - 1955-56
32. (a) The objectives of establishing SEZs Special export Zones include making available goods and services free of taxes and duties supported by an integrated infrastructure for export production, and single window approval mechanism and a package of incentives to attract foreign and domestic investments for promoting export-led growth.
33. (b) India has comprehensive Double Taxation Avoidance Agreements (DTAA) with 23 countries.  This means that there are agreed rates of tax and jurisdiction on specified types of income arising in a country to a tax resident of another country. Under the Income Tax Act 1961 of India, there are two specific provisions, Section 90 and Section 91, which provide specific relief to taxpayers to save them from DTAA.  Section 90 is for taxpayers who have paid the tax in a country with which India has signed DTAA, while Section 91 provides relief to taxpayers who have paid tax to a country with which India has not signed a DTAA. Thus, India gives relief to both kind of taxpayers Mauritius by itself is a low tax counting.  
34. (d) A neutrino is an elementary particle that usually travels close to the speed of light, is electrically neutral, and is able to pass through ordinary matter almost undisturbed. This makes neutrinos extremely difficult to detect. Neutrinos have a very small, but nonzero rest mass. Neutrinos are affected only by a 'weak' sub-atomic force of much shorter range than electromagnetism, and are therefore able to pass through great distances in matter without being affected by it.
35. (b) Recession is slow down in effective demand for goods and services slow down in the economy implies a short run decline in the growth rate.
36. (b) Over the past few decades, it has been the private sector that has really driven capacity-creation in Indian higher education. Serious thinking on downsizing bureaucracy had begun in the early 1990s.  A sub-group set up by the Planning Commission had suggested in 1993 that the Union government should weed out at least 2,000 senior-level positions in various ministries.
37. (c) Inclusive growth is 'broad-based growth', 'shared growth', and 'pro-poor growth'. It excludes the capital markets which is left to operate by itself in the open market.
38. (a) As per provisions given under Article 281 of the Indian Constitution the recommendations of the finance commission go to the president who is constitutionally bound to place it before the two houses of the parliament.
39. (b) The DEA or the Department of Economic Affairs is also responsible for preparation and presentation to the Parliament of Central Budget and the Budgets for the State Governments under President's Rule and Union Territory Administration.
40. (a) Abolishing the subsidies will lead to higher prices of goods and services which are subsidzed. A reduction in the tax rate would be a stimulus. While increase in government expenditure would increase the level of demand in the economy. Thus it is not good for providing stimulus in the economy.
41. (c) It was during eighth plan period (1992-97) that emphasis was put on infrastructure development.
42. (c) On 27 January 2005, the Government had decided to constitute a 'National Investment Fund' (NIF) into which realization from sale of minority shareholding of the Government in CPSEs would be channelised.  This fund is managed by professionals and a part of it is used for use in social sector - like education, health care and employment.
43. (c) The excise duty's share in the total tax revenue, which was 41.3 percent in 1992-93, declined to 25.1 percent in 2006-07. The customs duty's share in the total tax revenue, which was 31.9 percent in 1992-93, fell to 17.5 percent in 2006-07, as a result of massive structuring on excise and customs.  Planning and Economic Development
44. (b) State Finace Commission governs the distribution between the State and the Panchayats of the net proceeds of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees leviable by the State, which may be divided between them under this Part and the allocation between the Panchayats at all levels of their respective shares of such proceeds; the determination of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees which may be assigned as, or appropriated by, the Panchayats; the grants-in-aid to the Panchayats from the Consolidated Fund of the State.
45. (a)
46. (b) It is based on renewable resources like sugar, molasses, rice, corn and potato starches.
47. (b) Notwithstanding some moderation, food price inflation has remained persistently elevated for over a year now, reflecting in part the structural demandsupply mismatches in several commodities.  The trend of food inflation was pointing at not only structural demand-supply mismatches in commodities comprises the essential consumption basket but also at changing consumption patterns.
48. (a) Because it brings foreign exchange.
49. (b) Governments use fiscal policy to influence the level of aggregate demand in the economy. It is an effort to achieve economic objectives of price stability, full employment, and economic growth.
50. (d) Current account deficit is excess of imports over exports. Policies favouring FDI and FII will reduce the deficit. Also if the domestic currency is devalued, export would become cheaper which will create additional demand for countries products in the world markets. Any reduction in export subsidy is dangerous as the countries goods will become costlier and exports would fall.
51. (c) Base effect is almost an ubiquitous term which says that the previous data affects the calculation of the current data.
52. (b) Foreign Direct Investment only targets a specific enterprise. It aims to increase the enterprises capacity or productivity or change its management control.  The FII investment flows only into the secondary market. It helps in increasing capital availability in general rather than enhancing the capital of a specific enterprise. The Foreign Direct Investment is considered to be more stable than Foreign Institutional Investor. FDI not only brings in capital but also helps in good governance practises and better management skills and even technology transfer.
53. (c) The statements 1st and 3rd are correct, but 2nd statement is wrong because, the member should be aged between 18 and 59 years not 30 and 65 years.
54. (d) Microfinance is a movement whose object is "a world in which as many poor and near-poor households as possible have permanent access to an appropriate range of high quality financial services, including not just credit but also savings, insurance, and fund transfers."
55. (d) All adult members of the household who registered can apply for work. To register, they have to: Be local residents
56. (d) If annual union budget is not passed by the LOK SABHA, it is tantamount to no confidence motion. So the govt submits the resignation of his council of ministers.
57. (d) The Commission shall make recommendations as to the following matters, namely : (i) The distribution between the Union and the States of the net proceeds of taxes which are to be, or may be, divided between them under Chapter I Part XII of the Constitution and the allocation between the States of the respective shares of such proceeds; (ii) The principles which should govern the grantsin-aid of the revenues of the States out of the Consol idat ed Fund of India and t he sums to be paid t o the States which are in need of assistance by way of grants-in-aid of their revenues under article 275 of the Constitution for purposes other than those specified in the provisions to clause (1) of that article; and (iii) The measures needed to augment the Consolidated Fund of a State to supplement the resources of the Panchayats and Municipalities in the State on the basis of the recommendations made by the Finance Commission of the State.
58. (b) Statement 1 is not correct as caretaker Government is the government which is ready to Go, it does not present the Interim Budget. The Interim Budget is presented by the Incoming Government or new Government which has different fiscal and revenue plans from the outgoing Government.  S.N. Vote on account Interim Budget 1 It deals only with the expendi ture side of the government budget.  It includes both expenditures and receipts of the government's budget.  2 It is for only two or three months.  It is for one year.
59. (a) The statement 1 is correct because it includes the definition of teaser loans but the statement (2) is not correct, because in India teaser loan is provided to the home buyers not setting up manufacturing or export units.
60. (d)  The concept of the inclusive growth is based on both economic and social empowerment of ordinary and under privileged individuals. Thus all the statement are correct.
61. (d) When we say "Mainly" the money is to be used to pay the external debt, it is not correct to say so.  Government though "may intend" to retain the management control, but there are fiscal constraints, that induce the government to go for disinvestment.  Both statements are NOT correct.
62. (b) Inflation and economic growth are parallel lines and can never meet. Inflation reduces the value of money and makes it difficult for the common people.  Inflation and economic growth are incompatible because the former affects all sectors as indicated by CPI or Consumer Price Index.
63. (a) Low bank rate means more liquidity in the market.
64. (a) Deprivation of education, health, assets and services at household level
65. (a) A design for the Goods and Services Tax, and a compensation package linked to adherence to the proposed design
66. (c) 2, 3, 1, i.e. High birthrate with high death rate, High birthrate with low death rate, Low birth rate with low death rate.
67. (b) Capital gains arise when there is a natural increase in the value of the property owned and when you purchase a painting and there is a growth in its value due to increase in its popularity
68. (c) 1. Purchase of government securities from the public by the Central Bank 3. Borrowing by the government from the Central Bank
69. (d) All statements except 4th regarding F.D.I in India are correct.
70. (a) To reap the benefits of demographic dividend, skills have to be developed because a relatively larger portion of population fall under the category of productive labour force when there is a demographic dividend.
71. (d) General Price rise may be caused by an increase in the money supply as the real value of the money reduces. The higher aggregate price level will reduce the purchasing power subsequently reducing the consumer spending. Effective demand also increases when there is less purchasing power due to inflation.
72. (d) Extremely high rates of inflation are generally associ ated wit h hi gh rat es of money growt h. It i s often the result of financing large deficits by printing money.
73. (c) The quantity of money demanded is inversely related to the interest rate.
74. (c) A country's economic growth is reflected through capital formation, which in turn encourages private enterprises in enhancing the growth of  a country's economy.
75. (c) When interest rates decreases then investment expenditure by businesses on capital goods like factories and equipment increase in an economy.
76. (c) Non-plan expenditure covers interest payments, subsidies (mainly on food and fertilisers), wage and salary payments to government employees, grants to States and Union Territories governments, pensions, police, economic services in various sectors, defence, loans to public enterprises, loans to States, Union Territories and foreign governments.  
77. (d) IOR-ARC is a regional cooperation initiative of the Indian Ocean Rim countries which  was established in Mauritius in March 1997 with the aim of promoting economic and technical cooperation.  IOR-ARC is the only pan-Indian ocean grouping. It brings together countries from three continents having different sizes, economic strengths, and a wide diversity of languages, cultures. It aims to create a platform for trade, socio-economic and cultural cooperation in the Indian Ocean rim area, which constitutes a population of about two billion people. Presently it has 19 membersAustralia, Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, Iran, Kenya, Malaysia, Madagascar, Mauritius, Mozambique, Oman, Seychelles, Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Tanzania, Thailand, UAE and Yemen.  Six priority areas were identified to take forward the cooperation under IOR-ARC: (i) Maritime Safety and Security; (ii) Trade and Investment Facilitation; (iii) Fisheries Management; (iv) Disaster Risk Reduction; (v) Academic and S&T Cooperation; and (vi) Tourism Promotion and Cultural Exchanges.
78. (c) The Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action was adopted by the Fourth World Conference on Women in 1995. The Platform for Action reaffirms the fundamental principle that the rights of women and girls are an "inalienable, integral and indivisible part of universal human rights." The Platform for Action also calls upon governments to take action to address several critical areas of concern, among them violence against women.
79. (c) When inflation becomes very high, the RBI decreases supply of money (to check inflation) by adopting light monetary policy.
80. (a) Government can go for petroleum products deregulation. Rationalizing subsidies is also the solution.
81. (c) Pradhan Mantri Jan-Dhan Yojana (PMJDY) is National Mission for Financial Inclusion to ensure access to financial services, namely, Banking/ Savings & Deposit Accounts, Remittance, Credit, Insurance, Pension in an affordable manner.
82. (a) Union Government accepted the 14th Finance Commission's recommendation to devolve an unprecedented 42 per cent of the divisible pool to states during 20015-16 to 2019-20, against 32 per cent suggested by the previous commission.
83. (c) Convertibility of rupee implies freely permitting the conversion of rupee to other currencies and vice versa. Currency Convertibility is the ease with which a country's currency can be converted into gold or another currency.
84. (d) The Government of India has established NITI Aayog to replace the Planning Commission. The Union Government of India announced formation of NITI Aayog on 1 January 2015 and the first meeting of NITI Aayog was held on 8 February 2015.