1. (d) There are four grand slam tournaments in Tennis-Australian Open, U.S. Open, Wimbledon and French Open. So a player has to win any of them to win grand slam and if he wins all four its called "Golden Grand Slam".
2. (d) The chess player Alexi Shirov represents spain.  He is remarked 4th in the world. Vishwanathan Anand Alexi Shirov in the final to become Wide World Chess Champion, organised in Tehran.
3. (c) Deep Sen Gupta won the under 12 title in the World Youth Chess Festival in Oropesa, 2000. P.  Harikrishna is India's youngest international master in the world Junior Atheletics Championship is santiago-2000, Tejas Bakre won the title in the Asian chess Tournament in Mumbai 2000.
4. (a) Indira Gandhi Prize for Peace, Disarmament and Development was given to Archibishop Desmond Tutu, Jamnalal Bajaj award was given to Dr. M.S.  Swaminathan, International Gandhi Peace Prize was given to Nelson Mandela and World Prize was given to Dr. Gurudev Khush.
5. (c) Anjali Vedpathak is related to Rifle Shooting, Mouma Das is related to Table Tennis, Neelam Singh is related to Atheletics and Tumpa Debnath is related to Atheletics.
6. (a) Barry Richards was a famous batsman of South Africa, Tex Dexter was hard hitting batsman of England, Alan Davidson was a renowned wicket keeper of Australia and Charlie Griffth was a fast bowler of West Indies.
7. (d) Soma Biswas is related to athletics. She is champion of women's 200 m Race.
8. (c) Karamjit Kaur of Punjab improved her own national record in Women's Pole Vault by clearing a height of 3.15m on the concluding day of the three day Federation Cup Senior Athletic Meet held in Karnataka in 2001.
9. (a) Famous Golf player Vijay Singh is from Fiji.  
10. (d) Among the given options, Highest score in a cricket match innings by an Indian is 281 runs of V. V. S.  Laxman.
11. (d) Shikha Tandon is associated with Swimming, Ignace Tirkey is asociated with Hockey, Pankaj Advani is associated with Snooker and Rohan Bopanne is associated with Lawn Tennis.
12. (c) Correct match is as follows: Wally Grout -Test cricketer Eusebio- Football Rod Laver- Lawn Tennis Mark Spitz- Swimming
13. (b) India defeated Spain 4-3 in the final Hockey matches held in Moscow (1980).
14. (b) Correct sequence is as follows: Australian Open - mid January French Open - May and June Wimbledon - June and July US Open in August and September
15. (b) The Val Barker Trophy, named for boxer Val Barker, is presented every four years to an Olympic boxing athlete who exemplifies style during competition.
16. (c) Correct match is as follows: Daniela Hantuchova - Slovakia Patty Schnyder - Switzerland Nadia Patrova - Russia A'melie - France
17. (d) In 1956 Olympic Games Football tournament, India entered semi final.
18. (c) It was the first time at the European Championship and World Cup that the two teams who played the opening match of the championship met again in the final. Greece have won their very first maj or title. Greece became the first nation to win a major championship led by a foreign manager. This had never happened in 11 previous European Championships or 17 World Cups.
19. (c)
20. (b) Pamela Jelimo is a Kenyan middle-distance runner, specialising in the 800 metres.
21. (d) Nicolas Sebastien Anelka is a French footballer.
22. (d) Monte Carlo  officially refers to an administrative area of the Principality of Monaco specifically the ward of Monte, where the Monte Carlo Casino is located.
23. (b) Anand Pawar is a male Indian badminton player who competed at 2012 Japan Super Series.