1. (d) The marked countries in figure are : '1'   -   Kazakhstan, '2'   -   Turkmenia, '3'   -   Uzbekistan, '4'   -   Kirgizia, '5'   -   Tajikistan
2. (a) Greenwich Mean Time is the standard time for time assessment in different countries.  The countries which lies east of the Greenwich line is ahead of Greenwich Mean Time while the countries which lies west of Greenwich has their standard time behind the Greenwich Mean Time. So, the correct sequence of the countries are Japan, Iraq, Greece, Cuba and Costa Rica.
3. (c) The 'Gypsies' are a group of people found in Central Asia. But, the original home of Gypsies was in India (Western Rajasthan and Punjab) area.  'Gypsies' are an ethnic group, which for unknown reasons took to a wandering life style during the late middle ages.
4. (a) The Continent Antarctica has the highest mean elevation in the world. This is because it is covered by a thick layer of ice, about 7,100 feet (2,200 m) thick.
5. (c) Chechnya is situated in the Asian continent, Chechnya was in news due to its separatist movement from Russia.
6. (d) Great Nicobar, Sundarbans and Nanda Devi are biosphere reserves declared by Govt. of India. Gulf of Kutch is not a biosphere reserve, dry sandy plain.
7. (b) Arakan Yoma is located in western Myanmar. It is a part of eastern Himalayas. It includes the Naga hills, the Chin hills and the Patkai range which includes the Lushai hills.
8. (a) The dotted (broken) line in the map represents Durand line, the boundary between India and Afghanistan. This line was demarcated by a commission headed by Durand.
9. (d) Denotified tribe in India refers to the tribes who where originally listed under the originally trible act of 1871. They are also known as Vimukta Jati.
10. (c) Western Ghat is known as an ecological hot spot in India notified under the Wild Life Act of 1972.
11. (d) National Forest Policy, 1988 describes the protection of forest and development of forest. It does not describe the use of insecticide and pesticide in forest areas.
12. (c) In the given map the labelled countries are: 'A'  is Iraq, 'B'  is Syria, 'C'  is Saudi Arabia, 'D'  is Jordan 
13. (b) The Palk strait separates India and Srilanka. It lies between the Gulf of Mannar and the Bay of Bengal.
14. (d) Jaffna is situated at the 'D' point in the given figure. Jaffna is the location in Srilanka, where the L.T.T.E group is very active and has a stronghold.
15. (b) About 50% of the world population is concentrated between latitude of 20°N and 40°N, because most populous countries and areas like Asia, U.S.A, Europe and India lies with in this latitude.
16. (d) Mongloids are inhabitants of northern, eastern and south-east Asia.  Their eyes has a characteristic fold of skin on the upper lid, hair is lank and straight and the height is medium.  The group also includes the Chinese, Japanese, Burmese, Thais, Vietnamese and Malays.
17. (d) The Salween river is located in the eastern part of Myanmar. This river is situated at Shan plateu of Myanmar. Its basin covers 320,000 sq km. This river forms the border between Burma and Thailand.
18. (d) Indonesia consists of 13,677 islands (nearly 14,000) and this country is 5000 miles from Torres strait. 4th largest country in Asia.
19. (c) The geographical details given in the figure indicates England, which is situated in Europe.
20. (b) Daily wheather map showing isobars is an example of isopleth map. Isopleth map shows an imaginary  surface by means of lines joining points of equal values.
21. (b) Russia is the largest producer of fuel wood in the world because Russia has the largest cover of forests.
22. (b) During a flight from Delhi to Tokyo the respective airports are Bangkok  ® Hanoi ® Hong kong ® Taipei.
23. (a) The satellite launched by Canada has helped in the prepration of a complete and high resolution map of Antartica.
24. (a) Canada is the largest importer of bauxite from India.
25. (d) The Indonesian forest fire in 1997was caused by slash and burn technique of agriculture.
26. (b) In the given diagram of North America and South America.  'a' marked river is Yukon, 'b' marked river is Mackenzie, 'c' marked river is St. Lawrence, 'd' marked river is Orinoco.
27. (d)
28. (b) Maracaibo is an oil-port of Venezuela as it has oil rich basis.
29. (a) 'A' marked city in map is Darwin in Australia.  'B' marked city in the given map is Kualalumpur in Malayasia.  'C' marked city in map is Nairobi in Kenya. The city marked 'D' in the map is Lagos in Nigeria.
30. (b) Mestizo is a type of person with mixed racial ancestry, especially of mixed European and Indian a nc e s t r y.
31. (d) In the given map, copper deposits discovered by Atomic Minerals Division of Department Atomic energy, is at Hasson in Karnataka and is marked as '4'.
32. (b) Mt. Rainier is a volcanic mountain situated in U.S.A Mt. Etna is situated in Europe, Paricutin volcanic mountain present in Mexico and Taal volcanic mountain is present in Philippines.
33. (a) The correct sequence from east to west is Yugoslavia, Bosnia, Slovenia and Croatia.
34. (c) Lake Victoria acts as the international boundary between Tanzania and Uganda. It is the largest lake in Africa and 2nd widest fresh water body in the world.
35. (b) Marsupials are a group of mammals commonly have pouches or pocket of skin, where the mother nurses their young. These marsupians are found in Australia. The common example of marsupians are Kangaroo and Koala.
36. (c) The given map is the union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli. In western India. The capital is at Silvasa and major language of this Union Territory is Gujrati.
37. (b) Fohn is the warm and dry wind of Alps region.  Sarmun is the local wind of Kuristan region, Santa Ana is the local wind of California and Zonda is the local wind of Argentina.
38. (a) Ashikabad is marked as '1' Tashkent is marked as '2' Bishken is marked as '3' Dushanbe is marked as '4' in the given map.
39. (b) All the statements given in the options are correct.
40. (c) According to data of 2010, population of Indonesia is 242 million, population of Brazil is 201 million, population of Japan is 126.8 million and population of Russia is 139.3 million, so the descending order of the size of the country is Indonesia, Brazil, Japan and Russia.
41. (c) The descending order literacy status of these countries is: Srilanka - 90.7%, India - 65.5% Pakistan - 40.9% and Bangladesh - 38.9% now its Banglades, Pakistan.
42. (b) Bosnia, Hercegovina, Alabania, Croatia have Adriatic sea as a boundary. Macedonia is far away from Adriatic sea.
43. (d) In the given figure, four islands of Indian ocean region are Chagos, Socotra, Seychelles and Mauritius which are marked as 1, 2, 3 and 4 respectively.
44. (d) Victoria waterfalls is associated with the river Zambezi which is situated in Africa.
45. (a) In Macedonia, ethinic Albanian population is 23%, which is a good number in Macedonia. But in Kosovo 92% are Albanians and Serbians are in a minority.
46. (a) Israel has common borders with Lebanon, Syria, Jordan and Egypt.
47. (a) Armenia is a land lock country.
48. (b) Mekong is a major river in south eastern Asia.  Mekong is known as the Lancang in China. It runs through Yunan province, China, forms the border between Myanmar and Laos and most of the border between Laos and Thailand and flows across Cambodia and Southern Vietnam before emptying to South China.
49. (d) Latvia does not share its border with Poland because it is located between Estonia, Russia, Belarus, Lithuania, Gulf of Riga and Baltic Sea.
50. (c)
51. (d) The Panama Canal joins Pacific Ocean, Atalantic Ocean, Colombia and Coast Rica.
52. (c) Silent Valley National Park is situated in Nilgiri Hills of Western Ghats. The park is bound by Attappadi reserved forest to the east and vested forest of Palaghat division and Nilamber division to the south-west respectively.
53. (b) Ukraine does not border Lithuania. The border countries to Lithuania are Lativia, Russia, Poland, Belarus. Baltic sea is located in the west.
54. (c) While moving from the North to South Pakistan, the correct sequence of the towns is Peshawar - Islamabad - Gujranwala - Multan.
55. (d) All the monuments / sites are included in World Heritage list of UNESCO. Sun Temple of Orissa, group of monuments at Mahabalipuram were included in 1985. Champaner - Pavagadh Archeological Park of Gujrat and Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus of Maharastra are included in year 2004 in UNESCO list.
56. (d) City River A. Washington, D.C. 4. River Potamac B. Berlin 3. River Spree C. Paris 2. River Seine D. Madrid 1. River Manzanares
57. (b) The total area of United Kingdom is 94, 226 sq miles (244, 044 sq km), where England covers 50, 344 sq miles (130, 365 sq km) i.e. less than 60 % of total land area of United Kingdom. Great Britain donot comprise of Northern Ireland.
58. (c) Itaipu Dam is built on River Parana is the largest dam in the world. This is a joint project of Brazil - Paraguay.
59. (b) The decreasing order of arrangement of continent according to the percentage of Earth's land is Africa (29800000 sq km), North America (21510000 sq km) South America (17598000 sq km) and Europe (9699550 sq km).
60. (b) Bermuda Triangle is a strange and mysterious location in southern Atlantic Ocean. It is roughly in the shape of a triangle which extends upto South Florida, Pruto Rico and Bermuda Island.
61. (b) Macedonian territory is disputed by Bulgaria & Greece.
62. (c) The Huangpu river is the largest river in Shanghai in China. It is 113.07 km long 400 metres wide and 9 metres deep. Shanghai gets most of its drinking water from Huangpu.
63. (b) Canada is the largest producer of uranium, accounting for about 22% of world output. Production of uranium in Canada is mainly from the Mc Arthur River mines in northern Saskatchewan province, which is the largest  mine in the world.
64. (d) In statement '1' one nautical mile is 1852 mtrs and one terrestrial mile is 1609 metres. So, statement '1' is correct. In statement '2' Harmattan is a dry and dusty wind of West Africa. So, statement '2' is wrong.  In statement '3' Iberian peninsula includes Portugal, Spain, Andorra and Gibraltar. Greece and Albania are not a part of Peninsula. So, statement ' 3' is wrong.
65. (b) Colombia, Kenya and Indoneisa are countries through which the equator passes.
66. (a) Baikonur is world's first and largest operational space launch facility. It is located in Kazakhstan and not in Russia.
67. (d) Thailand, Laos and Bangladesh are countries bordering Myanmar.
68. (c) Copacabana Beach is located in Rio de Janeiro in Brazil.
69. (d) London, Lisbon and Accra in Ghana are close to Greenwich Meridian. But, Addis Ababa is istuated on the eastern part of Africa (i.e., longitude 38.74 E).  So, Addis Ababa has a different clock time than that of London, Lisbon and Accra.
70. (a)
71. (a) Amazon is the longest river in the world. It originates from Andes mountain in Peru.
72. (c) Strait of Dover connects United Kingdom and France. It is about 32 km in length.
73. (a) The largest coral reef is the Great Barrier Reef, located just off the north-eastern coast of Australia.  The 1200 mile (1900 km) long reef is protected as a Marine Park.
74. (c) India has largest livestock population in the world, having 57% of world's buffalo population and 14% of the cattle population. According to 17th India's Livestock Census, 2003, the country has about 18.5 crore cattle and 9.8 crore buffalo with total livestock of 48-50 crore and total poultry of 48.90 crore.
75. (b) Malta is in the centre of Mediterranean sea. Italy is in south and Libya is located north of Malta. Its area is 246 sq km.  
76. (d) Singapore is 200 km north of equator.
77. (b) Bering Strait is nearest to the International Date line. Located 1.5 km away from international date line.
78. (a) Maldova is a land locked country in Eastern Europe Located between Romania to the west and Ukraine to the north, east and south.
79. (c) Ajman is one of the seven emirates constituting the United Arab Emirates with an area of 260 sq kilometer. Ras al-Khaimah was the 7 th and last Sheikhdom to join UAE in 1972.
80. (b)
81. (c) Canada is ranked as 36th most populated country.
82. (b) Omkareshwar Project is associated with Narmada river.
83. (c) 9 states of India have a coastline. Gujrat, Maharastra, Karnataka, Kerla, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Odisha, West Bengal.
84. (d) The Tropic of Capricorn pass through all the countries mentioned in the list.
85. (a) Berl in is sit uat ed on t he bank of Havel river. Rhi ne river is the longest river in Germany.
86. (b)
87. (a) Cape Canaveral is the part of Florida's coast.
88. (a) Australia has the world's largest uranium reserves. Approximately 24% of the planet's uranium is present in Australia now 31%.
89. (b) The Shompen tribe is one of two Mongloid tribes found in Nicobar Island.
90. (d) Malacca strait is between the Indonesian island of Sumatra and the Malaya Peninsula. Singapore lies on the tip of the Malay Peninsular.
91. (b) In the third annual survery of National Geographic Society and Globe Scan, Indian top ranked in Greendex 2009 due to environmentally sustainable consumer behaviour.
92. (a) The Ten Degree Channel is a channel that separates the Andaman Islands from the Nicobar Islands in the Bay of Bengal.
93. (b) Turkey's smaller part is in Southeastern Europe and its larger part in Western Asia which is located between Black Sea and Mediterranean
94. (a) The Chechen Republic is a federal subject (a republic) of  Russia. Darfur is a region in western Sudan. Swat is a valley and an administrative district in Pakistan.
95. (c) The correct sequence of occurrence of the following cities in South-East Asia as one proceeds from south to north is Jakarta-Singapore-Bangkok and Hanoi.
96. (b) Jordan does not open out to the Mediterranean Sea.