1. (c) All the pairs, 1, 2, 3 are correctly matched.
2. (a) The Texas state i n U. S. A. has l egalised Euthanasi a.  Euthanasia is the process in which if a person who is willing to die, he is given peaceful death by the doctor through an injection.
3. (d) English, French, Chinese, Russian, Arabic and Spanish are the official language of U.N.O
4. (d) World Environment conference to discuss global warming was held in 1997 in Kyoto of Japan.
5. (b) Ringgit is the currency of Malaysia. A baht is also a unit of weight for gold and is commonly used in jewellers and goldsmiths in Thailand. The currency was originally known as the tical and this name was used in the English language text on banknotes until 1925. The rupiah (Rp) is the official currency of Indonesia. The Won is the official currency of South Korea.
6. (b) According to Meadows, if the present trend of world population, industrialization, pollution remained unchanged then "limits of growth" on our planet will be reached in 100 years.
7. (d) Hang Seng is the stock market of Hong Kong not Seoul. Rest 1 and 3 are correctly matched.
8. (c) Mercosur or Mercosul is an economic and political agreement between Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay. Founded in 1991
9. (a) Amartya sen was associated with WTO draft document.
10. (d) Kenya was granted as the 16th member of G-15 countries, which is marked as '4' in the given map.
11. (d) All the statement given in the question is correct, without '4' because Switzerland is not a member of European Union.
12. (c) Currency of U.A.E is Dinar; Sudan's currency is Sudanese Pound; Yugoslavia's currency is New Dinar Currency of Tunisia is Tunisian Dinar.
13. (b) The Kacchativu Dispute A territorial dispute arose in regard to the ownership of a one square mile uninhabited island, called Kacchativu, off the Jaffna coast in the Palk straits.  Pilgrims from both India and Sri Lanka used to go to Kacchativu Island every year in the month of March during the four-day St. Anthony's festival for worship at the local Roman Catholic Church. India protested over the presence of Sri Lankan police during the festival in 1968. This caused conflict. Both India and Sri Lanka were keen to avoid a serious situation. The Prime Ministers of India and Sri Lanka met twice and pending a final decision on the issue of island's title, resolved to maintain status quo in and around the island. Neither India nor Sri Lanka would send its policemen in uniform or custom officials, or resort to aerial reconnaissance or naval patrolling of adjacent waters during the St. Anthony's festival. Finally, through a comprehensive agreement India accepted Sri Lanka's ownership of the Kacchativu Island.  The Teen Bigha Corridor is a strip of land formerly belonging to India on the West Bengal-Bangladesh border which has been leased indefinitely to Bangladesh so that it can access its Dehgram- Angalpota enclaves, one of the Indo-Bangladesh enclaves. This Corridor was formally transferred to Bangladesh on June 26, 1992.
14. (b) Santos port Brazil is known as "coffee port" of world.
15. (c) In the given figure of Europe the ' c' marked city is Brussels, where historic treaty between NATO and warsaw pact was signed in 1998.
16. (b) Gilt-edged is the market in government securities guaranteed by the government - centre or state. The term means least-risk/best quality by way of least risk of default in repayment of principal and interest.
17. (d) International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) was established in 1977 with the objective to fight rural povert y. Its mission is t o "Enable poor rural people to overcome poverty". The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) is one of five institutions that comprise the World Bank Group.
18. (b) "The Struggle in My Life" is written by Nelson Mandela, " The Struggle and the Triump" is written by Lech Walsesa, "Friends and Foes" is written by Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and "Rebirth" is written by Leonid Brezhenev, the former president of U. S. S. R
19. (d) Falun Gong is a spiritual movement in China against which the Chinese authorities have taken strem action.
20. (c) "Chandra" X-ray telescope has been named after famous physicist of Indian origin Subramanyam Chandrasekhar.
21. (d) Important Day Date A. World Environment Day - 5th June B. World Forestry Day - 20th March C. World Habitat Day - 3rd October D. World Ozone Day - 16th September
22. (b) Ethnic community of Indonesia is Apatani, Dyak is the ethnic community of India, Dinka is related to ethnic community of Sudan, Vighers are the ethnic community of China.
23. (b) Berber speaking community lives in Algeria and Morocco.
24. (d) All the four countries Angola, Columbia, Congo and Sudan are suffering from civil war.
25. (d) The headquarter of International atomic Energy Agency is in Viena. The headquarters of International Telecommunication Union is in Geneva, Headquarters of Council of the European Union is in Brussels and Headquarters of Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development is in Paris.
26. (b) WDR is an annual publication of World bank i.e.  International Bank of Reconstruction and Development
27. (d) WIPO has its HQ at Geneva.
28. (a) Indonesia has the largest population in the given countries.
29. (c) The United Nation took over East Timor in 1999 to prepare for its independence and East Timor finally independence in September 2001.
30. (b) As per the human development index given by UNDP, Maldives ranked 84th, Sri lanka ranked 89th, India ranked 124th and Pakistan ranked 138th.
31. (d) The rupee is the currency of Seyhelles. It is locally called roupi, it is subdivided into 100 cents.  Currency of Bhutan is Ngultrum, Currency of Malaysia is Malaysian Ringget and Currency of Maldives is Maldives Rufiyaa.
32. (a) Bolivia is a land locked country, the surrounding countries are Peru, Chile, Argentina, Brazil and Paraguay. Other than Bolivia Peru, Uruguay, Surinam are the countries which one side any ocean or sea is present.
33. (d) According to 2010 edition of the National encyklopedin, the largest number of speakers in the world are, Portuguese (250 million speakers); Bengali (200 millonspeakers); Japanese; (125 millon speakers); French (74 millon speakers).
34. (c) New Zealand gave the right to vote to women in 1893.
35. (a) Total speaker of Spanish in world is 329 million, Arabic speakers are 220 million and French speakers are 200 million. So, the correct sequence in decreasing order of the number of speakers are Spanish, Arabic and French.
36. (b) The headquarters of United Nations Development Programme is in New york, the headquarters of United National Environment Programme is in Nairobi, The headquaters of united National Industrial Development Organisation is present in Vienna and Headquarters of Universal Postal Union is in Beru.
37. (b) World's longest ruling government is of Fidel Castro of Cuba. Fidel Castro came in power in 1959 following the Cuban revolution and became Prime Minister of Cuba in 1961 and from 1976 he became the President of Cuba till date.
38. (b) Cannes is a city organising film festival every year is present in country France.
39. (d) British Columbia is western most provinces of Canada, Bavaria is a state of Germany. Gibralter is the overseas territory of UK and Rhoda Island is the smallest state in USA.
40. (b) Benin - Dohomey Belize - British Honduras Botswana - Bechuanaland Malawi - Nyasaland 
41. (b) All the statements excepts '4' is correct.  Slovenia declared independent from Yugoslavia.
42. (c) The HQ of ISO is Geneva, Switzerland.
43. (b) China is not a member of ASEAN. It is a part of ASEAN + 3.
44. (b) The Constitution of USA came in to force in 1787.  George H. W. Bush (Father) was 41 st President  and George W. Bush (Son) was 43 rd President of USA.
45. (d) Only statement (1) is correct as statements 2 and 3 are mi smat ched. Federati on Counc il is Upper House of Russian Parliament and State Duma is the Lower House. Both are located in Moscow.
46. (b) Supreme Council i.e. Verkhovna Rada is the Parliament of Ukraine. Sejm is one chamber of Polish Parliament, National Assembly. The other chamber is the Senate underwrites the man Booker Prize presently.
47. (a)
48. (c) Statement (1) is not correct. The charter of UNO was adopted at San Francisco in June 1945.
49. (c) Ghana and Dutch Guiana are not related to each other.
50. (c) In Indonesia the conference of African and Asian nations was held which established to Non-aligned movement.
51. (d) Tamil is the major language in Singapore.
52. (b) Karachi was the capital of Pakistan from 1947 - 1959. Kyoto was the capital of Japan before Tokyo.  Brisbane was the capital of Australia before Cannbera in 1842 - 1859.
53. (a) Seikan Rail Tunnel is world's longest tunnel with length of 34 miles is located in Japan.  Seikan railway tunnel is Japan's 53.85 km long tunnel beneath the Tsugaru Strait and connects the Aomori Prefecture on Honshu Island and the Hokkaido Island.  With its track located 140m below the seabed, the Seikan tunnel is the world's deepest and longest railway tunnel.
54. (c) French is the official language of Republic of Congo, not Spanish. But spanish is the official language of chile, Columbia nad Cuba.
55. (c) Komagata Maru was a Japanese ship carrying passengers from Singapore to Vancouver. The ship was anchored at Calcutta in September 1914.
56. (c) John Major Conservative Party - 1990 James Callaghan Labour Party - 1976 Harold Wilson Conservative Party - 1974 Margaret Thatcher Conservative Party - 1979 Edward Heath Conservative Party - 1970 Harold Wilson Labour Party - 1964
57. (d) Since, 1910 as the seat of Parliament, Cape Town has been the legislative capital of South Africa, Pretoria the Administrative capital and Bloemfontein the Judicial Capital.
58. (c) The Bundala Biosphere Reserve is located on the southeast Coast of Sri Lanka. The c ore area of Bundal a Biosphere is national park and includes brackish water lagoon is added to UNESCO's man and Biosphere.
59. (a) Slovenia is the Capital of Ljublijana, but Bratislava is the capital of Slovakia.
60. (c) The Universal Product Code (UPC) is a barcode symbology (i.e., a specific type of barcode) that is widely used in the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, and in other countries for tracking trade items in stores.
61. (d) Pyinmana is a logging town and sugarcane refinery center in the Naypyidaw Union Territory of Myanmar. The administrative capital of Myanmar was officially moved to a militarized greenfield site two miles west of Pyinmana on November 6, 2005.
62. (c) Kofi Annan of Ghana is the seventh SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations.  The first SecretaryGeneral to be elected from the ranks of United Nations staff, he began his term on 1 January 1997.  On 29 June 2001, acting on a recommendation by the Security Council, the General Assembly appointed him by acclamation to a second term of office, beginning on 1 January 2002 and ending on 31 December 2006.
63. (a) Since 1901, the Nobel Prizes have been presented to the Laureates at ceremonies on 10 December, the anniversary of Alfred Nobel's death. As stipulated in the will of the Swedish-born inventor and international industrialist Alfred Nobel, which was opened after his death in 1896, the Nobel Prizes in Physics, Chemistry, Physiology or Medicine and Literature are awarded in Stockholm, Sweden, while the Nobel Peace Prize is awarded in Oslo, Norway.
64. (b) The script of the film Guide had been written by Nobel Laureate Pearl S Buck  who was signed for the film perhaps for no other reason but the fact that she was a bestselling writer worldwide whose books set in China were also known in India.
65. (d) Lectures from Colombo to Almora is a book of Swami Vivekananda based on his various lectures.
66. (b) The Communist Manifesto was written by Karl Marx with the assistance of Friedrich Engels.
67. (d) Akinwande Oluwole "Wole" Babatunde Soyinka is a Nigerian playwright and poet. He was awarded the 1986 Nobel Prize in Literature, the first African to be honored in that category.
68. (c) Genpact Limited is a multinational business process outsourcing and information technology services company, domiciled in Bermuda with executive headquarters in New York.
69. (c) Harold Pinter was a Nobel Prize-winning English playwright, screenwriter, director and actor. Jacques Diouf is a Senegalese diplomat who was DirectorGeneral of the United Nations' Food and Agriculture Organization from January 1994 to 31 December 2011.  José Manuel Durao Barroso is a Portuguese leftist politician who was the 11th President of the European Commission, serving from 2004 to 2014.  During 1999-2004 India and Pakistan held several rounds of talks on the design of projects, but could not reach an agreement. After failure of talks on January 18, 2005, Pakistan raised six objections to the World Bank, a broker and signatory of Indus Water Treaty. In April 2005 the World Bank determined the Pakistani claim as a 'Difference', a classification between the less serious 'Question' and more serious 'Dispute', and in May 2005 appointed Professor Raymond Lafitte, a Swiss civil engineer, to adjudicate the difference.
70. (d) Eric Richard Kandel is an American neuropsychiatrist. He was a recipient of the 2000 Nobel Pri ze i n Physi ol ogy or Medic ine for his researc h on the physiological basis of memory storage in neurons.
71. (c) In April 2002, the Netherlands became the first country to legalise euthanasia and assisted suicide. It imposed a strict set of conditions: the patient must be suffering unbearable pain, their illness must be incurable, and the demand must be made in "full consciousness" by the patient.
72. (a) The Hovercraft invented by Christopher Cockerell is officially launched in Southampton. Sir Christopher Cockerellinvented the hovercraft, the vehicle which can travel across land or water on a cushion of air. David Bushnell is credited as the inventor of the submarine, which was first used to launch explosives against British ships during the American Revolution (1775-83).Steam ship was invented by J.C Perrier in the year 1775.
73. (c) Davos is host to World Economic Forum, an annual meeting of global political and business elites and the home of huge ski resort is a town of Switzerland.
74. (a) The magnitude of intensity of energy released by an earthquake is measured by Richter Scale. The number indicating magnitude on Richter Scale  ranges between 0 and 9 but infact the scale has no upper limited of number because it is a logarithmic scale.  But each integer reading of the Richeter Scale has in energy 32 times of previous integer reading. So the statement is not correct.
75. (d) The member of Nordic Council are Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden with the autonomous territories Greenland, Faroe Island and Aland.
76. (c) 
77. (c) 
78. (c)
79. (d) VP Singh (1985-87), R Venkataraman (1980-82), YB Chavan (1971-75), Pranab Mukherjee (1982-85;Feb 2009-present)
80. (c) Nancy Patricia D'Alesandro Pelosi is the Minority Leader of the United States House of Representatives and served as the 60th Speaker of the United States House of Representatives from 2007 to 2011. Dr Margaret Chan is the Director-General of WHO and was first appointed by the World Health Assembly on 9 November 2006. Dr Chan's current term began on 1 July 2012 and will continue until 30 June 2017.  Pascal Lamy is a French political consultant and businessman. He was the Director-General of the World Trade Organization until 1 September 2013.  Steven Anthony "Steve" Ballmer is an American businessman who was the chief executive officer of Microsoft from January 2000 to February 2014.
81. (b) 14th Nam Summit was held in Havana(Cuba) from 15-16 September 2006.The 17th EU India summit was held in Helsinkion 13 October 2006.  14th APEC Summit was held 0n 18-19 November 2006 in Hanoi(Vietnam).  The 2006 United Nations Climate Change Conference took place between November 6 and 17, 2006 in Nairobi, Kenya.
82. (b) Michelle Bachelet was the first female president of Chile  from 2006 to 2014.In December 2013, Bachelet was re-elected as President of Chile with over 62% of the vote. She is the first person since 1932 to win the presidency of Chile twice in competitive elections.
83. (c) Chevron Corporation is an American multinational energy corporationand one of the successor companies of Standard Oil headquartered in California. AT and T Inc. is an American multinational telecommunications corporation, headquartered at Whitacre Tower in downtown Dallas, Texas. Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. is an American worldwide semiconductor company based in Sunnyvale, California, United States, that develops computer processors. Enercon GmbH  is the fourth-largest wind turbine manufacturer in the world  based in Germany.
84. (c) Nick was appointed as a lecturer in Bioengineering at Southampton University in January 2011.
85. (c) The Yom Kippur War, also known as the 1973 Arab-Israeli War, was a war fought by the coalition of Arab states led by Egypt and Syria against Israel from October 6 to 25, 1973.
86. (c) "Tim" Berners-Lee is  best known as the inventor of the World Wide Web.
87. (b) The Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) is the second largest inter-governmental organization after the United Nations. Its headquarters is situated in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia
88. (c) Gabriel Garcia Marquez was aColombian novelist, short-story writer, screenwriter and journalist. He was awarded with Nobel Prize in Literature in 1982.
89. (c) The Pugwash Conferences on Science and World Affairs is an international organization that brings together scholars and public figures to work toward reducing the danger of armed conflict and to seek solutions to global security threats. It was founded in 1957 by Joseph Rotblat and Bertrand Russell in Pugwash, Nova Scotia, Canada.
90. (d) The A0 size has an area of 1 square metre.  A0 = 1 square metre A1 = 1/2 square metre A2 = 1/4 square metre A3 = 1/8 square metre A4 = 1/16 square metre
91. (b)
92. (b) Sabyasachi Mukherjee is an Indian fashion designer from Kolkata. Aniruddha Bahal is an Indian journalist, author, founder and editor of the online magazine Cobrapost.com. Vikram Akula is a pioneer in market-based approaches to financial inclusion.  Yusuf Khwaja Hamied is an Indian scientist and chairman of Cipla.
93. (d) Ogaden region has been a source of conflict between Ethiopia and Somalia.
94. (b) Cristina Kirchner is the current President of Argentina and widow of former president Néstor Kirchner. She was sworn into a second term on 10 December 2011.
95. (c) The Foreign Intelligence Service   is Russia's external intelligence agency, mainly for civilian affairs. The Ministry of State Security (MSS) is the intelligence agency and security agency of the People's Republic of China. The Secret Intelligence Service(commonly known as MI6) is the British intelligence agency which supplies the British Government with foreign intelligence. Mossad is the national intelligence agency of Israel.
96. (a) Norman Ernest Borlaug was an American biologist who has been called "the father of the Green Revolution.
97. (a) Peter Benenson was a British lawyer and the founder of human rights group Amnesty International.  The Commonwealth of Independent States was established i n December 1991 t o assi st in set tl ing down the major issues of the independent states' formation and preserving historically established ties. December 8, 1991 - the leaders of the Republic of Belarus, the Russian Federation and Ukraine signed the Commonwealth of Independent States Creation Agreement in Viskuli - Belarusian government residence in the Bialowieza Forest. The Danube Commission is an international intergovernmental organization established by the Convention regarding the regime of navigation on the Danube signed in Belgrade on 18 August 1948. ESA's Headquarters are located in Paris.
98. (b) The one barrel of crude consist of appx 159 Liters.
99. (d) Francis Sellers Collins is an American physician- geneticist noted for his discoveries of disease genes and his leadership of the Human Genome Project.  Sergey Mikhaylovich Brin is an American computer World Panorama scientist and internet entrepreneur who, together wit h Larry Page, co-founded Google, one of the worl d' s most profitable Internet companies. Jimmy Donal "Jimbo" Wales is an American Internet entrepreneur best known as the co-founder and promoter of the online non-profit encyclopedia Wikipedia
100. (a) Davos is a town in Switzerland and Roland Garros is in England.
101. (b) The Audacity of Hope is a 2006 autobiographical work by Barack Obama.
102. (d) The Group of Seven (G7) is an informal bloc of industrialized democracies-the United States, Canada France, Germany, Italy, Japan, and the United Kingdomthat meets annually to discuss issues such as global economic governance, international security, and energy policy. Russia belonged to the forum from 1998 but was suspended after its annexation of Crimea in March of that year.
103. (b) The EU countries are: Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Republic of Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden and the UK.
104. (c) The headquarters of Asia pacific economic cooperationis in Singapore. The headquarters of Association of Southeast Asia Nations (ASEAN) is in Jakarta, Indonesia.
105. (b) The United Nations Economic and Social Council has 54 member states which are elected by the United Nations General Assemblyfor overlapping three-year terms. They are elected by the General Assembly for overlapping three-year terms. Seats on the Council are allotted based on geographical representation with fourteen allocated to African States, eleven to Asian States, six to Eastern European States, ten to Latin American and Caribbean States as well as thirteen to Western European and other States.They are elected by 2/3rd majority of the General Assembly.
106 . (b) Ethiopia and Somalia fought wars for Ogaden.
107. (c) The Association of Southeast Asian Nations, is a geo-political and economic organization of 10 countries located in Southeast Asia, which was formed on 8 August 1967 by Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand. Since then, membership has expanded to include Brunei, Burma (Myanmar), Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam.
108. (c) The Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) is a cartel of twelve developing countries made up of Algeria, Angola, Ecuador, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Libya, Nigeria, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, and Venezuela.
109. (b) ABN AMRO Bank N.V. is a Dutch bank with headquarters in Amsterdam, the Netherlands.  Barclays PLC is a global financial services company headquartered in London, United Kingdom. KB Kookmin Bank is the largest bank by both asset value and market capitalization in South Korea.
110. (b) BMW AG and Daimler AG are Head quartered in Germany.
111. (b) Five permanent members: China, France, Russian Federation, the United Kingdom, and the United States, and ten non-permanent members elected for two-year terms by the General Assembly (with end of term date).
112. (b) The United Nations framework convention on climate change is an international treaty drawn at UN conference on Environment and development, Rio de Janeiro, 1992.
113. (d) Newly industrialized countries are emerging markets whose economies have not yet reached first world status but have, in a macroeconomic sense, outpaced their developing counterparts. The Big Emerging Market (BEM) economies are: Brazil, China, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Mexico, Philippines, Poland, Russia, South Africa, South Korea and Turkey.
114. (d) The World Bank (established in 1944, HQ Washington, D.C.) is a vital source of financial and technical assistance to developing countries around the world.  It is not a bank in the common sense; we are made up of two unique development institutions owned by 187 member countries: the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) and the International Development Association (IDA).  The IBRD aims to reduce poverty in middle-income and creditworthy poorer countries, while IDA focuses on the world's poorest countries.  Their work is complemented by that of the International Finance Corporation (IFC), Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) and the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID).
115. (a) Item - China  Brazil  Russia  India GDP ($billions) - 4.667 1.346 1.371 1.256 Population-1,338,612,968 191,796,000 141,927,297 1,189,703,000
116. (a) The Codex Alimentarius (Latin for "food book") is a collection of internationally recognized standards, codes of practice, guidelines and other recommendations relating to foods, food production and food safety. Its name derives from the Codex Alimentarius Austriacus. Its texts are developed and maintained by the Codex Alimentarius Commission, a body that was established in 1963 by FAO and WHO.
117. (d) The Charter of the Commonwealth was adopted on 19 December 2012 and was officially signed by Queen Elizabeth II at Marlborough House, London, on the Commonwealth Day on 11 March 2013. The Commonwealth of Nationsis a voluntary association of 53 independent sovereign states, most of which were once part of the British Empire. The Commonwealth's membership includes both republics and monarchies. The head of the Commonwealth of Nations is Queen Elizabeth II, who reigns as monarch directly in 16 member states known as Commonwealth realms.
118. (d) The European Commission is the EU's executive body. It represents the interests of the European Union as a whole (not the interests of individual countries). While the European Council has no formal legislative power, it is a strategic body that provides the union with general political directions and priorities, and acts as a collective presidency.  The members of the European Council are the heads of state or government of the 28 EU member states, the European Council President and the President of the European Commission.  The Commission operates as a cabinet government, with 28 members of the CommissionOne of the 28 is the Commission President proposed by the European Council and elected by the European Parliament. The Council then appoints the other 27 members of the Commission in agreement with the nominated President, and the 28 members as a single body is then subject to a vote of approval by the European Parliament.
119. (d) It contains sulphur which is even higher than WTI crude oil.
120. (c) IMF is an Inter-Governmental organization that overseas the global financing system by following macro-economic policies of its member countries (187), in particular those with an impact on exchange rate mechanism and balance of payment.  
121. (b) Price of any currency in international market is determined by the demand for goods/services produced by the country. If the demand for the product is high then the currency would be strong.  The current depreciation of the Indian Rupee is due to rising oil prices. The stability of the government of the concerned country has no role to play in determining the prices of a currency.
122. (d) The Arctic Council is a high-level intergovernmental forum that addresses issues faced by the Arctic governments and the indigenous people of the Arctic.  It has eight member countries: Canada, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, Russia, Sweden, and the United States.
123. (a) Chaitra 1 of the national calendar based on the Saka Era corresponds to 22nd March of the Gregorian calendar in a normal year of 355 days and on 21 March in leap year.
124. (b) Amnesty International is a non-governmental organisation focused on human rights. It was founded in London in 1961 by the lawyer Peter Benenson. It draws attention to human rights abuses and campaigns for compliance with international laws and standards.