

1.      Which    one    of    the    following    is incorrectly matched?
List - 1            List – 2
(city)                   (Province)

Manda             - Jammu and Kashmir Sutkagendor    - Baluchistan Daimabad        - Maharashtra Alamgirpur      - Uttar Pradesh Choose the answer from codes
given below:

(a) 1, 3, 4          (b) 2, 3, 4 (c) 1, 2, 3, 4      (d) None
2.      Which is the most mentioned river in the Rig Veda?
(a) Sindhu         (b) Saraswathi

(c) Ganga          (d) Yamuna

3.      Which among the following is a reason for decline in Mughal empire?
A: Financial strain created by Shahjahans lavish spending on art.
B: Mansabdari Jagirdari crisis

C: Deccan campaign of Akbar

D: Revolts by provincial  governors  of

Delhi, Lahore

(a) All are true
(b) Only B is true (c) B, C, D are true (d) A, C, D are true.
4.      Consider the following statements: Statement A: Third Anglo Mysore war was between Tipu Sultan on one side and Marathas, Nizam and English on the other side.
Statement B: Growing power of Tipu Sultan alarmed  Nizam and Marathas and this led to abandoning him. Choose the correct code from below:
(a) A and B are true

(b) Only A is true

(c) Only B is true

(d) A and B are false

5.      Consider the following statements:

A.   Treaty    of    Salbai    is   between

English and Marathas

B.   Treaty of Bassein led to posting of subsidiary force permanently in Nizams territories
C.  Treaty of Manglore was signed between Hyder Ali and English.
(a) All are false

(b) Only C is true (c) Only B is true (d) Only A is true
6.      Consider following statements

A.   The Sikh panth  in Punjab  is as old as Mughal Empire

B.   Sikhs   and   Mughals   came   to conflict during Aurangazeb's reign
C.   Ranjith Singh raised Punjab to a position of eminence in politics
(a) All are true

(b) Only C is true (c) Only B is true (d) Only A is true
7.      Consider the following statements

A: Black  hole  tragedy  is  an unintended consequence of Siraj- ud-daulahs attack on Fort George
B: Battle of Plassey established British as a biggest power in India
(a) A and B are true

(b) Only A is true

(c) Only B is true

(d) A and B are false

8.      Consider the following statements

A.  Farrukhsiyar, granted duty free trading rights to East India Company at Surat and Bengal.
B. First    English    Factory    is established at Surat.
C. Jahangir  granted  farman  to English, whereby they could formally   establish   factories   in India.
(a) All are true

(b) Only C is true (c) Only B is true (d) Only A is true
9.      Consider the following Statements

A.   The search for alternate route to

India   and   Indonesia   for   spice
trade has led to European age of discovery in sixteenth century.
B.   Before  colonial  era  India  was  a self sufficient agrarian economy, industries  were  completely absent.
C.   Before   colonial   era   India   has deficit trade balance.
(a) All are true

(b) Only C is true (c) Only B is true (d) Only A is true
10.    Consider the following statements

A. First    phase    of    colonial exploitation is by making India a source of raw materials
B. Second   phase   of   colonial exploitation is by establishing Financial Imperialism
C.   Third   phase   of   exploitation   is through establishing trade monopoly by use of military and political clout.
(a) All are true

(b) Only C is true (c) Only B is true (d) All are false
11.    Which Gupta emperor is said to have founded Nalanda University?
(a) Skandagupta (b) Buddhagupta (c) Purugupta
(d) Kumaragupta I

12.    Which Major Rock Edict (MRE)   talk about replacement of berighosh by dhammagosh as a policy of Ashoka?
(a) MRE VII (b) MRE IX (c) MRE XI (d) MRE XIII
13.    Who  among  the  following   kingdom sent an embassy to roman emperor Augustus?
(a) Cholas (b) Cheras (c) Pandyas
(d) Satavahanas

14.    Match the following:

(A) Mirizen Shawls     (1) Assam

(B) Pashmina Shawls (2) Jammu and

Kashmir

(C) Himaroo shawls    (3) Aurangabad, Maharashtra
(D) Tanchoi sarees      (4) Surat, Gujarat
(a) A - 1 B - 3 C - 2 D - 4 (b) A - 4 B - 2 C - 1 D - 3 (c) A - 2 B - 4 C - 3 D - 1 (d) A - 1 B - 2 C - 3 D - 4
15.    Match the following

List – I                List – II A Vir                      1. Peace
B Shaanti              2. Courage

C Rudra                 3. Chivalrous

D Vibhatra            4. Terrifying glossy

A, B, C, D        A, B, C, D
(a) 1, 3, 2, 4      (b) 2, 1, 3, 4 (c) 2, 1, 4, 3      (d) 1, 2, 3, 4
16.    'Grama Bhojaka' refers to

(a) Village treasures (b) Village headman (c) Village chof
(d) None

17.    Which of the following texts of Ancient India allows divorce to a wife deserted by her husband?
(a) Sukra Nitwara

(b) Manavadharan Shartra

(c) Artha Sastra

(d) None

18. Match the following:

List – I            List – II

(a) Vellalar        (1) Ploughmen

(b) Uzavar         (2) Large land owners
(c) Kadaisiyar    (3) Landless

Labourers

(d) Adimai         (4) Slaves

A    B      C     D (a) 1    2       3      4 (b) 2   3       1      4 (c) 2    1       3      4 (d) 3   1       2      4
19.    What do you mean by "Shrenis"?

(a) Association of Private armed men

(b) Military ranks

(c) Association      of     craftsmen      & Merchants
(d) None

20.    An artificially produced material used to make beads, bangles etc is
(a) Oracle Bone     (b) Copper

(c)  Faience           (d) Citadel

21.    'Bhakti comes from the Sanskrit word

Bhaj which mean"

(a) To divide or share

(b) To promote

(c) To pray

(d) To meditate

22.    Which  among  the  following  is  not a factor for emergence of autonomous states in India in 18th century?
(a) Non-communal  nature  of  Mughal

Empire

(b) Decentralization        of       Political

Authority

(c) Political   &   economic   growth   of

Zamindars

(d) Emergence of communal classes

23.    Which among the following  does not

constitute  imports  into  India  during

18th century? (a) Spices
(b) Pepper (c) Copper (d) Saltpetre
24.    Arrange the following in chronological order.
1.  First Anglo Maratha

2.  Second Anglo Mysore

3.  First Anglo – Afghan war

4.  Third Anglo-Burmese war

(a) 1, 3, 4, 2 (b) 3, 1, 4, 2 (c) 3, 1, 2, 4 (d) 1, 2, 3, 4
25.    "Drain of Wealth" Includes:

1.   Home charges
2.   Military     store     purchases     in

England

3.   Interest on foreign capital

4.   Dividends of East India Company

(EIC) share holders

(a) 1, 3              (b) Only 1

(c) 1, 2, 3          (d) All the above

26.    Which among the following put an end to  the  commercial  activities  of  the EIC?
(a) The charter Act of 1813 (b) The charter Act of 1833
(c) Government of India Act 1858 (d) The charter Act of 1853
27.    The Floud commission was set up to

(a) Assess    the    problems    of    land revenue system
(b) Inquire the reasons of Great Bengal famine
(c) Make recommendations on judicial reforms
(d) None of the above

28.  Karam  Shah  & Tipu  Shah  are associated with
(a) Ahom Revolt

(b) Kol uprising

(c) Pagalpanthi uprising

(d) Faraizi movement

29.    Identify the correct sequence

1.   Kuka movement

2.   Wahabi movement

3.   Munda Revolt

4.   Mopla Revolt
(a) 2, 1, 3, 4      (b) 1, 3, 2, 4 (c) 2, 1, 4, 3      (d) 3, 2, 1, 4

30.    Match the following

I                       II
(Person)              (associated with)
1. Metcalfe            A: First census

2. Lord Auckland  B: Press

3. Dalhousie          C: Postal system

4. Hunter              D: Grand Trunk

Road

A  B  C  D         A  B  C  D (a) 3, 1, 2, 4      (b) 4, 1, 2, 3 (c) 4, 2, 1, 3      (d) 4, 1, 3, 2
31.  The  most  important  source  of information about the agrarian conditions during Mughals is-----
(a) Ain-i-Akbari

(b) Akbarnama

(c) Muntakhab-ul-Lubab

(d) Tarikh-i-Ferishta

32. Which of the following are wrongly matched?
(a) Polygar     rebellion-movement     by deposed ruler
(b) Moplah rebellion- politico religious movement
(c) Ramosi   uprising-   movements   by dependents of deposed ruler
(d) Santhal   rebellion-   Frontal   tribal movement
33.    Which one among the following is/are reasons for tribal movements?
A.   Exploitation by money lenders

B.   Attempt    to    suppress    human sacrifice.
C.   To restore traditional leadership

(a) All are true

(b) Only C is false
(c) Only B is false

(d) All are false

34.    Consider the following statements:

A. Breakdown   of   village   self sufficiency and commercial- lization of agriculture are reasons for revolt of 1857
B.   Abolition of sati created a threat to religion and way of life and precipitated in the 1857 revolt
C.   Loss of privileges of higher caste recruits in British army is also a reason for revolt.
(a) All are true

(b) Only C is false (c) Only B is false (d) All are false
35.    Which of the following is/are changes resulting from suppression of revolt of
1857?

A.   East India Company's  rule came to an end.
B.   Post  of  Secretary  of  state  has been abolished.
C.   Indians are made eligible to enter administrative  services  on  basis of education and ability.
(a) All are true

(b) Only C is false (c) Only B is false (d) All are false
36.    Consider the following statements:

A:  Lyttons  reactionary   policies  like vernacular  press  act  provoked  anti-

government  propaganda  and  led  to formation of political associations.
B: Curzons policies led to formation of

Indian National Congress

(a) Both statements are false (b) Both statements are true (c) Only A is true
(d) Only B is true

37. A: British India Association was dominated by Zamindars with the aim to expel British rule from India
B: Theosophical Society's aim is to create a Universal Brotherhood of Humanity in India.
(a) Both statements are false (b) Both statements are true (c) Only A is true
(d) Only B is true

38.    Who was called Mother of India

(a) Madam Bhikaji Kama

(b) Madame Blavatsky

(c) Annie Beasant

(d) Sarojini Devi

39.  Which of the following is wrongly matched?
(a) Prarthana Samaj - M.G. Ranade

(b) Theosophical Society founder - Annie Besant
(c) Indian National Congress - A.O.

Hume

(d) Young Bengal - Rabindranath

Tagore

40.    Which   among   the  following   Indian leader  was  arrested  in Saligram  Idol
Case?
(a) Balganghadar Tilak (b) Bipin Chandra Pal (c) Lala Lajpat Roy
(d) Surendranath Banerjee

41.    Consider the following statements:

A. Moderates were those who were benefitted from western education
B.   Moderates   believed   in   inherent good of British
C. Moderates opined that they cannot fight mighty empire.
(a) All are true

(b) Only C is false (c) Only B is false (d) Only A is false
42.    Consider the following statements:

A.   Act of 1853,  extended  Executive Council of Governor General for legislative purposes.
B.   Act of 1861 is the first time where non-official Indians could participate in legislation.
C.   Direct elections are introduced in the Act of 1892
(a) Only A is false (b) Only B is false (c) Only C is false (d) All are true
43.    Consider the following statements:

A. Extremists were inspired by India's glorious past and took pride in being Indian.
B.  Revolutionaries  of  the  world inspired Extremists

C. Break  of  myth  i.e.,  white supremacy and their untouchability    inspired extremists
(a) Only A is false (b) Only B is false

(c) Only C is false (d) All are true

44.    Consider the following statements: Statement  A:  The  purpose  of  both Moderates  and  Extremists  was  same i.e. not to overthrow British rule. Statement    B:    Extremists     made demands such as Swaraj, Home rule and Self government.
(a) Both statements are false (b) Both statements are true (c) Only A is true
(d) Only B is true

45.  Which among the following is/are Reactionary  policies  of  Viceroy Curzon?
A.   Exclusion of Indians from Special police services
B.   Official  Secrets  Act  was  passed which  covered  both military  and civil matters.
C.   Passed Vernacular Press Act and

Dramatic Performances Act.

D.   Brought     university     education under official control.
(a) A, B, C are true (b) B, C, D are1 true (c) A, C, D are true (d) A, B, D are true
46.    Consider the following statements:

A.   Province   of  Bengal  had  Bihar, Orissa, Chotanagpur and Assam.
B.   Partition  of Bengal  was done  on religious  lines  to  harm  unity  of the communities.
C.   Majority   of   Muslims   were   in favour of partition.
D.   Bengali Hindus were in minority in West Bengal.
(a) A, B, C are true (b) B, C, D are true

(c) A, C, D are true (d) A, B, D are true

47.    Consider the following statements:

A.   Shortage  of  capital  played  spoil sport in Swadeshi movement's encouragement to cottage industries.
B.   National   Council   of   Education was established during Swadeshi movement   to   develop   scientific and     technical     education     in vernacular languages.
C.   Moderates  did  not participate  in

Swadeshi movement.

D.   Boycott    was    not   a   part    of

Swadeshi movement. (a) C and D are true
(b) A and C are true (c) A and B are true (d) B and C are true
48.    Which of the following are reasons for rise of extremism?
A.   Terrible famines in last decade of
19th        century     coupled     with bubonic plague.

B.   Scholarly  writings  of  Dada  Bhai

Naoroji and R.C. Dutt.

C.   Inspiration  from  Indian  spiritual past.
D.   Curzon's seven year rule

(a) All are true

(b) A, C, D are true

(c) B, D are true

(d) All are false

49.    Which   of  the  following   sects   have avowed  policy  of  boycotting government jobs, English dress and courts of law?
(a) Kali sect in Bengal

(b) Namdharis of Punjab

(c) Bhumiars of aouth India

(d) All of the above

50.    Who   among   the   following   fought India's war of Independence outside India?
A.   Vir Savarkar

B.   Shyamji Krishna Verma C.   Madame Bhikaji Cama D.   Sardar Singh Rana
(a) A, B, C are true (b) B, C, D are true (c) A, C, D are true (d) All are true
51.    The two Royal ceremonies of Rajasuya and  Vajpeya  are  mentioned  for  first time in which book
(a) Rigveda

(b) Samaveda

(c) Yajurveda

(d) Atharvaveda
52.    Consider the following statements:

A.   Iron  is  the  first  metal  used  in

India.

B.   Guptas issued a large number of gold coins in ancient period.
C.   Man first learnt to use fire to his advantage during paleolithic age.
D.   Rigvedic   society   was   a   tribal society.
(a) A, B, C are true (b) B, C, D, are true (c) All are false
(d) All are true

53.    Match the following:

I                         II

A. Thomas          1. Gateway of India

Metcalfe

B. G Willet          2. Victoria Hall

C. Emerson         3. Metcalfe house

D. Herbert Baker 4. Secretariat & Legislative Council
A        B            C          D (a) 3        1             2           4 (b) 1        2             3           4 (c) 4         3             2           1 (d) 2        1             4           3
54.    Which of the following places has an observatory established by Jai Singh? (a) Agra             (b) Indore
(c) Ujjain           (d) Jodhpur

55.    'Samyukta   Panigrahi'   is   associated with which of the following
(a) Painting       (b) Violin

(c) Dance           (d) Sports

56.    Identify the correctly matched pair: (a) Tamasha : Odisha
(b) Guru Amar Dar : Mini & Piri (c) Guru Arjun Dev : Adi Granth (d) Guru Gobind Singh : Manji
57.    The 'Stellate' ground plan is used in

(a) Rashtrakuta Art

(b) Pala School

(c) Hoyasala Art

(d) Vijayangara Art

58.    Which  among  the  following  is  not a feature of Indo Gothic Style?
(a) Thicker walls (b) Pointed Arches (c) Large windows
(d) Elaborate & large contraction

59.    Which  of  the  following  are  correct regarding Sulva sutras?
1.   Earliest book on Mathematics

2.   Had mention of geometry

3.   Mentioned zero

4.   Is written by Bandhyan

(a) 2, 3              (b) only 3 (c) 1, 2, 4          (d) 2, 3, 4
60.    Which of the following are not part of

Cornwallis Code?

(i)     Separation     of    revenue     and justice administration.
(ii)   European subjects were brought under jurisdiction
(iii) Government    servants    made accountable to civil courts for action done under their official capacity
(iv)   The principle of rule of law was emphasized and imposed.
(a) None of the above

(b) (ii) and (iii) (c) (iii) and (iv) (d) (i) and (ii)
61.    Which of the following  is false about

Macaulay's Minutes of 1835?

(a) Macaulay  was  a  law  member  in

Governor General Council.

(b) Minute is to prepare an education policy for India.
(c) The  commission  rejected  making English  as  the  language  of education.
(d) Bentinck accepted the suggestions.

62.    Which   of   the   following   acts   done during Lord Dalhousie (1848-56):
(i)   Wood's     dispatch     leading     to opening of Anglo-vernacular educational institutions.
(ii)  Annexation of Sindh.

(iii) Abolition of female infanticide and human sacrifice
(iv)  Introduction   of  First   Telegraph and postal reforms.
(a) i and ii (b) ii and iii (c) iii and iv (d) i and iv
63.    Which of the following are true about

Wood's Dispatch 1854?
(i)   An education  department  was to be set up in every province.

(ii)  At least one government school to be opened in every district.
(iii) Affiliated  private  schools  should be given grant in aid.
(iv)  The   Indian   natives   should   be given training in their mother tongue also.
(a) All of the above

(b) i, ii, iii (c) ii, iii, iv (d) i, iii, iv
64.    Arrange  the following  in the order of the year of occurrence:
(i)   Formation of Swarajist party (ii)  Montagu-Chelmsford reforms (iii) All-India Forward Bloc
(iv)  Government of India Act-1935 (a) 1-2-3-4
(b) 2-1-4-3 (c) 2-1-3-4 (d) 1-2-4-3
65.    Which  of  the  following  are  not  the main features of the Government of India act-1919?
(a)  Introduction   of   Diarchy   in   the provincial government.
(b)  Introduction  of separate  electorate seats for Muslims.
(c)  Women were given right to vote.

(d)  A    bicameral    arrangement    was introduced at the centre.
66.    Arrange  the following  in the order of year of occurrence:
(i)   Kheda satyagraha

(ii)  Champaran movement
(iii) Non-Cooperation Movement

(iv)  Satyagraha against Rowlatt Act. (a) 2-1-4-3
(b) 2-1-3-4 (c) 1-2-4-3 (d) 1-2-3-4
67.    Which of the following are true about

The Vernacular Press Act, 1878?

(i)   The   newspaper   has   to   clearly print in every issue the name of the printer, the editor and the proprietor.
(ii) The   newspaper   editors   and printers were given the option to appeal  to the High Court  within
15 days of the order of forfeiture of the press.
(iii) The   Governor-General   had   the right to revoke a license or call for a fresh application.
(iv)  The Act came to be nicknamed as

Gagging Act. (a) i and ii
(b) ii and iii (c) Only iv (d) i and iv
68.    Which of the following is not feature of

The Rajagopalachari Formula?

(a) The   league   would   endorse   the demand for independence and cooperate with the Congress in forming a provincial government for the transitional period.
(b) The   right   of   self-determination

which  he  claimed  for  the  Muslim

was   to   be   denied   to   the   non- Muslims in those areas.
(c) In    the    event    of    separation, agreement would be made for Defence, Communication and other essential matters.
(d) At the end of the war, a plebicite of all the  inhabitants  in the  Muslim majority  areas  in  the  north-west and the north-east would decide whether or not they should form a separate state.
69.    Arrange  the following  in the order of occurrence:
(i)   The August Offer

(ii)  Wavell's plan

(iii) Cripp's Mission

(iv)  Quit India Movement (a) 1-3-4-2        (b) 3-1-4-2 (c) 1-3-2-4         (d) 3-1-2-4
70.    The  Nehru  Report  of  1928  was  the outcome of
(a) Gandhi-Irwin Pact

(b) Government of India Act-1935 (c) Simon Commission
(d) Round Table Conferences

71.    Which of the following are features of

Karachi session of Congress-1931?

I.    Presided   by   Sardar   Vallabhai

Patel.

II.   Congress  passed  the  resolution on  Fundamental  Rights  and Duties.
III.  The state shall own or control key

industries  and  services,  mineral
resources, railways, waterways, shipping   and   other   means   of public transport.
IV.  A  resolution  passed  to  draw  up an All-India Agrarian Programme.
(a) I, II, III         (b) I, II, IV (c) I, III, IV        (d) II, III, IV
72.    The split in Arya Samaj was due to

(a) Meat eaters vs vegetarianism

(b) Anglicized vs Sanskrit based education
(c) Women education

(d) None of the above

73.   Who among the following played an Instrumental  role in holding  the first "All India National Conference" at Calcutta on 1883?
(a) Motilal Nehru

(b) WC Banerjee

(c) Surendranath Banerjee

(d) All the above

74.    In  the  Indian  Councils  Act  of  1892, the number of additional members of central  executive  council  was increased to
(a) Min 3, Max 7   (b) Min 10, Max 16 (c) Min 8, Max 16 (d) Min 4, Max 8
75.    Which among the following is not an

Achievement of the Lucknow Pact? (a) Muslim Leagues separate status (b) Approval of separate electorate (c) Decreased the fame of Quaid-e-
Azam
(d) Security of Muslims rights & Interests.

76.    The Sadler Commission was appointed to review
(a) Account   the   ways   &   means   of improving education facility
(b) Importance  of training of teachers in Native language
(c) Administrational    &    educational problems of Calcutta University
(d) Development schemes of education

77.    Identify the Incorrect statement:

(a) Bhai Bal Mukund was sentenced to death on Hardinge Bomb case
(b) Indulal Yagnik was associated with

Kheda satyagraha

(c) M.N.Roy         founded         Radical

Democratic Party

(d) Arya  Samaj  formed  the  working

Man's Mission in Bengal in 1878

78.    Which is not recommendation  of the

Nehru report?

(a) No reservation of seats for Muslims in Punjab & Bengal.
(b) Government  on  the  model  of  self governing dominions.
(c) Executive  power  to  be  vested  in king, exercisable by Governor General.
(d) Sindh  should  be  integrated  with

Bombay province

79.    Which  is  not  true  about  the  Poona

Pact?

(a) Adequate representation to depressed classes in civil services.
(b) Principle of common electorate  for

all Hindus was accepted.
(c) 22% of seats in central legislature for depressed classes.
(d) None

80.    The   election   manifesto   adopted   by AICC in August 1936 does not include (a) Removal of untouchability
(b) Equal status for women

(c) Solution in communal problem

(d) None

81.  The  'Textile  enquiry  committee" appointed by Congress government in Bombay 1937 recommended
(a) Wage increase for workers

(b) Health  &  insurances  coverage  to workers
(c) Both             (d) None

82.    The   Congress   rejected   the   August

Offer 1940 because

(a) India did not want to participate in

World War II.

(b) Number   of   Indians   in   Viceroy's

Executive Council was decreased.

(c) Demand   for   provincial   national government was rejected by British
(d) All the above

83.    The Muslim league rejected the Cripps

Mission because

(a) It    did    not    recognize    separate electorates for the Constitution making body
(b) The was no clear cut acceptance of the demand for partition
(c) It  felt  that  it  was  only  a  more promise to freedom
(d) Both (a) & (b)

84.    The Wardha resolution is related to

(a) Civil disobedience movement

(b) Quit India

(c) Individual satyagraha

(d) None

85.    Which of the following were demands of All India Kisan Sabha?
(a) 50% cut in revenue part

(b) Full occupancy rights to tenants

(c) Restoration   of   customary   forest rights
(d) All the above

86. "British rule was an everlasting, increasing & every day increasing foreign invasion", these lines were said by
(a) Dwaraka Nath Tagore (b) Devendra Nath Tagore (c) Dadabhai Naoroji
(d) None

87.  Which of the following is correctly matched?
A.   Aravipurram   Movement   -   Shri

Narayana Guru

B.   Self      Respect      Movement      - E.V.Ramaswamy
C.  Temple  Entry  Movement   -  T.K.

Madhavan

D.   Satyashodhak   Samaj   -   Jyotiba

Phule

(a) All are true

(b) A, C, D are true

(c) B, D are true

(d) All are false
88. Which among the following are characteristics of Mughal painting?
A.   It was mostly Aristrocratic.

B.   Calligraphy  was  internal  part  of

Mughal paintings.

C.   Both miniatures and portraitures are present in Mughal painting.
D.   Female   characters   in   Mughal paintings are unreal.
(a) C, D are true (b) A, B are true (c) A, C are true (d) All are true
89.    Match the following

List – I                         List – II

(1) Taar Vadyas              (a) Dilruba

(2) Taal Vadyas              (b) Violin

(3) Tantu Vadyas           (c) Phakwaq

(4) Mukh Vadyas           (d) Sarod

(e) Shehenai

1     2          3          4 (a) d     e           a           b (b) b     c           e           d (c) d     c           a           e (d) b     a           c           b
90.    This dance  is the only dance  drama tradition of North India, it can be both duet or group dance, Brij Maharaj is a famous patron of this tradition…
(a) Manipuri      (b) Kathak

(c) Kathakali     (d) Odishi

91.    Consider the following statements:

A.   Architecture      during      Akbars period  is  influenced  by  Persian
history.

B. Jahangir    and    Shahjahan's architecture was influenced by Rajputana and central India.
C. Akbar used marble in his architecture  while Jahangir used Red sand stone.
(a) A, B are true    (b) B, C are true

(c) All are false      (d) All are true

92.    Under which of the following systems

pattas are not given to ryots? (a) Mahalwari system
(b) Ryotwari system

(c) Permanent settlement

(d) All of the above

93.    Which among the following is wrongly matched?
(a) Vishnu Shastri Pandit- Vidhwah

Vivah Utejaka Mandal.

(b) M.G.Ranadae - Paramahamsa

Sabha

(c) Lokhithawadi- Shatapatren

(d) Ram Mohan Roy - Indian

Association for Cultivation Science

94.    Which   among   the   following   is/are objectives of Aligarh movement?
A.   Forming   a  separate   nation  for

Muslims

B.   Modernization of Indian Muslims

C.   Popularisation of education

D.   Rationalisation of religious texts

(a) All are true

(b) A, C, D are true (c) B, C, D are true (d) All are false
95. Which among the following are components of satyagraha?
A.   Truth

B.   Non-Violence

C.   Self Suffering

D.   Show of strength

(a) All are true

(b) A, C, D are true (c) B, C, D are true (d) A, B, C are true
96.  The meeting of Indian and British political leaders during 1930-32 in London has often been referred to as the First, Second and Third Round Table  Conferences.  It  would  be incorrect to refer to them as such because:
(a) The Indian National Congress (INC)

did not take part in two of them.

(b) India  parties  other  than  the  INC participating in the conference represented sectional interest and not the whole of India.
(c) The   British   Labour   Party   had withdrawn from the conference thereby making the proceedings of the conference partisan
(d) It was an instance of a conference held in three session and not that of three separate conferences.
97.  Which of the following true about Hindustan Socialist Republican Association (HSRA) :
I.    One of the founding members was

Jawahar Lal Nehru.

II.   Objective was to demonstrate the need and desirability of Direct Action and Revolution in order to achieve complete independence.
III. Ideologically   inspired   by   the Russian Revolution and the Socialist thought, the association hoped to substitute British Imperialism  in  India  by  a federated Republic.
IV.  Kakori    Conspiracy     associated with those organizations.
(a) I, II, III         (b) II, III, IV (c) I, II, IV          (d) I, III, IV
98.    Consider   the   following   statements about Sikh Gurus:
1.   Banda Bahadur was appointed as the military leader of the Sikhs by Guru Tegh Bahadur.
2.   Guru Arjun Dev became the Sikh

Guru after Guru Ram Das.
3.   Guru Ajun Dev gave to Sikh their own script-Guru mukhi.
Which of the statements  given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 only (b) 2 and 3 (c) 1 and 3 (d) 1 and 2
99.    Identify the wrongly matched pairs: (a) Surat split       -  1909
(b) East India        -   Dadabhai Naoraj

Association

(c) Lokhit wadi      -   Gopal Hari

Desmukh

(d) None

100. "English education would make the Indian people gladly accept the British Rule?" these lines were said by
(a) Alexander        (b) Macaulay

(c) Elphinstone     (d) Sir Ashutosh