

1.       Ans: D

Exp:  All are correct. List-1 is city in Indus civilization & List-2 is province.
2.       Ans: A

3.       Ans: B

Exp:   Financial  strain  created  by Aurangazebs Deccan Campain, Mansabdari Jagirdari crisis, Revolt by governors  of Hyderabad, Awadh,   Bengal,   Carnatic   are   few   of reasons.
4.       Ans: A

Exp: Second  Anglo  Mysore  war  ended indecisively with Mysore, Nizam and Maratha  fighting  in alliance  against British.   After   the   war   Tipu   became assertive and more powerful. He had support of French, this led to Nizam and Marathas abandoning him.
5.       Ans: D

Exp:   Treaty of Bassein provided for a subsidiary army is Peshwa territories, while Treaty of Manglore was with Tipu Sultan.
6.       Ans: A

Exp: Sikh    Panth    started    establishing simultaneously during Babar era establishing Mughal rule, Explicit conflict between Mughals and Sikh was during Aurangazeb   period,  Ranjith  Singh  took sikh politics to zenith.
7.       Ans: C

Exp:   Black   hole   tragedy   occurred   in   Fort

William not in Fort George.

8.       Ans: A

9.       Ans: D

Exp:   Indian  economy  in  pre-colonial  era  was trade surplus and agrarian but jute, textile and handicraft industries were present.
10.     Ans: D

Exp:   First phase extended from 1757 till 1813 here establishing trade monopoly was the core, from 1813 till 1857, India is source of  raw  materials   while   the  remaining period saw financial imperialism.
11.     Ans: D

Exp:   Nalanda's  datable  history  begins  under the Gupta Empire and a seal identifies  a monarch named Shakraditya (Śakrāditya) as   its   founder.   Both Xuanzang and   a Korean pilgrim named Prajnyavarman (Prajñāvarman)  too attribute  the foundation  of  a sangharama  (monastery) at the site to him. Shakraditya is identified with     the     5th-century     CE     Gupta emperor, Kumaragupta            I (r. c. 415 –
 c. 455 CE),     whose     coin    has     been discovered at Nalanda.
12.     Ans: D

Exp: MRE VII - tolerance among all sects

MRE IX - avoiding expensive and meaningless ceremonies and rituals.
MRE XI - charity, kinship, dhamma

MRE XIII - change of heart after Kalinga war. berighos (sound of war drums) by dhammagosha (sound of peace).
13.     Ans: C

Exp:  The Pandyan country was wealthy and prosperous  as  they  profited  from  trade with Roman Empire and sent embassies.
14.     Ans: D

15.     Ans: B

16.     Ans: B

Exp:   The  village  headmen  were  known  as grama bhojaka. Most of the time the position  was  held  by the same  family. Grama bhojaka carried out multifarious functions in the village. He was responsible for maintaining the law and order  and  settling  the  disputes  among the people.
17.     Ans: C

18.     Ans: C

19.     Ans : C

20.     Ans: C

21.     Ans: A

22.     Ans: D

Exp: Decentralisation  and  emergence  of Zamindari influence were the major factors.  In  general  the  Mughal  rulers were non-communal and there is no evidence of communal clashes
23.     Ans: D

Exp:   Saltpetre   also   known   as   Potassium Nitrate  is  a  key  ingredient  in  making gun powder was exported to Britain.
24.     Ans: D

25.     Ans: D

26.     Ans: C

27.     Ans: A

Exp: It is a land  revenue  commission established by the government of Bengal in  1938  to  look  into  the  problems  of land revenue administration.
28.     Ans: C

Exp:   The Pagal    Panthi    was    a    religious movement that emerged in the northern province  of  Bengal.  In  contrast  to  the rest of Bengal, the region was inhabited mainly  by  tribal  peoples  such  as  the Hajangs,        Dalus,        Hudis        and Rajvangshies,      who      were      mainly adherents of Animism and tribal faiths)
29.     Ans: A

30.     Ans: D

31.     Ans: A

Exp:   Ain-i-Akbari  by Abul  Fazal  is the main source for today's historians to know about the structure of agrarian relations from the time of Akbar onwards
32.     Ans: D

Exp: Santhal, khond, munda, koya, rampa chenchu, are non frontal tribal movements i.e. movements  in mainland  India,  while khasi, singhpos, Rani Gaidinilus naga movement  are  frontier  tribe  movements, i.e. occuring in North east India.
33.     Ans: A

Exp:   Khond  uprising   is  against   government attempt to suppress human sacrifice.
34.     Ans: A

Exp:   Read about political,  economic,  religious, military causes of revolt of 1857.
35.     Ans: C

Exp:   Board of Control  and Board of Directors were abolished.
36.     Ans: C

Exp: Curzons  period is between  1899 to 1905, Congress was formed in 1885. Lyttons policies and Illbert bill controversy  led to formation of INC
37.     Ans: D
Exp:   The aim of British India Association is to protect landed interests.

38.     Ans: A

39.     Ans: D

Exp:   Young Bengal  movement  was started  by

Henry Vivian Derozio.

40.     Ans: D

Exp:   Saligram idol case was about inheritance of an idol, Banerjee questioned the right of European judge to interfere in a traditional issue.
41.     Ans: A

Exp: Moderates  believed  in petition  and prayer approach,  they petitioned  with humbleness and prayed for good will.
42.     Ans: C

Exp:   Direct elections  were introduced  in 1919 till  then   both   1892,   1909   acts   have provision of indirect elections.
43.     Ans: D

Exp:  Failure of moderate methods, apathy of British towards moderate voices, pride in Indian way of life, Revolutionaries who led German and Italian unification, raise of Japan, defeat of Italy in hands of Ethiopia are  reasons   which   gave  raise  to  and inspired extremist movement in India.
44.     Ans: B

45.     Ans: D

Exp: He passed Universities Bill by which university education was brought under official control in the disguise of reforms in education, vernacular and Dramatic performances acts were passed by Lytton.
46.     Ans: B

Exp:   Assam was not a part of Bengal province it was under chief commissioner,  separated from Bengal in 1874, In this scheme Muslims were in slight majority in east Bengal while Hindus in west even in west Hindi and Oriya people were in majority
than Bengali Hindus. Majority of Muslims
were in favour of partition because many Muslims were labourers under Hindu land lords and Nawab Salimullah of Dhaka coming under British Influence supported partition.
47.     Ans: C

Exp:   First phase of Swadeshi was dominated by moderates which included speeches, signature  campaigns  while second phase had constructive Swadeshi included national  education,  cottage and Indigenous industries, while third phase include systemic boycott of British goods and institutions.
48.     Ans: A

49.     Ans: B

Exp:   Namdharis are also called kookas because they raised voice against British and under Guru Ramsingh they refused to serve British cause and boycotted English methods.
50.     Ans: D

51.     Ans: C

52.     Ans: B

53.     Ans: A

54.     Ans: C

55.     Ans: C

56.     Ans: C

57.     Ans: C

58.     Ans: A

59.     Ans: C

60.     Ans: A

Exp:   All are part of Cornwallis Code

61.     Ans: C

Exp:   Macaulay  knew  that  it  is  impossible  to teach the English language to the masses. However  his  purpose  was  to  serve  the needs of imperial administration  through English educated workers. Macaulay thus
suggested making English as the language

of higher education in India and Bentinck accepted his suggestion.
62.     Ans: D

Exp:   Annexation  of  Sindh  1843  during  Lord Ellen  borough  abolition  of female infanticide  and  human  sacrifice  during Lord Hardinge (1844-48).
63.     Ans: A

Exp:   Along with above:

Universities  on the model of the London University  to be established  in big cities such as Bombay, Calcutta and Madras Provisions  were  made  for  a  systematic method of education from primary level to the university level.
64.     Ans: B

Exp:  (i) Formation of Swarajist party-1924 (ii) Montagu-Chelmsford reforms-1919 (iii) All-India Forward Bloc -1939
(iv) Government of India act-1935

65.     Ans: B

Exp:   Introduction  of  separate  electorate  seats for  Muslims  was  introduced   in Government of India act -1909.
66.     Ans: A

Exp:   (i)    Kheda satyagraha: 1918

(ii)   Champaran movement:1916

(iii)  Non-Cooperation Movement: 1919-22

(iv)  Satyagraha against Rowlett act: 1919

67.     Ans: C

Exp:   The Vernacular Press act, 1878:

District Magistrate with the previous permission  of  Local  Government  to  call upon the printer and publisher of any vernacular newspaper to enter into a bond undertaking not to publish anything likely to excite feeling of dissatisfaction  against the government or antipathy between persons  of  different  races,  castes,  and
religions among Her Majesty's subjects.
The  Magistrate's   action   was  final.   No appeal could be made to a Court of law. A Vernacular  newspaper  could get exemptions  from the operation of the act by submitting proofs of the paper to a government censor.
68.     Ans: B

Exp:   This right was demanded by Jinnah and

Gandhiji refused to accept the demand.

69.     Ans: A

Exp:   (i)   The August Offer-1940

(ii)   Wavell's plan-1945

(iii) Cripp's Mission-1942(March)

(iv)  Quit India

Movement 1942 (august)

70.     Ans: C

Exp:   The Simon commission was carrying on its work without  public opinion,  the leading Indian political parties were trying to forge a common political programme. An all- parties conference appointed a committee under Moti Lal Nehru's  chairmanship  to consider and determine the principles of a Constitution of India.
71.     Ans: A

72.     Ans: B

Exp:   In 1892 Arya  Samaj was  split  into  two factions after a controversy over whether to     make Vedic education     the     core curriculum at the DAV College Lahore.
73.     Ans: C

74.     Ans: B

75.     Ans: C

Exp:   Quaid-e-Azam means "the biggest leader of all". Mohammad Ali Jinnah was awarded  this  title  because  of  the  fact that he created a separate, independent state  for all Indian  Muslims.  His fame grew after the Lucknow pact).

76.     Ans: C

Exp:   In   1917   the   government    appointed the Sadler  Commission to  inquire  into the "conditions and prospects of the University  of Calcutta,"  an inquiry that was in reality nationwide in scope. Covering a wide field, the commission recommended  the formation  of a board with  full  powers  to  control  secondary and intermediate education)
77.     Ans: D

78.     Ans: D

Exp:   The Nehru Report in August 1928 was a memorandum    outlining    a   proposed new dominion   status   constitution   for India. It was prepared by a committee of the   All   Parties    Conference    chaired by Motilal       Nehru with       his       son Jawaharlal acting as secretary
79.     Ans: C

Exp:   In the Central Legislature 18 per cent of the  seats  allotted  to  the  general electorate  for  British  India  in the  said legislature shall be reserved for the Depressed Classes as per the pact)
80.     Ans: D

81.     Ans: C

Exp: The Textile Enquiry Committee was constituted in November 1952 with Shri Nityananda as Chairman to make a comprehensive  enquiry into the various sectors of the cotton textile industry, viz, the mills,  powerlooms  and  handlooms, with a view to determining  the place of each in the national economy and their inter-relationship. Prior to the appointment of the Committee, the handloom  sector  of  the  industry  had
gone through a difficult time and there
was serious unemployment among handloom weavers. Hence the enquiry).
82.     Ans: C

Exp: When the Congress ministries in the Provinces  resigned,  the  British  wanted to get support of the Congress for war. This was responded  by Lord Linlithgow in the sort of a proposal which is called August Offer. The Congress did not approve  the August  Offer. Jawahar  Lal Nehru  said  that  the  whole  idea  was "dead and doornail".)
83.     Ans: D

84.     Ans: B

Exp: In July 1942, the Congress Working Committee met at Wardha. Here a long resolution  was  passed  that  demanded that the "British Rule in India must end immediately"  which is popularly known as Quit India movement.)
85.     Ans: D

Exp:   All India Kisan Sabha is the peasant or farmers' wing of the Communist Party of India.   The   Kisan   Sabha   movement started in Bihar under the leadership of Swami Sahajanand,  who had formed in
1929 the Bihar Provincial  Kisan Sabha (BPKS) to mobilise peasant grievances against  the Zamindari  attacks  on their occupancy rights)
86.     Ans: C

87.     Ans : C

88.     Ans: D

Exp:   As  wearing  a vile  is  practiced  in  Islam, most of faces of women are painted using imagination.  Mughals used miniatures in books while portraits depicting aristocratic life   was   painted   on   walls   for   royal
patronage.

89.     Ans: C

90.     Ans: B

Exp:   Kathak was given life by Brij Maharaj.

91.     C

Exp:   Akbars  architecture  had been influenced by central India and Rajputana while Jahangir and Shahjahan had Persian predominance.   Akbar   used   Red   sand stone while Shahjahan used marble.
92.     Ans: C

Exp:   Under    permanent    settlement    system pattas were with zamindars, while in other two systems ryots were recognized as land owners.
93.     Ans: D

94.     Ans: C

95.     Ans: D

96.     Ans: D

Exp: RTC  was  held  to  discuss  Simon Commission's  report between Indian and British political leaders during 1930-32 in London.      It   was   an   instance   of   a conference held in three session and not that of three separate conferences.
97.     Ans: B

Exp: The Kanpur meeting attended by Sachindranath Sanyal, Jogesh Chandra Chaterjee,   Ramprasad   Bismil,   Bhagath
Singh, Shiv Verma,, Sukhdev, Bhagawati Charan  Vohra  and Chandrashekar Azad.the delibration resulted in the setting up  of  Hindustan   Republic   Association (HRA) subsequently (September 1928) reorganized  as the HSRA, with provincial units  in  Bengal,  the  U.P,  Delhi,  Punjab and even Madras.
98.     Ans: D

Exp:   Banda  Bahadur  was  appointed  as  the military leader of the Sikhs by Guru Tegh Bahadur(9th  Guru).
Guru Angad (2nd Guru) gave to Sikhs Guru

Mukhi script.

Guru Ram Das (4th Guru), Guru Arjun Dev

(5th Guru).

99.     Ans: A

Exp: Surat  Split  is  mainly  known  for separation  of Congress  party  men  into moderates  and extremists  at the Surat session  of Congress  on 26th December
1907)

100.   Ans: C

Exp:   He  became  the Governor  of  Bombay in

1819 where he is credited with the opening  of several  educational institutions accessible to the Indian population)

