

1.      Who  among  the  following  is  not  a member of first cabinet of free India? (a) Shyam Prasad Mukherjee
(b) Rafi Ahmed Kidwai

(c) Aruna Asaf Ali

(d) John Mathai

2.      Which of the following is not a feature of Government of India Act 1935?
1.   Abolished Council of India

2.   Established       Federal       Public

Service Commission

3.   Establishment of Federal Court

(a) All are true

(b) 1 and 2 are false

(c) 3 is false

(d) All are false

3.      Under which Government of India Act for the first time, direct elections happened in India?
(a) 1892                (b) 1919 (c) 1909                (d) 1935
4.      Which   among   the   following   is   a

Constitutional body?

A.     Finance Commission

B.     Election Commission

C.     Central Vigilance Commission.

D.     Advocate General of State. (a) A, C, D are true.
(b) A, B are true.
(c) A, B, C are true. (d) B, C are true.
5.      The 1784 Act is called Pitt's India Act, who is Pitts?
(a) Member of British parliament who formulated this act
(b) Prime minister of United Kingdom

(c) Governor General of India

(d) Secretary of state of India

6.      Which   of   the   following   statements is/are true?
1.   The   members   for   Constituent

Assembly are indirectly elected.

2.   All  the  members  of  Constituent

Assembly are elected.

3. Communal representation was absent in choosing members of Constituent Assembly.
4.  Constituent Assembly is formed under the scheme formulated  by Cripps Mission, 1942.
(a) Only 3 and 4 are true

(b) 1, 3, 4 are false

(c) 2, 3 are true

(d) 2, 3, 4 are false

7.      Which  of  the  following  became  the basis for Preamble in Indian Constitution?
(a) Lahore declaration

(b) Objectives resolution

(c) INC Charter

(d) None of the above

8.      Consider    following    statements    on

Constituent Assembly:

1.   The only function it performed is making Constitution.
2. Legislative      functions      are performed by executive.
3.  Rajendra Prasad presided when legislative  functions  are performed.
4. G.V.Mavlankar presided when constituent  functions  are performed
(a) All are true

(b) Only 1 is true (c) 3, 4 are true (d) All are false
9.      In which of the following cases Rajya Sabha is more powerful than Lok Sabha.
(a) Removal of Vice President.

(b) To initiate a new All India Services. (c) Both (a) and (b)
(d) Financial Bill.

10.    Which among the following is not an original provision of Indian Constitution?
1.      Independent bodies

2.      Collegium system

3.      Federal system

4.      Three tier government

(a) Only 3 is true

(b) Only 2 is true
(c) Only 2 and 4 are true

(d) 1, 2, 4 are true.

11.    Match the following

1. Single citizenship  A. Irish

Constitution

2. Nomination of        B. Australian members to RS          Constitution
3. Federation with      C. USSR

strong centre

4. Concurrent list       D. British

Constitution

5. Ideal of justice        E. Canadian

Constitution (a) 1 - D   2 - A   3 - E   4 - B   5 - C (b) 1 - D   2 - A   3 - B   4 - E   5 - C (c) 1 - D   2 - E   3 - C   4 - B   5 - A (d) 1 – B   2 - C   3 - E   4 - A   5 - D
12.    Which  of the following  is true about

Indian Constitution?

A.   It    is    the    lengthiest    written constitution.
B.   About 250 provisions of 1935 act have been included.
C.   Original constitution provided for only 5 fundamental rights.
D.   Advisory   jurisdiction   of   SC   is copied from French Constitution
(a) Only D is correct (b) A and B is correct (c) C and D are correct (d) All are false
13.    Telangana state and Maharastra have differences over which of the following irrigation projects?
(a) Pranahitha chevella

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
(b) Inchampally

(c) Lower penganga

(d) All of the above

14.    Consider the following statements

1.   India adopted indirect democracy.

2.   India is republic while Britain is not.
3.   Indian     socialism     is    Marxist socialism
4.   Plebiscite  is part  of Indian  legal system
(a) 1, 3, 4 are correct (b) 2, 3, 4 are correct (c) 1, 2 are correct
(d) All are false.

15.    Which of the following statements are true?
1.   Preamble is not an integral part of

Constitution.

2.   Preamble       is      enacted       by

Constituent Assembly.

3.   Preamble  is  the  last  part  to  be enacted by Constituent Assembly.
4.   Preamble is justiciable. (a) 1, 2, 3 are correct
(b) 2, 3 are correct. (c) 1, 4 are correct. (d) 3, 4 are correct.

16. Which among the following are grounds of restriction for Fundamental Rights?
1.   Maintenance  of friendly relations with neighboring states.
2.   In the interest of general public.

3.   Promotion of welfare of backward
classes.

4.   Contempt of court. (a) 1, 2 are true
(b) 1, 2, 3 are true

(c) 2, 4 are true

(d) All are true

17.    Which  among  the  following  is not a

Fundamental Duty?

(a) Safeguarding Public property

(b) Renouncing Practices derogatory to the dignity of women
(c) Abjuring violence

(d) Rendering      Voluntary      National

Service

18.  On which of the following Indian Constitution is silent or developed conventions?
(i)   A  member  can  be  appointed  as Prime Minister without being member of either house.
(ii)  President  of India  always  bound by decisions of cabinet.
(a) (i)                     (b) (ii)
(c) (i) & (ii)             (d) Neither

19.    Which   of   the   following   are   true regarding Union Territories?
(i)   Parliament can make laws on any subject of 3 lists for Union Territories, even though they have local legislature.
(ii) An administrator appointed by President is the head of the state like Governor.
(a) (i)                     (b) (ii)

(c) (i) & (ii)             (d) None

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
20.    Math the following:

(a) Commutation  (1) Awarding lesser punishment     in
place of originally awarded.

(b) Remission        (2) Awarding Rigorous imprisonment in place of simple

(c) Respite            (3) Stay on execution for temporary period.

(d) Reprieve          (4)Reducing amount of punishment without changing
its character

(a) a-2, b-4, c-4, d-1 (b) a-4, b-2, c-3, d-1 (c) a-4, b-2, c-1, d-3 (d) a-2, b-4, c-1, d-3
21.    Consider the following statements:

A.   To establish a Legislative Council State Assembly has to pass a bill to  that  effect  with  simple majority.
B.   Parliament has no role to play in establishing a State Legislative Council.
C. The  maximum  strength  of Legislative Council is 2/3rd of strength of Assembly
(a) All are false

(b) All are true.

(c) Only B is false. (d) Only A is false.
22.  Which among the following is/ are established by an enactment of Parliament?
A. Port trust         B.Township

C. Cantonment    D.Municipality

(a) All are false.

(b) A and C are true. (c) All are true
(d) Only D is true.

23.    The power of judicial review is implied from
(a) Preamble (b) Article 14 (c) Article 13 (d) Article 32
24.    Which  of  the  following  Fundamental

Rights are available to only citizens? (a) 15, 16, 19, 29, 30
(b) 17, 18, 26, 29, 30 (c) 16, 20, 21, 23, 24 (d) 17, 20, 22, 25, 27
25.    Consider the following statements:

A.  Schedule V envisages to protect social customs of tribal areas.
B.   Schedule  VI envisages  to protect economic interests of tribal areas
C.   President is empowered to declare an area as scheduled under Schedule V

(a) All are true.
(b) Only A is false (c) Only B is false. (d) Only C is false.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
26.  The    Fundamental    Duties    are mentioned in
(a) Part IV Article 51

(b) Part IV-A Article 51 A (c) Part IV A  Article 51 (d) Part IV Article 51 A
27. The Constitutional makers for the fulfillment of Directive Principles believed in
(a) Judiciary (b) President (c) Legislature
(d) Bureaucracy

28.   Which among the following give report to the President?
A. UPSC

B. Comptroller and Auditor General

C. Central Vigilance Commission

D. Information Commission

(a) All are true

(b) Only A is false

(c) Only D is false

(d) Only B and C are true.

29.  The  inclusion  of  NOTA  in  the Electronic Voting Machine is in accordance  with liberal interpretation of
(a) Article 14 (b) Article 18 (c) Article 19 (d) Article 21
30.  Which of the following regions are demanding for separate status?
(a) Darjeeling

(b) Vidharbha
(c) Bodoland

(d) All of the above

31.    The Preamble in present form is

(a)   Socialist       sovereign       secular democratic republic
(b)   Sovereign       socialist       secular democratic republic
(c)   Sovereign       socialist       secular republic democratic
(d)   Socialist       secular       sovereign democratic republic.
32.    The  Constituent  Assembly  composed on the lines suggested by
(a) 1935 act

(b) Cripps mission (c) Cabinet mission (d) Mountbatten plan
33.    Which of the following provisions have been enacted in accordance with Articles 15,  16, 17?
(1)  Reservation of SC's & ST's in government jobs.
(2)  SC & ST (Prevention of Atrocities) Act 1989.
(3)  Employment of manual Scavengers & construction of dry latrines (Prohibition) Act.

(a) 1 & 2               (b) 2 & 3

(c) 1 & 3               (d) All the above

34.    Which  of the following  writs are  not

issued against private individuals?

1. Habeas corpus 2. Mandamus

3. Prohibition         4. Quo warranto

(a) 1, 2, 3              (b) 2, 3, 4

(c) 1, 2, 4              (d) 1, 2, 3, 4

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
35.    In which of the following the principle of 'locus standi' does not apply?
1. Habeas corpus 2. Mandamus

3. Quo warranto   4. Certiorari (a) 1 & 2 only       (b) 1 & 3 only (c) 2 & 3 only        (d) All
36. According to 25th Constitutional Amendment Act 1971, Article 39 (b) & (c) can take precedence over some Fundamental Rights. Which of the following are they?
1. Article-14         2. Article-19

3. Article-21         4. Article-25 (a) 1 & 2 only       (b) 2 & 3 only (c) 1 & 3 only        (d) 1 & 4 only
37.    Arrange  the  tenure  of the   following Prime  Ministers  of India  in chronological order.
1. V.P. Singh

2. Chandra Shekar

3. Atal Bihari Vajpayee

4. P.V. Narshima Rao

5. H.D. Deve Gowda

6. I.K. Gujral

(a) 1→2→3→4→5→6→3 (b) 2→1→4→3→6→5→3 (c) 1→2→4→3→5→6→3 (d) 2→1→3→4→6→5→3

38. In which among the following, appointment   is   done   by   Governor while removal is by President.
1. State Information Commission

2. State Human Rights Commission

3. Advocate General of State
4. State public service commission

(a) 1, 3 are true  (b) 2, 4 are true

(c) 1, 4 are true  (d) 2, 3 are true

39.    Consider the following statements:

1. Governor can pardon a death sentence if the death sentence is given under a state law.
2. Governor can suspend, remit, commute a death sentence.
(a) Only '1' is true  (b) Only '2' is true

(c) Both are false   (d) Both are true

40.    Which of the following Bills, President can use "absolute veto" power
(a) State bills reserved to President by

Governor

(b) Private members Bills

(c) President   of   India   doesn't   use absolute veto any where
(d) Both (a) and (b) are true

41.    Which of the following is/are true?

A.   Election     Commission      is     a reservoir of power.
B.   Election   Commission    has   the power to derecognise political parties for violation of Model Code of Conduct.
C.   Election  Commission  has  power to recognise political parties.
D. Election  Commission  is  not concerned about Rajya Sabha elections.
(a) All are true

(b) A, C, D are true

(c) A,C are true

(d) All are false

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
42.    Consider the following statements:

A.   Rajya Sabha in India is not only second  chamber  but also secondary chamber.
B.   Legislative Councils in states are not  only  second  chambers  but also secondary chambers.
C.   Legislative  Councils of states are equally   powerful   as   of   Rajya Sabha.
D. All seats in Rajya Sabha and Legislative  Councils  are nominated.
(a) All are true.

(b) Only B is true (c) Only A is true (d) All are false
43.  Who among the following is not a member of National Human Rights Commission?
A.   Chairman   National  Commission of Minorities
B.   Chairman   National  Commission of SCs
C.   Chairman   National  Commission of Women
D.   Chairman   National  Commission of STs
(a) All are true

(b) All are false

(c) Only C is true

(d) B and D are true

44.    Vice-Chairman   of  National  Institute for Transforming India is
(a) Finance Minister.
(b) Aravind Subramanyam. (c) Aravind Panagaria
(d) There is no Vice-Chairman post.

45.    Who among the following has a right to speak and take part in both the houses of Parliament?
A. Cabinet Ministers B. Ministers of State. C. Advocate General D. Solicitor General. (a) All are true.
(b) Only D is false

(c) Only A and B are true. (d) Only A is true.
46. In which of the following state scheduled areas are absent
A. Tamilnadu

B. Kerala

C. Bihar

D. Haryana

(a) All are true

(b) A and B are true

(c) Only B is true

(d) All are false

47.    Consider the following statements:

A:   District  Planning  Committee  has four fifth elected members

B:   Metropolitan Planning Committee has two thirds of elected members.
(a) Only A is true. (b) Only B is true
(c) Both A and B are true

(d) Both A and B are false

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
48.  Which among the following ensures independence  of  Supreme  Court judges?
A.   Ban on practice after retirement.

B. Jurisdiction of SC cannot be curtailed.
C. Having a separate budget for judiciary
D.   Salaries  of  SC  judges  voted  in

Parliament. (a) All are true (b) A, B are true
(c) B, C, D are true

(d) All are false

49.    Consider the following statements:

A. Adjournment motion cannot be moved by Rajya Sabha
B. Council   of   Ministers   are collectively responsible to Parliament
C. Rajya Sabha can vote on the demands for grants.
(a) All are false

(b) Only A is true (c) Only B is true (d) Only C is true
50.    A: Joint  session  is run  according  to rules of Lok Sabha
B: A Joint session  cannot  be held if Lok Sabha is dissolved after President announcing joint session.
(a) Both are true (b) Both are false (c) A is true
(d) B is true
51.    Which  of  following  is  true  regarding

Money Bill?

A.   It can only be introduced in Lok

Sabha

B. President's prior permission is required  to  introduce  a  Money Bill.
C.   Speaker is the authority to decide whether  a  bill  is  Money  Bill  or not.
D.   Its defeat in Lok Sabha leads to resignation of the government.
(a) All are false

(b) A, B, C are true (c) A, C, D are true (d) All are true
52.    The   Deputy   Chairman   of   Council vacates his office in the following case (a) If  he  resigns  by  writing  to  the
President

(b) If  he  is  removed  by  a  resolution after giving 7 day advance notice
(c) If the chairman asks him to do so

(d) If  he  ceases  to  be  a  member  of

Council

53.    Consider   the   following   statements with respect to J & K:
1.   The  parliament  can  make  laws with respect to all the subjects in Concurrent List.
2.   High court of J & K can issue all types of writs.
3. Fundamental Duties are not applicable to the state.
4.   Part VI of Indian Constitution  is

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
not applicable to J & K. Identify the correct statements? (a) 1, 3               (b) 1, 2, 3
(c) 3, 4               (d) 2, 3, 4

54.    Which of the following expenditures are charged on the Consolidated Fund of India?
(a) Pensions of UPSC Chairman

(b) Debt charges

(c) Salaries of SC judges

(d) Allowance of PM

55.   Which   of   the   following   is   not   a function of UPSC?
(a) All disciplinary actions affecting All

India Services like censure etc.

(b) Claim for award of compensation in respect of injury during service
(c) Temporary appointments less than

1 year

(d) Claim  for  reimbursement  of  legal expenses  incurred by civil servant in defending legal proceedings
56.    The functions of Estimates Committee includes
(1)  To suggest the form in which estimates shall be presented to the Parliament.
(2)  To suggest alternate polices to bring out efficiency
(3)  To estimate the expenditure of

Parliament

(4)  To see that the expenditure conforms to the authority which governs it.
(a) 1, 2                  (b) 1, 2, 3
(c) 3, 4                  (d) All

57.    Identify the correct statement:

(a) Only a member of Rajya Sabha can contest the office of the Vice President.
(b) All the members of RS are elected by State Legislative Assemblies
(c) A candidate to the RS may not be ordinarily  a  resident  of  the  state from where he is contesting.
(d) The        Constitution        explicitly prohibits the appointment of nominated  members  of RS  to  the post of minister.
58.    Identify the incorrect statement:

(a) The   Appropriation   Bill   must   be passed by both the houses of Parliament before it can be enacted as a law.
(b) No money shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of India except   under   the   Appropriation Act.
(c) No Money Bill can be introduced without president's recommendation.
(d) None of the above

59.    Match the following:

Oath

(a) President       (1) Secrecy of

Information

(b) SC judges     (2) Faithful discharge of duties
(c) MP's              (3) Faith &

allegiance to the

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
Constitution of

India

(d) Union            (4) Upholding the

Minister        Constitution & the law
(a) 3, 4, 1, 2       (b) 4, 1, 2, 3 (c) 3, 4, 2, 1       (d) 4, 3, 1, 2
60.    Arrange  the  following  states  in  the year of creation:
(1) Sikkim            (2) Meghalaya (3) Nagaland         (4) Mizoram (a) 1-2-3-4            (b) 3-2-1-4
(c) 3-1-2-4            (d) 3-4-2-1

61.    Consider   the   following   statements about  rural  administration  and identify the correct statements:
1.   Each state has its own set of laws regarding Panchayats
2.   The Zila Panchayat plays a role in the sanctioning of money to Gram Panchayat.
3.   Panchayat Secretary, who assists the Panchayat,  is chosen by the Sarpanch.
(a) 1 & 2             (b) 1 & 3 (c) 2 & 3             (d) 1, 2, 3

62.    Identify the correct statements  about the role of police in criminal justice system:
1.   It  investigates  complaints  about the  commission  of  a  crime  with the statements of witness & evidences
2.   It files a charge sheet in the court
3.   It can punish the criminal based on the charges it has framed against him or fees
(a) 1, 2               (b) 1, 3 (c) 1, 2, 3           (d) None
63.    Consider the following about PILs:

1.   Only the affected can file a PIL

2.   PIL's are mentioned in Article 144 of Constitute
3.   Appellate Jurisdiction is extension of PIL
(a) 1, 2               (b) 1, 3

(c) 2, 3               (d) 3 only

64.    Which among the following is not an objective of PESA 1996?
(a) To  have  village  governance   with participating democracy
(b) To    safeguard    &    preserve    the traditions & customs of tribal community
(c) To review the financial position of panchayats
(d) To  protect  scheduled  areas  from higher level panchayats
65.    Consider the following statements:

1.   Deputy speaker and speaker may resign by writing to each other
2. Attorney General and Solicitor General   May  resign   writing   to each other
Identify the correct statements

(a) Only 1 (b) Only 2
(c) Both 1 & 2

(d) None

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
66.    What do you mean by a speaker Pro- tem?
(a) An additional speaker appointed in case of absence of the speaker.
(b) A senior member who presides over the election of a new speaker
(c) Speaker    appointed    in    case    a vacancy  arises  before  the completion of the term of the actual speaker
(d) None

67.    Which   of   the   following   is   not   a function of the language commission? (a) Promoting   the  use  of  Hindi  for
official purposes.

(b) Restricting  the  use  of  English  for official purposes.
(c) The   language    to   be   used   in

Supreme court and the High courts

(d) None

68.    The importance of 84th   Constitutional

Amendment is

(a) Reservation for BC's in Government

Employment.

(b) Delimitation         of         territorial constituencies.
(c) Addition of 4 new languages to the

8th Schedule.

(d) Right      to     Universal      Primary

Education.
an ordinance.

C.   The   Chief   Minister   of   UT   is appointed by Lt. Governor.
(a) All are true

(b) Only A is false

(c) All are false

(d) Only C is false.

70.    Which of the following support Federal features of Indian Constitution
(i)   Written Constitution.

(ii)  Rigid Constitution.

(iii) Flexibility of the Constitution.

(iv)  Independent judiciary. (a) i, ii, iii           (b) ii, iii, iv (c) i, ii, iv            (d) i, iii, iv
71.    Article-262     of     the     Constitution provides for the adjudication of Inter- state water disputes. Which of the following provisions in it are true?

(i)   Parliament may by law provide for the adjudication of any dispute or complaint.
(ii)  Parliament can't restrict Supreme Court   or   any   other   court   to exercise jurisdiction in respect of such dispute.
(a) i only             (b) ii only

(c) i & ii              (d) Neither  of them

69.    Consider the following statements:

A.   Governor     cannot     enact     an

72.    Zonal   councils   are           

headed by           

bodies  &

ordinance         without         prior permission of President.
B.   In UT Lt. Governor cannot issue

(a) Constitutional & Prime Minister. (b) Statutory & Prime Minister.
(c) Constitutional & Home Minister.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
(d) Statutory & Home Minister.

73.    Which of the following are true?

(i)   Constitution      provides      Rajya

Sabha a fixed tenure of 6 years

(ii)  Constitution  provides  Lok Sabha a fixed tenure of 5 years
(a) i                    (b) ii

(c) i & ii              (d) None

74.    Which   of   the   following   are   true regarding Attorney General?
(i)   He can speak and take part in the proceedings of either house.
(ii)  He    can    become    member    of

Parliamentary Committee.

(iii) He  is  also  entitled  to  vote  in

Parliament & committees. (a) i only             (b) ii only
(c) i & iii             (d) i & ii

75.    Match the following

(a) Supplementary  (i) granted for grant                  special purpose
and forms no service during
a financial year in excess of the amount granted in that year
(b) Additional         (ii) Funds grant                 appropriated
found to be insufficient for that year
(c) Excess grant    (iii) funds to some
new service not contemplated in the budget for that year.
(d) Exceptional    (iv) Granted money grant               has been spent on
any part of the current service of any financial year.
(a) a -2, b -3, c -4, d -1 (b) a -3, b -2, c -4, d -1 (c) a -2, b -3, c -1, d -4 (d) a -3, b - 2,c -1, d -4
76.    Which   of   the   following   are   true regarding Public Accounts Committee (PAC)?
(i)   It  consists  of  22  members  (15 from Lok Sabha & 7 from Rajya Sabha).
(ii)  The tenure of its members is one year.
(iii) The chairman of the committee is appointed from amongst its members by the Speaker.
(iv)  CAG   acts   as  guide,   friend   &

philosopher to the PAC. (a) i, ii, iii           (b) i, iii, iv
(c) i, ii, iv            (d) i, ii, iii, iv

77.    Which of the following are not correct regarding Governor?
(a) He should not hold any other office of profit.
(b) He is entitled to such emoluments, allowance and privileges as may be
determined by State Legislature.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
(c) Same   person   is   appointed    as Governor of two or more states, the emoluments    and   allowance payable  to him are shared by the states in such proportion as determined by President of India.
(d) His  emoluments   and  allowances cannot be diminished during his term of office.
78.    Which of the following is not correctly matched special provision for states:
(a) 371 A            (i) Nagaland (b) 371 C            (ii) Manipur (c) 371 G            (iii) Sikkim
(d) 371 H            (iv) Arunachal

Pradesh

79.   Which   of   the   following   is   not   a compulsory provision in the 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act?
(a) Granting  powers  and  authority  to Panchayats to enable them to function as institutions of self- government (i.e., making them autonomous).
(b) 21  years  to  be  minimum  age  for contesting elections to Panchayats
(c) Reservation   of   1/3rd         seats   to women in panchayat at all 3 levels
(d) Constitution    of    State    Finance Commission after every 5 years to review financial position of Panchayats.
80.  Which of the following is/are true regarding Finance Commission?
(i)   Finance Commission is a quasi –
judicial body.

(ii)  The recommendations  of Finance Commission are binding on Government.
(iii) The    Commission    submits    its report to Parliament.
(iv) Constitution                authorizes Parliament to determine the qualification of members of the commission and the manner in which they should be selected.
(a) i                    (b) i & iv

(c) i, iii, iv           (d) i, ii, iv

81.    The power of Supreme Court to decide disputes between Centre and States falls under its
(a) Advisory jurisdiction (b) Original jurisdiction (c) Appellate jurisdiction
(d) Constitutional jurisdiction

82.    Which   of   the   following   are   true regarding Amendment of Constitution (i.e., Article 368)?
(i)   A     private     member     cannot introduce a bill because Constitutional Amendment requires prior permission of President.
(ii) If a house disagrees on any provisions,  it  may  be  called  for joint sitting.
(iii) President may send the bill for reconsideration once.
(a) i                    (b) i & ii

(c) i & iii             (d) None

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
83.    In    what    way    Indian    Parliament exercise control over administration? (a) Parliamentary committees.
(b) Though     Group     of     Ministers

/Empowered GOMs.

(c) By   compelling   the   executive   to issue writs.
(d) By   making   administration   send periodic reports.
84.    With reference to Seventh Schedule of Constitution  which  of  the  following pairs is not correctly matched?
(a) Electricity        (i) Concurrent list

(b) Drugs &          (ii) Concurrent list poisons
(c) Social security (iii) Concurrent

& social                 list insurance
(d) Agriculture      (iv) Concurrent list including
Agriculture education & research
85.    Which of the following are true?

(i) Vice President electoral college consist of both elected and nominated  members  of Parliament.
(ii)  He draws his regular salary in his capacity as ex-officio chairman of Rajya  Sabha,  not  as  Vice President.
(a) Only i       (b) Only ii

(c) i & ii            (d) neither i nor ii

86.    Which of the following are not correct
about CAG?

(i)   He is appointed by President for a period of 5 years
(ii)  His salary and conditions of service are determined by President.
(iii) He shall vacate the office on attaining the age of 60 years.
(iv)  He can be removed by President.

He stays in office until the

'pleasure of President' is retained (v)   He is responsible for maintaining the accounts of Central and State
governments.

(a) 1, 4, 5           (b) 2, 3, 4 (c) 1, 2, 3, 4, 5   (d) 3, 4 & 5
87.    A new All India Service can be created by
(a) A resolution of Rajya Sabha. (b) An act of Parliament.
(c) An order of President. (d) A resolution of UPSC.
88.  The  correct  statement  regarding ordinance  making power of Governor are
(i)   It can be issued by him after the advice of POI or COM.
(ii)  It is co-extensive  with legislative powers of state legislature.
(iii) It can be issued only during the recess  of  state  legislative assembly and not legislative council.
(iv)  It cannot be withdrawn by him at

anytime.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
(a) i & ii              (b) i, ii, iii

(c) ii, iii, iv          (d) i, ii, iii, iv

89.    Which  of  the  following  are  true  of Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT): (i)   It   was   established   under   the provision   of   Article   323-A   of
Constitution.

(ii)  CAT exercises original jurisdiction in relation to Promotion and all service matters of public servants covered by it.

(iii) The  members   are  drawn   from both administrative and judicial streams and are appointed by President.
(a) i                    (b) i & ii

(c) ii & iii            (d) i, ii, iii

90.    With reference to Lok Adalats, which of the following are correct?
(a) Lok Adalat have the jurisdiction to settle the matters at pre-litigative state and not pending before any court.
(b) It  only  deals  with  matters  which are civil and not criminal.
(c) Every Lok Adalat consists of either serving  or  retired  judicial  officer only and not any other person.
(d) None of the above

91.    Which of the following regarding 'Exit poll' is correct?
(a) 'Exit poll' is a term used to denote a  post-election   survey   of  voters
regarding  the  candidate  in  whose
favour   they   had   exercised   their franchise.
(b) 'Exit poll' & 'Opinion poll' are one and the same.
(c) 'Exit poll' is device through which results   of   voting   can   be   most exactly predicted.
(d) 'Exit   poll'   is   an   administrative device  made  by  Election commission of India to prevent impersonation.
92.  Which of the following is not true regarding  Official  language  according to Constitution?
(a) The  choice  of  State  legislature  to adopt any one or more  languages and is not limited to language   in
8th Schedule of Constitution.

(b) The judgments, decrees and orders of High Court must continue to be in English only (until Parliament otherwise provides).
(c) Governor, with consent of President of India, can authorize  the use of Hindi or any other language in proceedings in High Court of state
(d) None of the above

93.  During Presidents Rule (Article-356), which of the following is not true?
(a) President of India can take up the functions of State government.
(b) President    of    India    can    only suspend State legislature but can't dissolve the house.
(c) President  of India can promulgate

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
ordinances  for state, if Parliament is not in session.
(d) President   of  India  can't  assume himself the powers vested in the concerned state High Court.
94.    Who   among   the   following   can   be removed from the office in like manner and on like ground as Supreme Court judge?
(i) Election commission of India. (ii) Comptroller & Audit general. (iii) High Court Judge.
(iv) Attorney General.

(a) i & ii              (b) i, ii, iv

(c) ii, iii               (d) i, ii, iii, iv

95.    Which  of  the  following  civil  services find mention in the Constitution?
(i) IAS.

(ii) IPS.

(iii) Indian Forest Service.

(iv) All-India Judicial service.

(v) Indian Foreign Service. (a) i & ii              (b) i, ii, iii (c) i, ii, v             (d) i, ii, iv
96.    In  the  context  of  budget,  the  term

'Guillotine' is used with reference to: (a) Appropriation bill
(b) Consolidated Fund charges

(c) Voting of demands

(d) Finance Bill

97.    District judges are appointed by
(a) Chief Justice of High Court.

(b) State Public Service Commission. (c) Chief Minister
(d) Governor

98.    Which of the following require Special Majority of Parliament and consent of states?
(1)  Election of President of India and its manner.
(2)  Extent of executive powers of the union and the states.
(3)  Directive Principles of State Policy

(DPSP).

(4)  Powers  of  Parliament  to  amend the Constitution & its procedure.
(a) 1, 2, 3              (b) 2, 3, 4 (c) 1, 3, 4              (d) 1, 2, 4
99.    Delhi legislature is not empowered to make laws on
(a) Police

(b) Public order

(c) Land

(d) All of the above.

100. The  maximum   period  for  which legislative council can delay a bill passed be legislative assembly
(a) One month (b)Four months (c) Three months (d) 14 daysw w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
PLACE FOR ROUGH WORK

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
PLACE FOR ROUGH WORK

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
