

1.      Ans: C

Exp:   Refer to first chapter of Lakshmikanth, in a table he gives the names.
2.      Ans: A

Exp: Refer to page no. 1.8 in lakshmikanth polity

3.      Ans: B

Exp: 1892 introduced election system but it was indirect, 1909 introduced separate electorates  but  with  indirect  elections,
1919  introduced  direct  elections  in  the name of "responsible government in India"
4.      Ans: A

Exp: CVC is not a constitutional body, advocate general of state is a constitutional post.
5.      Ans: B

Exp: 1784 act referred company territories as British possessions in India, and government was given supreme control over company affairs.
6.      Ans: D

Exp: C. A is partially elected and partially nominated, while former is followed in British provinces later in princley states, even the elected members were elected by representatives of  provincial  assemblies, thus making them indirectly elected, communal representation was present in provincial members for Muslims and Sikhs. Cabinet mission envisaged the scheme of C.A not cripps mission.
7.      Ans: B

Exp:   Objectives resolution is moved by Nehru, which talks about FR and philosophy or

constitution,  it  was  later  modified  into preamble.
8.      Ans: D

Exp: CA performed both legislative and constitution making functions, they met on different days for this, Rajendra Prasad presided when they met to perform constitution writing function, mavlankar when they met for legislative functions.
9.      Ans: C

Exp:   According to article 67(b) impeachment of VP will be initiated in RS, according to article 312 to create a new all India services RS has to take the initiative.
10.     Ans: C

Exp:   Three tier governments were envisaged in

73rd and 74th constitutional amendments.

11.     Ans: C

Exp: Refer to chapter salient features of Indian constitution in Lakshmi Kanth.
12.     Ans: B

Exp: Advisory jurisdiction is influenced from Canadian constitution, original Indian constitution had 7 FR, Right to property has  been  removed and  there  are  6  FR right now.
13.     Ans: D

Exp:   The  irrigation  issues  not  only  include above three but also Lendi.
14.     Ans: C

Exp:   Indian socialism is a blend of marxian and gandhian socialism, heavily leaning towards the later, plebiscite is utilized in India to incorporate Sikkim.
15.     Ans: A

Exp:   Though earlier SC opined that preamble is not an integral part later in Kesavananda Bharati and LIC of India case it said preamble is integral part, but preamble is not justiciable and is neither a source of power nor a prohibition on power.
16.     Ans: D

17.     Ans: D

18.     Ans: A

Exp: 1997, supreme court held that a person who is not a member of either house of parliament can be appointed as Prime minister for 6 months within which he should become member of either house.
President of India has some discretionary powers, veto powers, summoning house of govt is not calling if for long
Source: Laxmikant 19.1
19.     Ans: A

Source:  Administrator  is  agent  of  POI  unlike

Governor.

20.     Ans: D

Source: laxmikant 17.13

21.     Ans: A

Exp:   To establish a legislative council assembly has to pass a bill with 2/3 rd of members present and voting, and the same by parliament with simple majority. The maximum strength is 1/3rd of assembly members.
22.     Ans: B

23.     Ans: C

24.     Ans: A

25.     Ans: B
Exp:   Schedule   V   protects   only   economic interests, while schedule VI protects both economic interests and social customs. Under V prez can declare an area scheduled,  under  VI  governor  can organize and reorganize autonomous districts.
26.     Ans: B

27.     Ans: C

28.     Ans: C

Exp: Information Commission and NHRC give its annual report to central government while UPSC, CVC, CAG give their report to president who places it in front of parliament.
29.     Ans: C

30.     Ans: D

31.     Ans: B

32.     Ans: C

33.     Ans: D

34.     Ans: B

35.     Ans: B

36.     Ans: A

37.     Ans: C

38.     Ans: B

39.     Ans: B

40.     Ans: D

41.     Ans: B

Exp: According to SC EC is reservoir of power, which mean in case there is no rule governing  certain  aspect  of  election  EC can make a rule, with deliberation of concerned parties. EC can recognise a party based on seats and vote share but cannot derecognise them on basis of violation of MCC. RS election is responsibility   of   state   chief   electoral officer.
42.     Ans: B

Exp: Rajya sabha is second chamber not secondary but only second chamber because in many cases RS is equally powerful as LS, while the same is not the case with legislative councils.
43.     Ans: B

Exp: NHRC consist of chairman, 4 members and

4 ex officio members belonging to women, minorities, SCs and STs.

44.     Ans: C

45.     Ans: B

Exp: Council  of  ministers  can  take  part  in proceedings of both the houses, advocate general can speak in both houses and in joint session too.
46.     Ans: A

47.     Ans: C

48.     Ans: B

Exp: Salaries of SC judges are charged upon not voted
49.     Ans: B

Exp: Council of ministers are responsible to house of people not house of elders, demands for grants cannot be voted in Rajya Sabha as it belongs to money bill.
50.     A ns: C

Exp: Joint session can be held even after dissolving LS, if it is announced earlier.
51.     Ans: D

52.     Ans: D

53.     Ans: D

54.     Ans: C

55.     Ans: C

56.     Ans: A

57.     Ans: C

58.     Ans: A

59.     Ans: C

60.     Ans: B

61.     Ans: A

62.     Ans: A

63.     Ans: D

64.     Ans: C

65.     Ans: A

66.     Ans: B

67.     Ans: C

68.     Ans: B

69.     Ans: C

Exp: Except   in   UT   governor   can   enact   an ordinance      without      permission      of
president,  lt.   Governor  can   issue  an
ordinance but with permission of president, chief minister of UT is appointed by president not lt. Governor.
70.       Ans: C

Exp: Flexibility i.e easy to amend constitution is not acceptable in federal structure.
71.     Ans: A

Source: laxmikant 15.1

72.     Ans: D

Exp:   Zonal coucils are statutory and headed by

HM.

73.     Ans: D

Exp: Constitution empowers parliament to fix the term of office of members of RS. So statement 1 is wrong. LS do not have fixed tenure.
74.     Ans: D

EXP:He is not entitled to vote but participate in proceedings of houses and parliamentary committees.
75.     Ans: A

Source: Laxmikant 22.25

76.     Ans: D Source: all are true.
77.     Ans: B

Exp: Governor's   emoluments,   allowance   and previleges are determined by parliament.
78.     Ans: C

Exp:   371 G- Mizoram   &  371 F- Sikkim

79.     Ans: A

Exp: Granting    powers     and     authority    to Panchayats is left to States; in turn some states  devolved powers  as  per requirement.
80.     Ans: B

Exp: FC submits report to POI.

The recommendations are only advisory nature and hence, not binding. It is upto government to implement recommendation on granting money to the states.
81.     Ans: B

Exp: Article-131     states     disputes     between different units of federation comes within exclusive jurisdiction of supreme court.
82.     Ans: D

Exp: A bill can be either introduced by minister or private member and does not require prior permission of POI. Each house must pass the bill separately. POI must give assent to the bill. He can neither withhold his assent nor return the bill for reconsideration.
83.     Ans: A

Exp: Parliament  supervises  executive  activities through parliamentary committees like committee on Government Assurance, committee on Sub-ordinate legislation, committee on Petition
84.     Ans: D

Exp: Agriculture and related are in state list.

85.     Ans: C

86.     Ans: C

Exp:   Cag appointed for a period of 6 years. His salary and conditions of service are determined by parliament. He vacate the office on attaining age of 65 years. He is removed in the same manner of supreme court judge. He is not responsible for maintaining records, he audits accounts.
87.     Ans: B

Exp: Laxmikant 45.1

88.     Ans: A

Exp:   Governor can promulgate ordinance when both the houses are not in session or one of the house is not in session (in case of bicameral legislature).
89.     Ans: D

Exp: All are correct

90.     Ans: D

Exp:   Lok-Adalat accepts both pre-litigative and

pending  in  regular  courts  within  their jurisdiction. Such a case may be civil or criminal. Lok Adalat is presided by sitting or retired judicial officer as the chairman, with two other members a lawyer and a social worker. There is no court fee. No appeal lies against the order of lok adalat. Lok  Adalat  basically  accepts  the  cases which could be settled by conciliation and compromise.
91.     Ans: A

92.     Ans: D

Exp:   All the above are true

Source: Laxmikant 58.2

93.     Ans : B

Exp:   President of India can either suspend or dissolve the house
Source: Laxmikant 16.6

94.     Ans: C

95.     Ans: D

96.     Ans: C

Exp: Gullitone  is  passing  all  the  undiscussed bills together as the end of budget session
97.     Ans: D

Exp:   The appointment, posting and promotion of district judges in a state are made by the governor of the state in consultation with High court
98.     Ans: D

99.     Ans: D

Exp:   Delhi being a union territory has a local legislature, but it has limited powers on state list all the above exceptions to state list.
100. Ans: B

Exp: LC can delay a bill for 3 months initially and later for one more months that equals
4 months maximum period. Whereas for money bill it's only 14 days.

