

1.      Which  among  the  following  is  not present in the primary composition of earth?
(a) Methane          (b) Phosphate

(c) Oxygen            (d) Water

2.      The   first   photosynthetic   organisms were
(a) Fungi               (b) Angiosperm

(c) Cyanobacteria  (d) Ferns

3.   Arrange  the  following  in  the chronological  order of their evolution starting from earliest
1. Amphibians.              A. 4, 3, 1, 2

2. Fungi.                        B. 1, 3, 2, 4

3. Birds.                         C. 2, 1, 3, 4

4. Mammals.                  D. 2, 3, 1, 4

4.      The Cambrian period relates to

(a) Evolution of primitive invertebrates

(b) Oldest eukaryotic fossils

(c) Age of tribolites

(d) Both a and b

5.      Analogy indicates

(a) Common   ancestry   but   different function
(b) Different    ancestry    but    similar functions
(c) Common    ancestry    and    similar functions
(d) Common ancestry only
6.      Identify the wrong statement(s):

(a) There is no well defined nucleus in a prokaryotic cell
(b) Cell wall is absent in animal cells

(c) Both a & b

(d) None

7.      Which  of  the  following  is  correctly matched?
(a) Chlorine - butter

(b) Iron -   cheese

(c) Phosphorus - molasses

(d) Starch - almonds

8.      Identify the incorrectly matched pair(s) (a) Vitamin D - tocoferol
(b) Vitamin B4- biotin

(c) Vitamin K - phylliquinone

(d) Vitamin B5 - nicotinamide

9.      Consider the following and identify the correct statement:
(a)  Double   bonded   fatty   acids   are called saturated fatty acids
(b)  Heparin is not an anticoagulant

(c)  Hemicellulose    is   present   as   a reserve food in dates
(d)  Wood contains 70-80 % cellulose

10.    Polyploidy - a phenomenon  of having more than two genomes is induced by (a) Decapitation
(b) Infection

(c) Both                (d) None

11.    Identify the correct statement:

(a) Anaerobic respiration is energically less  efficient  than  aerobic respiration
(b) Respirometer     provides    artificial respiration for asthma patients
(c) Change of colour of plants is due to chloroplasts
(d) All the above

12.    Meiosis is significant because

(a) It increases the genetic variability

(b) It doubles the chromosomes

(c) It helps in cell repair

(d) Both (a) & (c)

13.    What is white - fi technology?

(a)  Beaming   internet   over   an   area using helium balloon
(b)  Beaming   internet   over   an   area using solar drones
(c)  Beaming   internet   over   an   area using underground cable
(d)  Beaming   internet   over   an   area using unused television spectrum
14.    Who among the following will benefit from a digital locker?
(a) Persons  wanting   to  hide  his  ip address while downloading torrents
(b) Persons    wanting    to    store    his pirated  movies,  softwares  and games
(c) Persons       wanting       to       run applications made by strangers, without the risk of malware
(d) Person       wanting       to       store

government certificates on a cloud
15.    Project Varsha, India's new naval base under construction near which of the following cities?
(a) Kochi

(b) Karwar

(c) Visakhapatnam

(d) Chennai

16.    Arrange  the following  in the order of food chain
1. Detrivores        2. Carnivores

3. Omnivores        4. Herbivores

5. Autotrophs (a) 5, 4, 1, 2, 3 (b) 5, 4, 3, 2, 1 (c) 5, 1, 4, 2, 3
(d) None of the above

17.    Consider the following statements:

1.   The amount of conversion of solar energy into chemical energy by autotrophs  is  called  productivity of ecosystem.
2.   Productivity if an ecosystem goes on  decreasing   from  equator  to poles
3.  Chemical energy assimilated by herbivores is called gross primary productivity
4.   Gross primary productivity minus amount lost through excretion is called net primary productivity.
(a) 1, 2, 3 are false (b) 2, 3, 4 are false (c) 1, 3, 4 are false (d) All are true

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
18.    Capability  of a natural  ecosystem  to apply  self  regulating  mechanisms  so as to return to a steady state after an outside disturbance is called
(a) Ecological stability (b) Ecological resilience (c) Ecological resistance (d) All of the above
19.    Consider the following statements and answer based on the codes given: Statement  1:  When  a  result  of  a process influences the operation of the process in such a way as to increase magnitude is called negative feedback. Statement  2:  When  a  result  of  a process influences the operation of the process in such a way as to decrease magnitude is called positive feedback. (a) Both the statements are false
(b) Both the statements are true

(c) Only 1 is true

(d) Only 2 is true

20.    Consider the following statements:

1.  Ecological  pyramids  are  always upright.
2.  Stabilisation population will have a bell shaped graph.
3.  Ageing    population    will    have triangle shaped graph.
4.  Rapidly   falling   population   will have j shaped curve
(a) 1, 2, 3 are true (b) 2, 3, 4 are true (c) 1, 3, 4 are true
(d) All are true
21.    Which    among    the    following    are services of ecology?
1.   Supporting services

2.   Provisioning services

3.   Regulating services

4.   Cultural services

(a) 1, 2, 3 are true

(b) 2, 3, 4 are true

(c) 1, 3, 4 are true   (d) All are true

22.    Consider the following statements

1. Government of India in its environmental management has changed from command and control approach to participatory approach
2.   Environment is a closed system

3.   Preservation  is proper  utilisation and management of natural resources i.e. judicious use.
4.   Conservation  is  upkeep  of  rare and endangered species.
(a) 1, 2, 3 are false (b) 2, 3, 4 are false (c) 1, 3, 4 are false (d) All are true
23.    Match the following

List – I                         List-II

A. Assemblage      1. National parks protection
B. Species            2. Bharathpur bird preservation         sanctuary
C. Habitat               3. Gir lions protection
(a) A-1; B-3; C-2   (b) A-2; B-3; C-1

(c) A-3; B-2; C-1   (d) A-2; B-1; C-3

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
24.  Which  among  the  following  are advantages of ecotourism?
1.   Earns foreign exchange

2.   Generate local employment

3.   Brings awareness

4.   Funds for conservation

(a) 1, 2, 3 are true (b) 2, 3, 4 are true (c) 1, 3, 4 are true (d) All are true
25.    Which among the following are used to decide a "biodiversity hotspot"?
1. Endemism

2. Presence of exotic species

3. Threat perception

4. Exploitation (a) 1, 2 are true (b) 2, 3 are true (c) 1, 3 are true (d) All are true
26. Which of the following are India's biodiversity hotspots?
1. The Himalayas

2. Eastern Himalayas

3. Western Ghats

4. Sunder bans

(a) 1, 2, 3 are true (b) 2, 3, 4 are true (c) 1, 3, 4 are true (d) All are true
27.    A deadly parasite is lodged in stomach of a bird species. The parasite has gradually spread to the flock and then to  entire  species  and  killed  the  bird
species.   Now   the   bird   species   is
extinct,   as   the   parasite   can't   live outside or in/on any other species, parasite  too became  extinct.  What is this process called?
(a) Overexploitation

(b) Co-extinction

(c) Parasitism

(d) Both (a) and (b)

28.    Consider the following statements and answer based on the codes given: Statement 1: National parks, wild life sanctuaries  are  examples  of  in-situ conservation.
Statement 2: Zoos, botanical gardens are example of ex-situ conservation.
(a) Both 1 and 2 are true (b) Both 1 and 2 are false (c) Only 2 is true
(d) Only 1 is true

29.    Which of the following are functions of biosphere reserves?
1. Conservative function

2. Logistic function

3. Development function

4. Economic function

(a) 1, 2, 3 are true (b) 2, 3, 4 are true (c) 1, 3, 4 are true (d) All are true
30.    Which among the following are part of international network of biosphere reserves
1. Niligiris

2. Sunderbans

3. Gulf of Mannar

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
4. Nanda Devi

(a) 1, 2, 3 are true (b) 2, 3, 4 are true (c) 1, 3, 4 are true (d) All are true
31.    If one of the cell has the potency  to form into any cell type that is called
(a) Pleuripotent (b) Multipotent (c) Totipotent
(d) None of the above

32.    Consider the following statements

1.   Reproductive cloning is banned in most of the countries
2:   Therapeutic   cloning   is   allowed world wide
(a) Both 1 and 2 are false

(b) Only 1 is true

(c) Only 2 is true

(d) Both 1 and 2 are true

33.    Consider the following statements:

1. Diseases  spread  by  animals  are called vector borne diseases.
2. Zoonoses  are  diseases  spread  by insects.
3. If a organism stays in the system of an animal without undergoing any changes it is called intermediate host.
4. Malaria undergoes sexual cycle    in man.
(a) 1, 3 are false (b) 2, 3 are false (c) 1, 2 are false
(d) All are false
34. In which of the following, the electromagnetic spectrum is in increasing order of their frequency?
(a) IR, Visible, UV, X-ray, Gamma (b) IR, UV, X-ray, Visible, Gamma (c) UV, IR, Visible, X-ray, Gamma (d) Gamma, X-ray, UV, Visible, IR
35.    Which   of   the   following    force   of universe is weakest of all?
(a) Nuclear force

(b) Electromagnetic force

(c) Strong force

(d) Gravitational force

36.    Consider the following statements:

A. Fortification   of  food  is  a  viable solution for malnutrition in India.
B. Under   height   is   more   serious problem than under weight
(a) Both A and B are false

(b) Only A is true

(c) Only B is true

(d) Both A and B are true

37.    A genetically  modified bacteria which is   used   for   clearing   oil   spills   by digesting harmful hydrocarbon is
(a) Bacillus thuringenesis (b) Pseudomonas putida (c) Clostridium tetani
(d) None of the above

38.  Which of the following is wrongly matched phyto remediation pair?
(a) Sunflower- ceasium (b) Water hyacinth- lead (c) Bamboos- silica
(d) Alovera- benzene

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
39.    Which  of  the  following  institute  is present in Hyderabad?
(a) Centre  for Cellular  and  Molecular

Biology

(b) National Institute of Nutrition (c) Centre for DNA Fingerprinting (d) All of the above
40.    If    a    person     is    infected     from environment    and    over    a    period develops antibodies in response to it, what is that type of immunity called? (a) Acquired passive immunity
(b) Acquired active immunity

(c) Innate active immunity

(d) Innate passive immunity

41.    Consider the following statements:

1. Red  data  book  consists  a  list  of extinct animals.
2. Red list is published by world wild life fund.
3. A animal if called extinct it is only extinct in wild.
4. Near threatened species are part of red data book.
(a) All are true

(b) 1, 3, 4 are true (c) 2, 3, 4 are true (d) All are false
42.    Which     is     a     fundamental     and functional unit of ecological study?
(a) Biome

(b) Ecosystem

(c) Species

(d) All of the above.
43.    Which among the following is a third component of an ecosystem?
(a) Energy

(b) Soil

(c) Light

(d) Environment

44.    The term ecology is coined by

(a) A.G. Tansley (b) Ernest Hackel (c) Reiter
(d) None of the above

45.    Which among the following is a forest function?
1. Watershed protection

2. Atmospheric regulation

3. Land bank

4. Market use

(a) 1, 2, 3 are true   (b) 2, 3, 4 are true

(c) 1, 3, 4 are true   (d) All are true

46.    Which  of the following  is the reason for extinction of species?
(a) Loss of habitat

(b) Over exploitation

(c) Competition

(d) All of the above

47.    Which of the following species is/are extinct in India?
1. Dodo

2. White tiger

3. Gangetic dolphin

4. Cheetah

(a) 1, 2, 3 are true (b) 2, 3, 4 are true (c) 1, 3, 4 are true
(d) All are true

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
48.    Consider   the   following   statements about Joint Forest Management?
1.   Forest protection  committees  are formed to restore green cover
2.   It involves and formal agreement between forest department and local communities
3.  It respects the rights of local communities   rights   and   needs from forests
4.   This  protect  an area  from  being over exploited
(a) 1, 2, 3 are true (b) 2, 3, 4 are true (c) 1, 3, 4 are true (d) All are true
49.    Which among the following steps help in sustainable water management?
1. Recycling municipal water for agricultural use
2.   Protection of wet lands

3.   Building few mega projects.

4.   Pricing of water (a) 1, 2, 3 are true (b) 2, 3, 4 are true
(c) 1, 2, 4 are true

(d) All are true

50.    Which  of  the  following  are  problems caused by dams?
1.   Fragmentation and transformation of rivers
2.   Water logging

3.   Salinization of surrounding lands

4.   Emission of green house gases
(a) 1, 2, 3 are true (b) 2, 3, 4 are true (c) 1, 3, 4 are true (d) All are true
51.    Which   of  the   following   country   is leader in drip irrigated farming?
(a) Australia

(b) New Zealand

(c) China

(d) Israel

52.    Which  among  the  following  is  world single   largest   emmitter    of   Green House Gases?
(a) Crude oil

(b) Coal

(c) Agricultural fields

(d) All of the above

53.  Thermal power plants releases the following into atmosphere
1.   Suspended particulate matter

2.   Oxides of Sulphur

3.   Oxides of Nitrogen

4.   Acid rains

(a) 1, 2, 3 are true (b) 2, 3, 4 are true (c) 1, 3, 4 are true (d) All are true
54.  Which of the following will reduce pollution?
(a) Incinerators

(b) Electrostatic precipitators (c) Large hydroelectric projects (d) All of the above

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
55.    Which of following utilises sunlight in a direct fashion?
(a) Photo voltaic cells (b) Solar thermal cells (c) Bio gas production (d) Both a and b
56.    Snickometer is associated with which sports?
(a) Tennis             (b) Cricket

(c) Hockey             (d) Football

57.    Recently, the government of India has launched a new initiative called Meghraj. What is this Meghraj?
(a)   It's  a  new  monsoon  prediction system
(b)   It's a new project related to cloud computing
(c)   It's     a     new     service     under department of posts
(d)   It's  a  new   scheme   for   India's rainfed areas
58.    Who among the following Indians have been awarded the 2014 Marconi Prize, a Nobel equivalent for technology engineers?
(a) Joseph Paulraj

(b) Naveen Natarajan (c) Sumitraraj Gupta (d) Jagadish Singh
59.    Which one of the following statements is true about "roboearth"?
(a) It is a worldwide web for robots
(b) A   robotic   satellite   launched   to study earth
(c) Military robot mission developed by

USA

(d) India's   first   robotic   mission   to study earth
60.  The international  designator,  also known as COSPAR designation, is an international naming convention for
(a) Rockets           (b) Satellites

(c) Typhoons         (d) Galaxies

61.    The  protein  CA-125  (cancer  antigen-

125)    is    used    as    biomarker    for detection of which type of cancer?
(a) Ovarian cancer (b) Bone cancer

(c) Lung cancer     (d) Oral cancer

62.    NASA's     Cassini     spacecraft     has provided evidence on presence of hydrothermal  activity  on  which Saturn's moon?
(a) Titan                (b) Enceladus

(c) Rhea                (d Mimas

63.    Which one of the following  has been used  as  antimicrobial  compound  in personal   care  products   like  soaps, lotions, deodorants and toothpastes? (a) Triclocarban
(b) Chlorine

(c) Benzoyl Peroxide

(d) Hydrogen Peroxide

64.    The  theme  of  National  Science  Day

2015 is        ?

(a) Science for daily life

(b) Science for nation building

(c) Science for sustainable development

(d) Science for better future

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
65.    Lysosomes,    which   are   known   as suicide  bags, are produced  by which organelle?
(a) Mitochondria

(b) Golgi body (c) Ribosome (d) Peroxisome
66.    Which space agency has successfully launched  the world's  first all electric satellites in March, 2015?
(a) Russia Federal Space Agency

(b) China National Space

Administration

(c) Spacex

(d) European Space Agency

67.    The Reebov antigen rapid test kit has been  recently  approved  by  who  for quick testing of which disease?
(a) Malaria

(b) Ebola

(c) Swine flu

(d) HIV/AIDS

68.    Which of the following statements with regard to Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes are correct?
1.  The onset of Type 1 is sudden whereas   onset   of   Type   2   is gradual.
2.   Type  2  is  more  common  than

Type 1.

3.   In   Type    2,   the   body    stops producing insulin.
4.   The onset of Type 2 is primarily due  to  lifestyle  reasons  whereas
the onset of Type 1 is unrelated to lifestyle.
(a) All

(b) All except 1.

(c) All except 2 & 4. (d) All except 3
69.    Consider   the   following   statements with regard to Thorium based nuclear power plants:
Assertion:  Thorium  cannot  be  used directly to produce nuclear energy. Reason:  Thorium  does  not  contain any fissile material.
(a) Assertion    &   Reason    both   are correct  and  Reason  is the correct explanation.
(b) Assertion    &   Reason    both   are correct   but   Reason   is   not   the correct explanation.
(c) Assertion   is   wrong,   Reason   is correct.
(d) Assertion   is   correct,   Reason   is wrong.
70.   Which of the following statements are correct with regard to Hepatitis (A, B, C, D & E):
1. Hepatitis  is  the  inflation  of  liver due to viral infection.
2. Hepatitis  B  vaccine  is  enough  to keep type D at bay.
3. Type B & C are mainly transmitted through blood transfusion.
4. Type  A  &  E  are  caused  due  to exposure   to   polluted   food   and
water.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
(a) 1, 2 & 3 only. (b) 1, 3 & 4 only. (c) 2 & 4 only.
(d) 1, 2, 3 & 4

71.    What  is India's  ranking  in the  2014

Environmental     Performance     Index released recently?
(a) 140                  (b) 155 (c) 165                  (d) 168
72.    Which country has been ranked best on UN's disaster risk and age index launched at third world conference on disaster risk reduction?
(a) Malta               (b) Finland

(c) Singapore        (d) Norway

73.    The   Hyogo   Framework   for   Action

(HFA) is related to        ? (a) Disaster reduction
(b) Biodiversity protection

(c) Population control

(d) Ozone protection

74.    On which date, World Wildlife Day is observed?
(a) March 2           (b) March 3 (c) March 4           (d) March 5
75.  Which  one  of  the  following  is considered  as  inexpensive  future energy option?
(a) Dimethyl ether

(b) Dimethoxyethane. (c) Dimethyl sulphate (d) Polyethylene glycol
76.    Which one of the following pollutants is  not measured  under  the  national
air quality index launched by India?
(a) Nitrogen Dioxide (b) Carbon Monoxide (c) Methane
(d) Ammonia

77.    Which  of following  statement  is true about the ecotone?
(a) It is meeting place of two different eco systems
(b) It is meeting place of two same eco systems
(c) Density of species is very low here

(d) All of the above.

78.    Which     of    the    following     Indian biosphere reserves have been included in the world network of biosphere reserves under the man biosphere program of UNESCO:
1.   Simplipal biosphere reserve.

2.   Achanakmar – Amarkantak biosphere reserve.
3.   Pachmarhi biosphere reserve.

4.   Western Ghats

(a) 1, 2 & 4 only. (b) 1 & 3 only.
(c) 1, 2, 3 & 4.

(d) 1, 2 & 3 only.

79.  How  many  pollutants  are  measured under the recently launched National Air Quality Index?
(a) Six                   (b) Seven

(c) Eight                (d) Ten

80.    Which of the following committees has been set up to review India's Marine fishing Policy?

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
(a) Meena Kumari committee

(b) Gadgil committee

(c) Krishna Mohan committee

(d) Kirthi Parekh committee

81.   Which of the following are potential reasons for decline of house sparrow?
1. Severe   changes   in   urban ecosystem.
2.   Radiations from mobile tower.

3.  Excessive  use  of  chemical fertilizers.
4.   Poaching.

(a) 1 & 4 only.      (b) 1, 2 & 3 only. (c) 1 & 2 only.       (d) 1, 2, 3 & 4.
82.    Which  of  the  following  is  true  with regard to regulation of GM crops in India?
1.   At    present     GM     crops     are regulated  under  the  purview  of the Union Ministry of agriculture.
2.   Ministry    of    environment    and forest has introduced a new bill to set  up  a  new  regulatory  system for gm crops by the name Biotechnology  Regulatory Authority of India (BRAI).
3.   The bill proposes setting up BRAI under the ministry of science and technology.
4.   BRAI will act as a single window clearance  system for products  of modern  biotechnology,  including
GM crops.
(a) 1, 2 & 4 only. (b) 1, 2 & 3 only. (c) 1, 3 & 4 only. (d) 3 & 4 only.
83.    Lantana  –  know  as  phool  lakhri  in local parlance is a shrub found in abundance  in Himachal  Pradesh. Which of the following statements are correct about it?
1.   It is a toxic weed and has affected the   mountain   diversity   of   the state.
2. Lantana  species  are  widely cultivated for their flowers.
3.   It is endemic to India.

4.  It is considered as potential fire hazard and it is combustible even when green.
(a) 1, 2 & 4 only.  (b) 2 & 4 only. (c) 1 & 3 only.       (d) 1, 2, 3 & 4.
84. Recently Chinese scientists have developed  carbon  aerogel.  Which  of the following is/are correct about it?
1.   It is the second lightest material after graphite aerogel.
2.   It has excellent elasticity.

3.   It    is    expected    to    play    an important  role  in  pollution control.
4.  It is expected to become ideal material for sound absorption.
(a) 2, 3 & 4 only. (b) 2 & 4 only.
(c) 1 & 3 only.

(d) 1, 2, 3 & 4.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
85.    Plasma arc technology is used for the disposal   of   waste,   which   of   the following   statements   is/are   correct with regard to this technology?
1.   It can be used for the disposal of hazardous and radioactive waste.
2.   Oxides  of  Sulphur  and  Nitrogen are the polluting gases produced in this process.
3.   This   technology   has   not   been tried anywhere in India.
(a) 1, 2 & 3.          (b) 1 & 2 only. (c) 1 & 3 only        (d) 3 only.
86.    What do you understand by the term

'dark fermentation'?

(a) It is a method to reduce CO2 in the atmosphere.
(b) It is a method to produce Hydrogen as fuel from wastewater.
(c) It is a method to dispose nuclear wastes.
(d) It is a method to produce Methane from organic waste.
87.    Which   of   the   following   statements is/are correct with regard to mobile touch screen technologies?
1.   When a user touches a capacitive touch screen some charge is transferred  to the user from the screen.
2. Capacitive      touch      screen technology has more life than resistive touch screen technology.
3.   Capacitive screens provide clearer

image than resistive screens.
(a) 1, 2 & 3.          (b) 1 only.

(c) 1 & 3 only.       (d) 2 & 3 only.

88.    Which of the following are true about

Kepler telescope?

1.   Discovered 8 planets

2.   kepler-438b     and     kepler-442b orbit   stars   smaller   and   cooler than sun
(a) 1 only              (b) 2 only

(c) 1, 2                  (d) Neither of them

89. World Congress on Information Technology-2018, a biennial event will be held in:
(a) Bangalore        (b) Hyderabad

(c) Mumbai           (d) Chennai

90. Which among the following drug is popularly known as "meow-meow"
(a) Mephedron

(b) Methamphetamine

(c) Cocaine            (d) Heroin

91.    As  you  go  down  into  a  well,  your weight
(a) Increases slightly

(b) Decreases slightly

(c) Remains exactly the same

(d) None of the above

92.  The  entire  surface  of  a  plant  has  an outer covering of epidermis. Why is it useful for plants?
1.   Protects against loss of water

2.  Protects  against  invasion  by parasitic fungi
3.   It makes them water resistant
Choose the correct answer using the coded below:

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
(a) 1 and 2            (b) 2 and 3

(c) 1 and 3            (d) all of the above

93.    What do you mean by a hybrot?

(a) It is a computer formed by fusion of traditional analog with digital computers
(b) It is a robotic computer consisting both electronic and biological elements.
(c) It  is  a  computer  which  can  use both battery and solar power
(d) Both a & c

94.    Which  of  the  following  is  incorrect about biofertilisers?
(a) Increases crop yield by 20-30% (b) Very easy to store
(c) Cost effective   (d) All the above

95.    In terms of percentage,  which  of the following metals has highest composition in polymetalic nodules?
(a) Manganese      (b) Iron

(c) Nickel              (d) Copper

96.    Which of the following preservatives is most commonly used to preserve meat products?
(a) Sodium Benzoate

(b) Potassium Bromated

(c) Sodium Nitrate

(d) Butylated Hydroxytoluene

97.    Which    is   true    regarding    mantra

Rajbhasa?
(a) A voice translator which translates any language into Hindi
(b) A voice translator which translates

Hindi into any language

(c) Translates documents in English to

Hindi

(d) Translates    documents    in    any language to Hindi.
98.    Which  of  the  following  two  Indians have recently won the Whitley award for their contribution to wildlife conservation?
(a) Anil Kumar and Navin Patil

(b) Ullas Karanth and Anand Kumar (c) Pramod Patil and Anand Kumar (d) Krishna Singh and Navin Patil
99.    The   Line   Probe   Assay   (LPA)   and Cartridge Based Nucleic Acid Amplification Test (CBNAAT) are the new diagnostic technologies used globally to determine which one of the following diseases?
(a) Tuberculosis    (b) Malaria

(c) Hiv/aids          (d) Dengue

100.  What do you understand by the term

Oil Sardines?

(a) It is a Gastric disease caused due to excessive Oil consumption
(b) It   is   a   newly   discovered   plant species the seeds of which can be used for making Edible oil
(c) It  is  the  name  of  a  Fish  species found in the Indian coast
(d) None of the above.w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
PLACE FOR ROUGH WORK

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
PLACE FOR ROUGH WORK

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
