

1.     Ans: C
Exp:      Oxygen and ozone were absent initially.
2.     Ans: C
3.     Ans: C
Exp: Amphibians 364 mya, fungi
500  mya,  birds  155  mya, mammals 129 mya. mya -million years ago
4.     Ans: C
Exp: a  and   b  were   found   in proterozoic period ard 1500 mya
5.     Ans: B
Exp: Different structures evolving for the same function and having similarity
Are analogous eg. Flippers of penguins and dolphins.
6.     Ans: D
Exp:       Animal cell is covered by plasma   membrane,   plant   cells have cell wall)
7.     Ans: A
Exp:      Cheese is a source of calcium  and  phosphorus Molasses contains potassium
8.     Ans: A
Exp:       Vitamin D is known as
calciferol.
9.     Ans: C
Exp: Saturated fatty acids do not contain any double bonds
Hepatin is anticoagulant
Wood contains 30-50%cellulose
10.   Ans: C
Exp:       Polyploidy is induced by decapitation, high or low temperature Mechanical injury, infection, irradiation.
11.   Ans: A
Exp:       Anaerobic      respiration uses electron acceptors instead of oxygen which have smaller reduction potential and hence less energy is released per oxidised molecule,  respirometer  measures
rate       of       respiration       and

chromoplasts  change  the  colour of fruits.
12.   Ans: A
Exp:      Meiosis   increases   the genetic  variability  through crossing over. It reduces the chromosomes  by  half  while making  gametes.  Cell  repair  is done by mitosis)
13.   Ans: D
14.   Ans: D
15.   Ans: C
Exp: India   is   developing    new naval base under the code name project Varsha. This base will be home for its new fleet of nuclear submarines.   The   base   is  now being  developed  at  Rambilli, which is 50 km from Visakhapatnam.
16.   Ans: B
17.   Ans: C
Exp:     Rate of conversion is productivity not amount of conversion, energy assimilated by autotrophs not herbivores is gpp, amount lost in respiration not excretion.
18.   Ans: A
19.   Ans: A
Exp:      Negative           feedback reduces the change while positive accenuates the change.
20.   Ans: B
Exp:     Ecological pyramids of energy are always upright while numbers and biomass are sometimes inverted.
21.   Ans: D
Exp:   Supporting    services provide basis for other higher services, provisioning services are food, cosmetics, medicine, regulation  of  environment, cultural  services  to  provide spiritual and aesthetic services.
22.   Ans: C

Exp: Preservation  aim is to increase the population to an optimum level, while conservation aims at judicious and sustainable use.
23.   Ans: B
24.   Ans: D
25.   Ans: C
Exp: To    be    declared    as    a biodiversity hotspot a species should  be endemic  i.e. found  in particular area only, threat perception  based on habitat loss is taken into consideration.
26.   Ans: C
27.   Ans: B
28.   Ans: A
29.   Ans: D
Exp: Biosphere     reserve     have economic function, they have research, tourism, conservation, human development.
30.   Ans: D
31.   Ans: C
Exp: Totipotent  can change  into any cell type, pleuripotent into many types of cell lines but not all, multi potent means into multiple lines in same format but less than pleuripotent.
32.   Ans: C
Exp: Reproductive cloning means producing a new human clone, while therapeutic cloning to treat some diseases.
33.   Ans: D
Exp:   Disease  spread  by arthropods are called vector borne diseases, Zoonoses are diseases spread by animals, reservoir is in which the organism doesn't undergo any change, intermediate host in which an organism undergoes a part of cycle, malaria undergoes  sexual  cycle  in mosquito.
34.   Ans: A

Exp: The sequence of increase of frequency  is Radio Waves, Micro Waves, Infra Red, Visible, Ultra Voilet, X Rays and Gamma Rays.
35.   Ans: D
36.   Ans: D
Exp: Under  height  is  associated with mental development  so it is more serious
37.   Ans: B
38.   Ans: D
39.   Ans : D
Exp:       Alovera    is    used    for removal of formaldehyde  while to remove  benzene  chrysanthemum is used
40.   Ans: B
41.   Ans: D
Exp:       Red  list  is  released  by IUCN, red data book has only threatened species, which include critically endangered, endangered, vulnerable  species. Extinct mean extinct in wild and captivity.
42.   Ans: B
43.   Ans: A
Exp:    Ecosystem  has  two essential  components  one  is biome  consisting  of  living organisms other the physical environment i.e. habitat. While energy is the third component connecting both of them.
44.   Ans: B
Exp:      Tansley coined the term ecosystem, ecology by Hackel.
45.   Ans: D
Exp: Forests protect watershed feom flash floods, it regulates atmosphere  by regulating  oxygen and carbon  dioxide,  act as land bank  by  maintaining   soil nutrients, produces minor and major forest produce.
46.   Ans: D
47.   Ans: ALL
48.   Ans: D
Exp:       The basic idea of JFM is that involving local communities will help in protection more so if local  communities  realise economic benefits from conservation.
49.   Ans: C
Exp:   Building           small reservoirs  than  mega  projects  is
found to be more efficient, pricing will help in realising real value of a resource.
50.   Ans: D
Exp:      Dams    will    fragment rivers  and lead to their physical transformation, storing leads to water logging and salination of areas,   rotting   of  vegetation   in these water logged areas leads to emission of GHGs.
51.   Ans: D
Exp:       Due to scarcity of water Israel adopted  drip irrigation;  its water usage efficiency has been increased  and 95% and doubled its food production
52.   Ans: B
53.   Ans: A
Exp:  Acid   rains   are consequences of pollution when Oxides  of Nitrogen  and  Sulphur are mixed with water vapor in atmosphere.
54.   Ans: D
Exp:    Large  hydro  electric projects and incinerators recent evidence  show  that  they contribute  to pollution  but on a larger scale they reduce pollution.
55.   Ans: A
Exp:       Photo      voltaic      cells utilises sun light to produce electricity while solar thermal cells utilise temperature to produce electricity.
56.   Ans: B
Exp:      Snickometer     is     the name of a computer and camera system  used in cricket  matches. This  technology  is  used  in televised cricket matches to graphically show the video of the ball passing the bat at the same time the audio of any sounds at the time. It is only used to give the television audience more information  and  to  show  if  the ball did or did not actually hit the bat.
57.   Ans: B
Exp:       Meghraj,        technically called GI Cloud is a new project launched by the government of India  to  harness  the  benefits  of
cloud  computing.  The  GI  Cloud
facility would ensure optimum utilization   of  the  infrastructure and  speed  up  the  development and  deployment  of e-governance applications.  It will also help the departments  to  procure  ICT services on demand.
58.   Ans: A
Exp:      Joseph   Paulraj   is   a Stanford University Professor. Joseph Paulraj who has been recognised  for  his  work  in inventing and advancing MIMO (Multiple Input Multiple Output) technology, a key enabler of wireless broadband services that has revolutionised high speed delivery  of multimedia  media across the world.
59.   Ans: A
Exp:       It is a worldwide web for robots roboearth- a giant network and database repository where robots can share information and learn from each other about their behaviour and their environment. The goal of roboearth is to allow robotic  systems  to  benefit  from the experience of other robots, paving the way for rapid advances in  machine  cognition  and behavior.
60.   Ans: B
Exp:  The      international designator,  also  known  as COSPAR designation, is an international  naming  convention for satellites. It consists of the launch  year,  a  3-digit incrementing launch number of that year and up to a 3-letter code representing the sequential identifier  of a piece in a launch. The international designator of India's   Mars  Mission   is  2013-
060a.
61.   Ans: A
Exp:       CA-125  (cancer  antigen
125) also known as mucin 16 or muc16   is   a   protein   that   in humans is encoded by the muc16 gene.  CA-125  is  the  most frequently used biomarker for Ovarian cancer detection.
62.   Ans: B

Exp:   NASA's          Cassini spacecraft has detected hydrothermal activity on the seafloor of Saturn's icy moon enceladus. The finding adds the tantalising   possibility   that   the moon could contain environment suitable for living organisms.
63.   Ans: A
Exp:       Triclocarban   has  been used as antimicrobial and antifungal compound in personal care products like soap, lotion, deodorants.
64.   Ans: B
Exp:       National  science  day is celebrated on 28th February every year  to  commemorate  the discovery of the Raman effect by Indian physicist Sir Chandrasekhara Venkata Raman. The   theme    for   the   National Science Day 2015 is "science for nation building.
65.   Ans: B
Exp:     Lysosomes  are called suicide sacks. They are produced by the golgi body. They consist of a single  membrane  surrounding powerful   digestive   enzymes.   It acts as the "garbage disposal" of the cell by breaking down cell components that are no longer needed  as  well  as  molecules  or even bacteria that are ingested by the cell.
66.   Ans: C
Exp: Space    exploration technologies   (SPACEX) successfully  put the world's  first all-electric communications satellites into orbit. The satellites launched are outfitted with lightweight, all- electric engines, rather than conventional chemical propulsion systems, to reach and maintain orbit.)
67.   Ans: B
Exp:      Reebov   antigen   rapid test kit made  by colorado-based corgenix  has  been  approved  by who for quick testing ebola. Until now, ebola test have been mainly conducted  in laboratories.  These gene    based    tests    are    more
accurate but can take between 12 to 24 hours.)
68.   Ans: D
69.   Ans: A
70.   Ans: D
71.   Ans: B
Exp:       India  has  been  ranked at a low 155th position in a global list that places countries on how well they perform on high-priority environmental  issues.  The  2014
Environmental Performance Index has ranked 178 countries in total. Among  them,  India  is placed  at the 155th position, with an index score of 31.23 points.
72.   Ans: A
Exp:      Malta has been ranked the best on UN's disaster risk and age index. The index has been developed  by  helpage  with support   from   un's   office   for disaster risk reduction (unisdr) as a pilot. Somalia has ranked first, followed by Central African Republic,    Afghanistan,    Sudan and Iraq among others. All these countries are affected by civil war and  ongoing  conflict.  India  has been ranked 28th in the list.
73.   Ans: A
Exp:      Hyogo   Framework   for Action   is  a  ten  year   strategy (2005-15)   to   integrate   disaster risk  reduction  into  the development programmes of individual norms. The framework was  approved  in  2005,  at  the world conference for disaster reduction in Kobe, Japan.

74.   Ans: B
Exp:       March  3 designated  as World  Wildlife  Day  to  celebrate and raise awareness of the world's wild fauna and flora. The date is the day of the adoption of the convention on international trade in  endangered   species   of  wild fauna and flora (cites) in 1973, which plays an important role in ensuring  that international  trade does not threaten the species' survival.
75.   Ans: A
Exp:       DME (Dimethyl Ether) is a clean-burning, non-toxic, potentially renewable fuel. Its high cetane  value  and  quiet combustion, as well as its inexpensive propane-like fuelling system, make it an excellent, inexpensive diesel alternative that will meet strict emissions standards.  DME  has  been  used for decades  as an energy source in  China,  Japan,  Korea,  Egypt, and   Brazil,    and    it   can   be produced domestically from a variety of feedstock, including biogas and Natural Gas.
76.   Ans: C
Exp:      The national air quality index  will  consider  eight pollutants that impact health. These are p particulate matter pm
10 and pm 2.5, Nitrogen Dioxide, Sulphur Dioxide, Ozone, Carbon Monoxide, Ammonia and Lead.
77.   Ans: A
Exp:       Ecotone is a place where two  different  eco  systems  meet each other. Mangrove and terrestrial  eco system  is an example  of ecotone.  This area is very rich is in species.
78.   Ans: D
Exp:       Western     Ghats   is  a world heritage site)
79.   Ans: C
Exp:     Union government has launched the national Air Quality Index (AQI) for monitoring the quality of air in major urban centres  across  the country  on a real-time basis and enhancing public awareness for taking mitigative   action.   The  aqi  has been at present launched for 10 cities — Delhi, Agra, Kanpur, Lucknow, Varanasi, Faridabad, Ahmadabad, Chennai, Bangalore and Hyderabad. The index considers  eight  pollutants  — PM10, PM2.5, NO2, SO2, CO, O3, NH3 and PB).
80.   Ans: A
Exp: A seven-member  committee headed by Dr B. Meena Kumari, Deputy        Director        General
(Fisheries),    Indian    Council    of

Agricultural Research (ICAR), was appointed to review India's marine fishing policy and the existing guidelines for deep-sea fishing in the country's Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ). The committee has submitted its report, but it is yet to be approved by the Department of  Animal  Husbandry,   Dairying and  Fisheries  of the  Ministry  of Agriculture. One of the most controversial recommendations  is the creation of a buffer zone between the near-shore and offshore  regions  i.e  waters between 200 m and 500 m in depth.
81.   Ans: D
82.   Ans: D
83.   Ans: A
84.   Ans: A
85.   Ans: C
86.   Ans: B
87.   Ans: A
88.   Ans: C
Exp: Using       Kepler's       data, scientists have reached this millenary  milestone  after validating  8  more  planet candidates  that  were  spotted  by the  telescope   both  kepler-438b and  Kepler-442b  orbit  stars smaller and cooler than our sun. Thus making the habitable  zone closer to their parent star, in the direction of the constellation lyra.
89.   Ans: B
90.   Ans: A
91.   Ans: B
Exp:       Weight   is   product   of mass and gravity, as we go down gravity  decreases   and  becomes zero at centre of earth.
92.   Ans: D
Exp:       The epidermis is usually made of a single layer of cells. In some plants living in very dry habitats, the epidermis may be thicker since protection against water  loss  is critical.  The  entire surface of a plant has this outer covering of epidermis.  It protects all the parts  of the plant. Epidermal cells on the aerial parts of the plant often secrete a waxy, water-resistant    layer   on   their outer surface. This aids in protection  against  loss  of water, mechanical  injury  and  invasion by parasitic fungi.)
93.   Ans: B
94.   Ans: B
Exp:      Bio   fertilisers   contain living microorganisms which promotes plant growth by increasing  the  supply  or availability of micro nutrients (N, P, K) they are difficult to store and effects are comparatively slower)
95.   Ans: A
Exp:      Polymetalic       nodules, also  called  manganese  nodules, are  rock  concentrations  on  the sea bottom formed of concrete layers of iron and manganese hydroxides around a core.
96.   Ans: C
Exp: Sodium Nitrite and Sodium Benzoate  are commonly  used to preserve  meat  products.  It prevents   bacteria   growth   and helps meat to retain its color.
97.   Ans: C
Exp:  Machine      assisted translation tool translates documents        pertaining        to
personnel administration, finance, small   scale   industries, agriculture,   information technology  etc  developed  by  C- DAC Pune)
98.   Ans: C
Exp:       Ananda  Kumar and Dr Pramod  Patil were awarded  with the prestigious Whitley awards for their contribution to wildlife conservation. Ananda Kumar won the award for his work using innovative   communication systems  to  enable  human- elephant coexistence  in southern India. Dr Pramod Patil has been awarded  for his work  to protect the iconic great Indian bustard in the Thar desert.
99.   Ans: A
Exp:       Tuberculosis   for   early and rapid diagnosis of drug resistant tuberculosis, new diagnostic  technologies  such  as Line Probe Assay (LPA) and Cartridge Based Nucleic Acid Amplification Test (CBNAAT) have been developed globally.
100.       Ans: C
Exp: Oil  sardines  are  the  most common fish in the Indian coasts and dominant item in the nets of Indian fishermen. As per the data released by the Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute Oil sardines at 5.45 lakh tonnes and Indian   mackerel   at   2.37   lakh tonne  were  the  top  two  fishes based on the landings in nine maritime states and two union territories.

