

1.      The    famous    "Nullarbor    Plain"    is located in
(a) Canada            (b) Argentina

(c) Australia          (d) China

2.      Which among the following are used to decide a "Biodiversity Hotspot?"
A.   Endemism

B.   Presence of exotic species

C.   Threat perception

D.   Exploitation (a) A, B are true (b) B, C are true (c) A, C are true (d) All are true
3.      Which    of    the    following    protocol governs movement of living modified organisms?
(a) Nagoya Protocol

(b) Cartagena protocol

(c) Aichi Biodiversity Targets

(d) All of the above

4.      Consider the following statements:

A. Ecological   pyramids   are   always upright.
B. Stabilisation population will have a bell shaped graph.
C. Ageing population will have triangle shaped graph.
D. Rapidly falling population will have

J shaped curve
(a) A, B, C are true (b) B, C, D are true (c) A, C, D are true (d) All are true
5.      Consider the following statements:

(a) The amount of conversion of solar energy into chemical energy by autotrophs is called productivity of ecosystem.
(b) Productivity  of an ecosystem  goes on decreasing from equator to poles
(c) Chemical   energy   assimilated   by herbivores is called Gross primary productivity
(d) Gross  primary  productivity  minus amount lost through excretion is called Net Primary Productivity.
(a) A, B, C are false (b) B, C, D are false (c) A, C, D are false (d) All are true
6.      Which  of  the  following  are  problems caused by dams?
A. Fragmentation  and transformation of rivers
B. Water logging

C. Salinization of surrounding lands D. Emission of Green House Gases (a) A, B, C are true
(b) B, C, D are true

(c) A, C, D are true

(d) All are true

7.      Which of the following statements are correct?
1.  There exist alternate stripes of positive and negative magnetic anomalies found on either side of oceanic ridge.
2.   The  divergence  of plates  lead  to increase in radius of earth.
3. Caledonian    and    Hercynian mountains are Fold Mountains formed   due   to   convergence   of North American and Eurasian plates.
4.   Thermal     convective      currents within earth leads to movement of plates.
(a) 1, 2 correct      (b) 2, 3, 4 correct

(c) 1, 3, 4 correct  (d) All the above

8.      Consider   the   following   statements about Joint Forest Management:
A. Forest  protection  committees  are formed to restore green cover.
B. It   involves   a   formal   agreement between   forest   department   and local communities.
C. It   respects   the   rights   of   local communities  and  needs  from forests.
D. This  protects  an  area  from  being over exploited.
(a) A, B, C are true (b) B, C, D are true

(c) A, C, D are true (d) All are true
9.      Which among the following is a third component of an ecosystem?
(a) Energy             (b) Soil

(c) Light                (d) Environment

10.    Which   among   the   following   is/are function(s) of forest?
A.   Watershed protection

B.   Atmospheric regulation

C.   Land bank

D.   Market use

(a) A, B, C are true (b) B, C, D are true (c) A, C, D are true (d) All are true
11.    The "Spiti Valley" is a desert mountain valley located in?
(a) Himachal Pradesh

(b) Uttarakhand

(c) Jammu & Kashmir

(d) Uttar Pradesh

12.    Israel has common border with

(a) Lebanon, Syria, Jordon and Egypt (b) Lebanon, Syria, Turkey and Jordan (c) Cyprus, Turkey, Jordon and Egypt (d) Turkey, Syria, Iraq and Yemen
13.    The  maximum   damage  to  life  and surface is done by the:
(a) Surface waves

(b) Transverse waves (c) Longitudinal waves (d) Primary waves
14.    The term Hamada stands for:
(a) A coastal  low  land  eroded  by sea waves

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
(b) A  depositional   plain  in  an  arid region.
(c) A  flat  rocky  surface  in  a  desert without surfacial matter other than boulder, etc
(d) A karst depositional plain

15.    Which one of the following statements is not correct about 'badland'?
(a) Badland   is   rugged   topography,

usually of relatively low relief.

(b) Badland   is  associated   with   wet lands.
(c) Badland is devoid of vegetation

(d) Badland   is  associated   with  arid and semi-arid region
16.    Examine   following   statements   and select  the  correct  answer  using  the code given below:
(i)   A    spectacular     glowing     light display   in   the   ionosphere    is known as Aurora.
(ii) Aurora  is stimulated  by the interaction of the solar wind with hydrogen.
(iii) In the Northern Hemisphere, it is known as Aurora Borealis.
(iv)  In the Southern Hemisphere, it is known as Aurora Australis.
(a) i, ii and iii        (b) i, ii and iv

(c) i, iii and iv       (d) i, ii, iii and iv

17.    Examine   following   statements   and select  the  correct  answer  using  the code given below:
(i)   Ground  inversion  occurs  during

long winter nights.
(ii) Ground  inversion  occurs  in cloudless clear skies.
(iii) Ground inversion  occurs at high relative humidity
(iv)  Ground   inversion   occurs   when the ground is covered with snow
Choose the correct code:

(a) i, ii and iii        (b) i, ii and iv

(c) i, iii and iv       (d) i, ii, iii and iv

18.    Denudation stands for:

(a) A   general   term   refers   to   the processes of erosion.
(b) A   general   term   refers   to   the processes   of  weathering,   erosion and transport
(c) A   general   term   refers   to   the processes of weathering
(d) A   general   term   refers   to   the processes  of  mechanical weathering.
19.    The term Inselberg is associated with: (a) Glaciers
(b) Running water

(c) Underground water

(d) Wind action

20.    Consider the following statements

1. Kuroshio  is  a  cold  current, Oyashio is a warm current.
2.   Elnino current is an extension of

Humboldt Current.

3.   In the absence  of North Atlantic Drift the Western Europe would have been an uninhabitable area.
4.   Benguela   current   is   a   warm

current in Indian Ocean.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
(a) 1, 4 correct      (b) 1, 2, 4 correct

(c) 2, 3 correct      (d) 1, 3, 4 correct

21.    Which of the following species is/are extinct in India?
A.   Dodo

B.   White Tiger

C.   Gangetic dolphin

D.   Cheetah

(a) A, B, C are true (b) B, C, D are true (c) A, C, D are true (d) All are true
22.    Match the following List 1 with List 2 and  choose  the  correct  answer  from the codes given below:
List – 1               List – 2

A. Sonai Rupai     I.  West Bengal

B. Jaldapara         II. Arunachal

Pradesh C. Morleen            III. Manipur D. Kaibul Lamjo   IV. Mizoram Codes:
A      B      C      D

(a)     II       I        IV      III (b)     III      I        II       IV (c)      I        II       IV      III (d)     III      IV      I        II
23.    Consider the following statements:

I.    Lowermost layer of atmosphere is called Troposphere.
II.   Height of Troposphere is more at pole and lesser near the equator.
III.  Most of the weather phenomena

takes place in Stratosphere
Which of above statement is / are true about the Troposphere?
(a) I only               (b) I and III

(c) 1 and II            (d) All of the above

24.    Which of the following are correct?

(i)   Canada  has  the  largest  reserves of Uranium in the world.
(ii) Australia which has the second largest reserves is the largest exporter of Uranium.
(iii) The primary source of Uranium in India is Jaduguda. Uranium is extracted in the form of yellow cake.
(a) ii and iii           (b) i and ii

(c) iii only             (d) i

25.    Choose the false statement among the following statements:
(a) The southwest monsoon is a continuation   of   the   southeast trade wind, deflected towards the Indian    subcontinent    after crossing the equator.
(b)   In   winter   India   is   under   the influence of North West monsoon due to westerly jet stream.
(c)   The  southwest  monsoon  sets  in over the Kerala coast by around
1st June.
(d) The shift in the position of the ITCZ is  related  to  the  phenomena  of the withdrawal of the westerly jet stream from its position over the north Indian plain.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
26.    Which of the following are functions of

Biosphere Reserves?

A.   Conservative function

B.   Logistic function

C.   Development function

D.   Economic function

(a) A, B, C are true (b) B, C, D are true (c) A, C, D are true (d) All are true
27.    Consider the following statements

1.   Maldives   are  known   for  fringe reefs.
2. Coral   bleaching   refers   to extensive growth of algae leading to death of corals.
3.   Great  barrier  reef  is  in  Atlantic

Ocean.

4.   Most of coral reefs are found  in temperate belt.
(a) 1, 2, 4            (b) 2, 3, 4

(c) 1, 3, 4            (d) None of the above

28.    Which    among    the    following     is

Incorrect?

(a) The    mid-day    sun    is    exactly overhead at least once a year on all latitudes  in between  the Tropic of Cancer  and  the  Tropic  of Capricorn.
(b) Those places east of Greenwich will be ahead of Greenwich Time and those to the west will be behind it.
(c) It will be 7:30 A.M. in India when

its 2:00 P.M. in London
(d) The axis of the earth which is an imaginary  line  makes  an angle  of
66½° with its orbital plane.

29.    Nitric Oxide pollution can lead to all of the following, except
(a) Leaf spotting in plants

(b) Bronchitis-related           respiratory problems in human
(c) Production    of    corrosive    gases through photochemical reaction
(d) Silicosis in human

30.    Examine   following   statements   and select  the  correct  answer  using  the code given below:
i)    Relative  humidity  increases  with the decrease in temperature.
ii)   Relative  humidity  increases  with the increase in temperature.
iii)  Relative  humidity  increases  with the  increase  in  water  vapour  in the air at constant temperature.
Choose the correct code:

(a) i and ii             (b) i and iii

(c) ii and iii           (d) i, ii and iii

31.    The  vegetation  type  characterized  by a large expanse of grassland with scattered trees and shrubs,   lying between    tropical   rain   forest   and deserts is
(a) Mid-latitude      broad-leaf      mixed forest
(b) Temperate rain forest

(c) Tropical Savanna

(d) Mid-latitude grassland

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
32.    Which among the following is known as "Doctor Wind"?
(a) Loo                  (b) Chinook

(c) Harmattan       (d) Foehn

33.    What  causes  wind  to  deflect  toward left in the Southern hemisphere?
(a) Temperature

(b) Magnetic field

(c) Rotation of the Earth

(d) Pressure

34.    Consider the following:

1.   The  imaginary   line  joining  the land projecting towards the sea is called base line.
2.   Flying of foreign planes prohibited within the range of Exclusive Economic Zone without prior permission.
3.   Epiflora and Epifauna live on the surface of sea bottoms.
4.   Ocean  ranching  is  nothing  but ocean husbandry.
(a) 1, 2, 4 correct (b) 2, 3, 4 correct (c) 1, 3, 4 correct
(d) All the above are correct

35.    Which  of  the  following  is  /are  the stage(s) of demographic transition?
1.   High death rate and birthrate, low growth rate.
2. Rapid decline in death rate, continued low birthrate, very low growth rate.
3.   Rapid     decline     in     birthrate,

continued decline in death rate.
4.   Low death rate and birthrate, low growth rate.
Select the correct answer using the code given below.
(a) 1 only              (b) 1, 2 and 3

(c) 3 and 4            (d) 1 and 4

36.    Which type of Volcanic eruptions have caused Deccan Trap formations?
(a) Shield              (b) Composite

(c) Caldera            (d) Flood

37.    Which of the following methods is/are suitable  for soil conservation  in hilly region?
1.   Terracing and contour bunding

2.   Shifting cultivation

3.   Contour ploughing

Select the correct answer using the code given below.
(a) 1 and 3 only    (b) 2 only

(c) 3 only              (d) 1, 2 and 3

38.  The  "Ninety  East  Ridge"  is  a submarine volcanic ridge located in?
(a) Pacific Ocean   (b) Atlantic Ocean

(c) Indian Ocean   (d) Arctic Ocean

39.    Consider   the   following   statements with reference to the National Biodiversity Authority:
1.   It is a statutory autonomous body under  the Ministry  of Environment and Forests.
2.   The recommendations made by it are advisory in nature.
3.   It is headed by the Prime Minister of India.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
Which of the above statements are true?

(a) Only 1 & 2       (b) Only 3. (c) Only 1 & 2       (d) All.
40.    Which among the following are known as Inner Planets?
(a) Planets between Sun and Saturn

(b) Planets between Sun and the Earth

(c) Planets without Satellites

(d) Planets between Sun and the belt of Asteroids
41.    Consider the following statements:

1.   Productivity  of  fish  is  more  in west  coast  of  India  than  east coast.
2.   East   coast   plains   are   broader than west coast plains.
3.   Western continental shelf of India is  broader  than  eastern continental shelf.
4.   Barak  river  drains  into  Arabian

Sea.

(a) 1, 2, 4 correct  (b) 2, 3, 4 correct

(c) 1, 2, 3 correct  (d) 1, 3, 4 correct

42.    Consider the following:

1.   Bioaccumulation and Biomagnification are concerned with pollution in trophic level
2.   Bioaccumalation is pollutants entering from Environment to first organism.
3.   Biomagnification is tendency of pollutants to increase from Environment to first organism.
4.   Biomagnification is tendency of

pollutants to increase in
concentration as they move from one trophic level to other.
Choose the correct option

(a) 1, 2 and 3 only (b) 1, 2 and 4 only (c) 1 only
(d) None of the above

43.    Polar fleeing force is related to

(a) Revolution of earth

(b) Rotation of earth

(c) Polar winds

(d) Gravitation

44.    Which  among  the  following   is  the salient feature of Metamorphic rocks? (a) Changeable      (b) Cystalline
(c) Foilation          (d) Compaction

45.    What do you understand by the term

Diastrophism?

(a) The  molecular   stress  caused  by temperature changes and crystallization.
(b) The processes that move, elevate or build up portions of the earth's crust.
(c) The chemical  addition  of minerals to top layer of soil.
(d) None of the above

46.    Consider the following statements:

1.   Upwelling   of   waters   leads   to increase in nutrient supply.
2. Upwelling leads to decrease in temperature  of oceanic waters in the region.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
3.  Low   pressure   develops   on   the surface of ocean where upwelling takes place.
4. Upwelling leads to decrease in salinity in the region.
(a) 1, 3, 4 correct (b) 1, 2, 4 correct (c) 1, 2, 3 correct (d) All the above
47.    Which among  the following  rivers do not drain into the sea?
1.      Machhu

2.      Rupen

3.      Luni

4.      Banas

(a) 1, 3                  (b) 1, 2, 3

(c) 3 only              (d) All the above

48.    Identify the wrong statement:

(a)  The  Himalayan  states  experience two additional seasons' spring and monsoon.
(b) The  north  east  monsoon  is  also known as the winter monsoon.
(c) The    eastern    Himalayan    region extends from Kashmir to Kumaon.
(d) All the above

49.    According to the World Biogeographic classification of India,
Identify the wrong statement?

(a) Represents two of the Major realms palearctic & Indo Malayan.
(b) Represents Four Biomes

(c) Accounts for about 7.5% of the world's animal species known
(d) Both (a) & (c)
50. Arrange the following states in the Increasing Order of their Population Density:
A.   Haryana B.   Odisha C.   Assam
D.   Tamil Nadu

(a) 3, 4, 1, 2         (b) 3, 2, 4, 1 (c) 3, 2, 1, 4          (d) 2, 3, 1, 4
51.    Match the following:

a. Cocos plate       1. Between South

America and Pacific

b. Nazca plate      2. Between central

America & Pacific

c. Arabian Plate   3. Between Asiatic

& Pacific

d. Philippine plate 4. Mostly the

Saudi land Mass

a  b  c  d             a  b  c  d (a) 1, 2, 4, 3         (b) 3, 2, 4, 1 (c) 2, 1, 4, 3          (d) 2, 3, 4, 1
52.    Consider   the   following   statements about our Solar system:
1.   All the planets revolve around the

Sun in elliptical orbits.

2.   Venus  is  the  hottest  planet  on

Earth.

3.   The   only   planet   to   rotate   in clockwise   direction   around   the Sun is Uranus.
Choose   the  correct  answer   using  the codes below.
(a) 1 only              (b) 2 and 3 only

(c) 1 and 2 only    (d) 3 only

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
53.    Consider the following statements:

1.   Red tides are nothing but spring tides during summer season.
2.   Neap   tides   are   formed   during syzygy position.
3.   Guoyt is a flat topped mountains submerged under water.
4.   Tides  recur  at an interval  of 12 hours.
(a) 1, 2 correct        (b) Only 3 correct

(c) Only 4 correct    (d) Only 2 correct

54.    Most important limiting factors of the terrestrial ecosystem are
(a) Moisture and Temperature (b) Temperature and Humidity (c) Temperature and Pressure (d) Pressure and Humidity
55.    The axis of the Earth is inclined to the plane of the elliptic in which it rotates. If its axis were perpendicular  to this plane then
(a) All parts  of the globe  would  have equal days and nights at all times of the year
(b) The   temperature   would   be   the same at all points at a given time on   the   Earth   where   there   is daylight.
(c) Only   the   global   distribution   of temperature  would change a little; and the rest would be the same as it is now.
(d) Seasonal  changes  would  become more diverse and rapid.
56.    Match the following:

1. Coniferous forest     A. Pedozolic and deep

2. Temperate               B. Thin Podozols deciduous forest
3. Tropical rain forest  C. Red lotisols

Choose the correct option:

(a) 1-A, 2-B, 3-C (b) 1-B, 2-C, 3-A (c) 1-B, 2-A, 3-C (d) 1-C, 2-B, 3-A
57.    Ox-Bow lake is formed by

(a)  River Erosion in its youthful stage

(b) Transport action of the river

(c) River Erosion in its matured stage. (d) Deposition  in  the  old  age  of  the
river.

58.    Which of the following affects salinity of oceans?
1. Latitudes               2. Temperature

3. Ocean currents      4. Tides

(a) 1, 2, 4                      (b) 1, 3, 4 (c) 1, 2, 3                       (d) 2, 3, 4
59.    Consider the following statements:

1.   Pycnocline  is  a  layer  where  is sharp change in density in the vertical section of seawater.
2.   Mediterranean    sea    has    high salinity than Atlantic Ocean.
3.   Salinity in Arabian Sea is higher than Bay of Bengal.
4.   High salinity of ocean is found in Equatorial  region  due  to intense evaporation.
(a) 1, 2, 4 correct   (b) 1, 3, 4 correct

(c) 1, 2, 3 correct   (d) All the above

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
60.    Which of the following are mentioned in ancient text Charaka Samhita regarding Environment and ecology?
1.   Classification  of  animals  on  the basis of food and habitat.
2.   Land  in terms  of nature  of soil, climate and vegetation.
3.   Description  of  plants  typical  to various locations.
(a) 1 and 2            (b) 1 and 3 (c) All of the above(d) None
61.    Which   of  the  following   is  not  an

'Ecotone'?

(a) Mangrove forests     (b) Grassland

(c) Estuary             (d) Evergreen forest

62.    Which of the following description are true regarding Taiga Biome?
1.   It is also called as Boreal forest.

2.   It is found in North Europe, Asia, North America.
3.   Coniferous  evergreen  vegetation, lichen and mosses
Choose the correct option

(a) All are true       (b) 1 and 2 are true

(c) 1 and 3 are true (d) None are true

63.    Which  of  the  following  are  levels  of

Organisations in Ecology?

1.   Individual.     2.      Population

3.   Community   4.      Ecotone

Choose the correct option

(a) 1,2 and 3 are correct

(b) All are correct

(c) 1 and 4 are correct

(d) 1, 3 and 4 are correct
64.    Which of the following are functions of ecosystem?
1.   Energy flow

2.   Nutrient cycling

3.   Ecological balance

4.   Ecological development

Choose the correct option from the following
(a) 1, 2 and 3 only  (b) 1, 2 and 4 only

(c) 1 and 2 only      (d) 1 and 4 only

65.    The albedo rate is highest in which of the following surface
(a) Lake                  (b) Ice sheet

(c) Rice field            (d) Wheat field

66.    Consider    the    following    regarding

Tropical seasonal forest:

1.   Occur near Equator

2. Most    diverse    and    rich communities on earth
3.   Annual rainfall more than 200cm throughout year
4.   High rate of leaching and useless for agriculture
Which of the above statements are

True?

(a) 1, 2 and 3 only   (b) All are true

(c) All are false         (d) 1, 2 and 4 only

67.    Consider the following regarding Bio- geo chemical cycles
1. Water cycle, carbon cycle and Nitrogen  cycles  are  gaseous cycles.
2. Phosphorous,    calcium    and magnesium circulate by means of
Sedimentary cycle.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
3. The element involved in the sedimentary cycle normally does not cycle through atmosphere.
4. The Sulphur cycle is mostly sedimentary except H2S and SO2 which add gaseous component.
Choose the True statements:

(a) 1, 2 and 3 only   (b) All are true

(c) 1, 2 and 4 only   (d) 1 and 2 only

68.    Consider the following statements.

The type of natural vegetation in India varies  due to variation in
1.   The amount of rainfall.

2.   Soil types.

3.   Mean annual temperature.

4.   Altitude

Select  the  correct  answer  using  the codes given below:
(a) 1 and 2         (b) 1, 2 and 3 (c) 2, 3 and 4     (d) 1, 3 and 4
69.    Consider the following statements:

1.   The new alluvial soils are known as Khadar.
2.   The old alluvial soils are called as

Bhangar.

3.   Black soil is called as Regur.

4.   Black   soil   has   low   moisture holding       capacity.
Select  the  correct  answer  using  the codes   given below:
(a) 1, 2 and 3     (b) 1, 3 and 4

(c) 2, 3 and 4     (d) 1, 2, 3 and 4

70.    Which   of   the   following   statements regarding  Laterite  soils  of  India  are
correct?
1.   Laterites   are   generally   red   in colour.
2.   Laterites are rich in nitrogen and potash.
3.   These   are   well   developed    in

Rajasthan and UP.

4.   Tapioca  and  cashew  nuts  grow well on this soil.
Select  the  correct  answer  using  the codes   given below
(a) 1, 2 and 3     (b) 2, 3 and 4 (c) 1 and 4         (d) 2 and 3
71.   The most possible explanation of the location of           the   Thar   Desert   in Western India is
(a) The   obstruction   caused   by   the Aravalli to the rain bearing wind that proceeds to the Ganga Valley.
(b) The prevalence  of comparative  high pressure.
(c) The  absence  of  mountains  to  the north of Rajasthan to cause orographic rainfall.
(d) That  the  moisture  carried  by  the South West Monsoon is driven by the dry upper air  current
72.    Which  among  the  following  races  is not correctly matched?
(a) Negro-Sudan

(b) Mongolian- Central Asia (c) Alpine-Northern Africa (d) Australoid-Australia
73.  Consider  the  following  regarding grassland ecosystem:

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
1.   Rainfall is between 25 to 75 cm per year.
2.   Generally tropical climate.

3.   In India  they  are  found  in  high

Himalayas.

Choose the correct statements: (a) All are true      (b) All are false (c) 1 and 2 only    (d) 1 and 3 only
74.   Government of India encourages the cultivation of sea buckthorn. What is the importance of this plant?
1.   It helps in controlling soil erosion and in preventing Desertification
2.   It is a rich source of biodiesel

3.   It  has  nutritional  value  and  is well adapted to live in cold areas of high altitude
4.   Its timber is of great commercial value.
Which  of  the  following  statement given above is/are correct?
(a) Only 1             (b) 2, 3 and 4 (c) 1 and 3            (d) All of these
75.    The correct order of four Geological eras in India is
(a) Purana, Archean, Aryan, Dravidian (b) Archean, Dravidian, Purana, Aryan (c) Archean, Aryan, Dravidian, Purana (d) Archean, Purana, Dravidian, Aryan
76.    Consider the following statements:

1.   Karbi Anglong and Meghalaya  are extensions of Indian peninsular block.
2.   Western      Ghats      are      Block

Mountains.
3.   Malda fault runs parallel to Aravalis

4.   Peninsular   block   is   the   oldest geological     feature of India.
(a) 1, 2 correct       (b) 1, 2, 4 correct

(c) 1, 2, 3 correct  (d) 1, 3, 4 correct

77.    The       spatial       distribution        of

'Temperature'   is   due   to   following factors:
1.   Latitude and Altitude  2.  Winds

3.   Distance from sea/ocean

4.   Ocean currents

Which of the above are responsible for temperature?
(a) 1 and 4            (b) All of the above

(c) 2, 3 and 4 only (d) 1, 2 and 3 only

78.    Consider the following statements:

1.   Bugyals are summer grasslands in higher reaches.
2.   Duns  are  longitudinal  valleys  in

Himalayas.

3.   Karewas are thick deposits of glacial clay   embedded with moraines.
4.   Duars  are  grasslands  in  Eastern

Himalayas.

(a) 1, 4 correct      (b) 1, 2, 4 correct

(c) 1, 2, 3 correct (d) 2, 3, 4 correct

79.   Which one of the following gases is transparent  to incoming  solar radiation and opaque to outgoing terrestrial radiation?
(a) Oxygen            (b) Nitrogen

(c) Helium             (d) Carbondioxide
80.   Koeppen's system of classification of climates can be termed as

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
(a) Applied            (b) Systematic

(c) Genetic            (d) Empirical

81.    The PAT (perform - achieve - trade), as a part   of   the   National   Action   Plan   for Climate Change Mission, is a scheme for (a) Trading energy-efficiency
certificates in large energy- intensive industries
(b) Trading carbon credits between developing economies
(c) Trading GHG credits between

energy intensive industries within a country
(d) None of the above

82.    Fold  mountains  are  formed  due  to large scale movements  in the Earth's surface when stresses are setup in the earth's crust. These stresses that lead to their formation can be induced by which of the following?
1.   Increased load of overlying rocks

2.   Flow movements in the mantle

3.   Magmatic intrusions in the crust Choose  the  correct  answer  using the codes below.
(a) 1 and 2 only    (b) 2 and 3 only

(c) 1 and 3 only    (d) All of the above

83.    Consider   the   following   statements about Loess:
1.   These are blown from deserts and barren surfaces and deposited upon hills and valleys
2.   Areas    covered    by   Loess    are infertile lands.
3.   They   are   responsible   for   the

formation of peneplain.
Choose  the  correct  answer  using the codes below.
(a) 1 and 2 only    (b) 2 and 3 only

(c) 1 and 3 only    (d) All of the above

84.    In  Assam,  West  Bengal  and  Orissa, three crops of .... are grown in a year known  as  "Asu,  Aman  and  Boro". (a) Paddy              (b) Wheat
(c) Pulses              (d) Maize

85.    Seasonal   migration   of   people   with their animals is called
(a) Attritition         (b) Jhumming

(c) Transhumance (d) Migation

86.    Which  among  the  following  requires high temperature, light rainfall, 210 frost-free  days  and  bright  sunshine? (a) Jute   (b) Cotton (c) Tea  (d) Coffee
87.    Consider the following statements:

1.   Delhi    experience    extremes    of climate, one reason is due to lack of moderating influence of sea.
2.   Annual  range  of  temperature  of Delhi is less than         that         of Thiruvananthapuram.
3.  Places in the mountains of high altitudes are cooler due to presence of thin air.
4.   Bangalore   receives   more   rainfall than Mangalore.
(a) 1, 3 correct       (b) 2, 4 correct

(c) 1, 3, 4 correct   (d) 2, 3, 4 correct

88.    Which of the following is/are true?

1.   Areas  of  low  rainfall  experience high variation in rainfall.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
2.   "October heat" is due to retreat of monsoon.
(a) Only 1 true         (b) Only 2 true

(c) Both 1 and 2 true

(d) Neither of them is true

89.    Consider the following statements:

1.   Adding   gypsum   to  soil  reduces salinity of soil.
2.   High evaporation results in salinity of soil.
3.   Capillary action in dry areas results in salinity.
4.   Usara soils are most fertile soils. (a) 1, 2, 4 correct  (b) 1, 2, 3 correct (c) 2, 3, 4 correct  (d) 1, 3, 4 correct
90.    Consider   the   following   statements with reference to the Zoological Survey of India:
1.  It works under the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEFCC).
2.   The ZSI participates in the Indian

Antarctic Program

3.  Similar to the Red Data Book produced by IUCN, ZSI also releases   a  Red  Data  Book  on Indian Animals
Which  of  the  above  statements  are true?
(a) Only 1             (b) Only 1 & 2 (c) Only 1 & 3       (d) All
91.    Which of the following groups of rivers have their source of origin in Tibet?
(a) Chenab, Ravi and Sutlej

(b) Brahmaputra, Ganges and Sutlej
(c) Ganges, Sutlej and Yamuna

(d) Brahmaputra, Indus and Sutlej

92.    The Bijlee Utpadan's thermal unit has been set up by BHEL in
(a) Bengal             (b) Uttar Pradesh

(c) Odisha             (d) Bihar

93.    Which  of the following  are true  with respect to the Indian Peninsular Plateau?
1.   The  southern   plateau  block  is formed mainly of granite and gneiss.
2.  The Deccan lava plateau is an elevated tableland consisting of horizontally arranged lava sheets.
3.   The Malwa plateau dominates the Vindhyan scraps, forming the northern flank of the plateau.
4.   The trough  of the Narmada  and Tapti are interposed between the Vindhyan  and  the  Satpura ranges.
(a) 1, 2 and 4        (b) 1, 2 and 3

(c) 1 and 2            (d) All the above

94. Which of the following factors are responsible  for India's failure to fully exploit the inland fisheries during the last five decades?
1.   Silting and pollution of the inland water bodies
2.   Deforestation   in  the  catchment areas of the rivers
3.   Lack of marketing facilities
Select the correct answer from the codes given below

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
(a) 2 and 3            (b) 1, 2 and 3 (c) 1, 2                  (d) 1, 3
95.  Which of the following plants have nitrogen-fixing capacity?
(a) Rice and wheat

(b) Maize and sugarcane

(c) Jute and rice

(d) Gram and other pulses

96.    Consider the following statements:

1. The Oceans in the northern hemisphere  have  more temperature  than  their counterpart in the southern hemisphere.
2.  The  Atlantic  Ocean  records relatively     higher  annual  range of temperature than  the     Pacific Ocean.
3.   The    eastern    margins    of   the oceans   in   the   middle   latitude have   relatively   higher temperature than the western margins of  the ocean.
Which above statement in is/are true? (a) 1 and 2         (b) 2 and 3
(c) Only 1           (d) All the above.

97. The  Trans-Anatolian  Natural  Gas Pipeline (TANAP) starts from which country?
(a) Russia             (b) Turkey

(c) Azerbaijan        (d) Georgia.
98.    Which   of   the   following   statements relating to earthquakes is/are correct?
1. The  point  of  origin  of  an earthquake  is  called  the epicenter.
2.   The lines joining the places which were  affected  by  earthquake  at the same point of time are called homoseismal lines.
Select the correct answer using the code given below.
(a) 1 only              (b) 2 only

(c) Both 1 and 2   (d) Neither 1 nor 2

99.    Arrange the following Industrial areas from West to East.
1.   Jaipur-Ajmer

2.   Durg-Raipur

3.   Bhojpur-Munjer

4.   Bhilaspur-Korba

(a) 3, 2, 4, 1         (b) 3, 4, 2, 1 (c) 2, 3, 4, 1          (d) 4, 3, 2, 1
100.  Consider the following statements:

1. Distance between two latitudes remains same throughout the globe and is 111 km approximately.
2.  Distance between two longitudes remain same.
3.   Distance   between   longitudes   at equator is almost        equal         to distance between latitudes.
4.   Latitudes converge at poles.

(a) 1, 3 correct      (b) 1, 2, 3 correct

(c) 1, 2, 4 correct

(d) All the above are correctw w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
