

1.     Ans: C
Exp: The  Nullarbor  Plain  is  in southern Australia, its located on the Great Australian  Bight coast with the Great Victoria Desert to its north. It is the world's largest single exposure of limestone bedrock, and occupies an area of about 2 Lakh square kilometers
2.     Ans: C
Exp: To be declared as a biodiversity hotspot a species should  be endemic  i.e. found  in particular area only, threat perception  based on habitat loss is taken into consideration.
3.     Ans: B
Exp : Nagoya protocol on access to gentic resources and equitable sharing of benefits, Cartagena about movement  of LMOs, while Aichi is strategic plan for Biodiversity protection
4.     Ans: B
Exp:  Ecological  pyramids  of energy are always upright while numbers and biomass are sometimes inverted.
5.     Ans: C
Exp: Rate of conversion is productivity not amount of conversion,  energy  assimilated by autotrophs not herbivores is GPP, amount lost in respiration is not excretion
6.     Ans: D
Exp:  dams  will  fragment  rivers and lead to their physical transformation, storing leads to water logging and salination of areas,   rotting   of  vegetation   in these water logged areas leads to emission of GHGs
7.     Ans: C
8.     Ans: D
Exp: the basic idea of JFM is that involving  local  communities  will

help in protection more so if local communities realise economic benefits from conservation.
9.     Ans: A
Exp: Ecosystem has two essential components  one  is  biome consisting   of   living   organisms other  the  physical  environment i.e. Habitat..  While energy is the third component connecting both of them.
10.   Ans: D
Exp: Forests  protect  water  shed from flash floods, it regulates atmosphere  by regulating  oxygen and carbon  dioxide,  act as land bank  by  maintaining   soil nutrients, produces minor and major forest produce.
11.   Ans: A
Exp: The Spiti Valley is a desert mountain  valley  located  high  in the Himalaya mountains in the north-eastern  part  of the  Indian state of Himachal Pradesh. The name "Spiti"  means  "The Middle Land", i.e. the land between Tibet and India.
12.   Ans: A
13.   Ans: A
Exp: Surface   waves   have   the highest amplitudes and longest duration.  For  those  areas,  they will therefore cause the most damage.
14.   Ans: C
Exp: Hamada, a rocky desert, or desert   region,   which   does  not have surficial materials and which consists  mainly  of boulders  and exposed bedrock. Two basic types occur: stony hamada, jaggedly developed   across   crystalline rocks; and pebbly hamada, cut across sedimentary  material  and mantled with bedrock fragments.
15.   Ans: C

Exp: Badlands are a type of dry terrain   where   softer sedimentary rocks and clay-rich soils  have  been  extensively eroded by wind and water. They are  characterized  by  steep slopes, minimal vegetation, lack of  a  substantial  regolith,  and high drainage density.
16.   Ans: C
Exp:   Energetic   electrically charged  particles  (mostly electrons) accelerate along the magnetic  field  lines  into atmosphere (earth), where they collide  with  gas  atoms,  causing the atoms to give off light.
17.   Ans: B
Exp:  Generally, within the lower atmosphere   the   air   near   the surface   of  the Earth is  warmer than the air above it, largely because the atmosphere is heated from     below     as solar radiation warms the Earth's surface, which in turn then warms the layer of the atmosphere  directly above it. It generally occurs in low relative humidity   regions   on  mountain tops. A ground inversion develops when air is cooled by contact with a colder surface until it becomes cooler than the overlying atmosphere;   this   occurs   most often  on clear  nights,  when  the ground cools off rapidly by radiation.
18.   Ans: B
Exp: Denudation is the long-term sum of processes that cause the wearing   away   of   the   earth's surface leading to a reduction in elevation  and relief  of landforms and landscapes. Endogenous processes such as volcanoes, earthquakes,  and plate tectonics
uplift   and   expose   continental

crust  to  the  exogenous denudation processes of weathering, erosion, and mass wasting.
19.   Ans: D Exp:
A Monadnock  or Inselberg is    an isolated rock hill, knob, ridge, or small mountain that             rises abruptly from a gently sloping or virtually level surrounding plain.
20.   Ans: C
21.   Ans: D
22.   Ans: A
23.   Ans: B
24.   Ans: D
25.   Ans: B
26.   Ans: D
Exp: Biosphere reserve fulfills conservative, economic, development functions. Logistic Function involves international networking  for research,  training and education.
27.      Ans: D
28.      Ans: C
29.      Ans: D
Exp: Silicosis, a chronic disease of the lungs  that is caused  by the inhalation of silica dust over long periods of time. Silica is the chief mineral  constituent  of sand and of many kinds of rock. Whereas the other problems are caused by various oxides of Nitrogen.
30.   Ans: B
Exp: RH is the ratio  of amount water holding of air to the amount which  it  can  hold.  Decrease  in temp decrease amount it can hold thus, increases RH.
31.   Ans: C
32.   Ans: C
Exp:         Harmattan          wind (the doctor)- A dry, dusty, north- easterly  or  easterly  wind which occurs in West Africa north of the equator.  Its  effect  extends  from just north of the equator in January,  almost to the northern tropic in July
33.   Ans: C
34.   Ans: C
35.   Ans: D
36.   Ans: D
37.   Ans: A
Exp: Shifting cultivation is not a soil  conservation  method; moreover it degrades the soils due to deforestation. Terracing is another method of reducing or preventing  soil  erosion  on mountain slopes. Tilling the field at right angles to the slope called counter ploughing.
38.   Ans: C
Exp:  The Ninety East Ridge is an
5500 km long, north-south- oriented,     submarine     volcanic ridge in the eastern Indian Ocean that formed from magmatism associated with the deep seated Kerguelen mantle plume as the Indian plate drifted rapidly northward during the Late Cretaceous.
39.   Ans: C
Exp: The National Biodiversity Authority (NBA) is a statutory autonomous body under the Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India established in 2003 to implement the provisions under the National Biological   Diversity   Act,   2002, after India signed Convention  on Biological    Diversity    (CBD)    in
1992.)
40.   Ans: D
41.   Ans: C
42.   Ans: B
43.   Ans: B
44.   Ans: C
Exp: Foilation is the process of arrangement of minerals or grains in  lines  and  layers  of metamorphic rocks.
45.   Ans: B
46.   Ans: B
47.   Ans: D
48.   Ans: C
Exp:   The   western   Himalayan region extends from Kashmir to Kumaon.
49.   Ans: B
Exp: India represents  only three biomes  tropical  humid,  tropical dry and warm desert
50.   Ans: D
51.   Ans: C
52.   Ans: C
Exp:  Both  Uranus  and  Venus rotate in clockwise direction.
53.   Ans: B
54.   Ans: A
55.   Ans: A
56.   Ans: C
57.   Ans: C
Exp: An oxbow lake forms when a river  creates  a meander,  due  to the river's eroding the bank through   hydraulic    action, abrasion and erosion. After a long period of time, the meander becomes very curved, and eventually  the  neck  of  the meander  becomes  narrower  and the  river cuts  through  the  neck during a flood, cutting off the meander  and forming  an oxbow lake.
58.   Ans: C
59.   Ans: C
60.   Ans: C
Exp: All of the above mentioned in Charaka Samhita.
61.   Ans: D
Exp: Evergreen  forest  is  not  an ecotone. Ecotone is juncture between two or more ecosystems.
62.   Ans: B
Exp: Taiga biome consists of coniferous evergreen vegetation. Lichen and mosses belong to Tundra Biome.
63.   Ans: A
Exp: The levels of Organisation in ecology are 6 and they are Individual, Population, Community,   Ecosystem,   Biome and  Biosphere.  Ecotone  and Niche come under ecosystem and they are not levels of Ecology directly.
64.   Ans: B
65.   Ans: B
66.   Ans: B
67.   Ans: B
68.   Ans: D
69.   Ans: A
70.   Ans: C
71.   Ans: B
72.   Ans: C
73.   Ans: D
Exp:   Grasslands  generally  have
Temperate climate.
74.   Ans: C

75.   Ans: D
76.   Ans: B
77.   Ans: B
78.   Ans: B
79.   Ans: D
80.   Ans: D
Exp: The Köppen Climate Classification  System  is  a empirical system based on observable  features.  Other systems are either "genetic" classification  systems  (based  on the  causes  of  the  climate  like solar radiation, air masses, pressure  systems,  etc.)  or "applied" classification systems created for, or as an outgrowth of, a particular climate-associated problem. (e.g., Thornthwaite classification system based on potential evapotranspiration.)
81.   Ans: A
Exp: The PAT (perform - achieve - trade) is a scheme for trading energy-efficiency  certificates  in large energy-intensive industries under the National Mission for Enhanced Energy Efficiency.
82.   Ans: D
83.   Ans: C
Exp: Loess is a geologically recent deposit of silt or material which is usually   yellowish   or  brown   in color   and   consisting    of   tiny mineral particles brought by wind to the places where they now lie. It is a product of past glacial activity in an area. It is a sedimentary deposit of mineral particles   which   are  finer  than sand  but  coarser  than  dust  or clay, deposited by the wind. Loess is a type of silt which forms fertile topsoil in some parts of the world)
84.   Ans: A
85.   Ans: C
86.   Ans: B
Exp: Ideal   conditions    for   the cotton plant  are Long vegetation periods (175 to 225 days) without frost, Constant temperatures between   18   and   30°. ,   Ample sunshine  and  fairly  dry conditions.
87.   Ans: A
88.   Ans: C
89.   Ans: B
90.   Ans: D
91.   Ans: D
92.   Ans: D

Exp: BHEL has commissioned Bijlee  Utpadan's  thermal  unit in Bihar.  This  is the first 195 MW unit to be commissioned by Bhel at the Muzaffarpur thermal power station which is a joint venture of NTPC and Bihar State Power Generation
93.   Ans: D
94.   Ans: D
95.   Ans: D
96.   Ans: D
97.   Ans: C
Exp: The             Trans-Anatolian Natural Gas Pipeline (TANAP) is a natural  gas  pipeline  from Azerbaijan through Georgia and Turkey to Europe. The project will allow first Azerbaijan gas exports to Europe, beyond Turkey. Construction  of  the  pipeline began  formally  in  March  2015 and is expected  to be completed in 2018
98.   Ans: B
Exp: The point of origin is called
Focus.
99.   Ans: B
100. Ans: A

