

1.      They  are  fantastically  diverse.  They speak hundreds of languages and dialects.   They   comprise   scores   of ethnic groups. They include highly industrialized economics and up-and- coming economies. They span half the surface of the earth and are home to two-fifths  of  the  world's  population'. The group of countries referred to here belongs to:
(a) SAPTA             (b) APEC (c) ARF                 (d) CIS
2.      Agricultural income tax is assigned to the State Government by
(a) The Finance Commission

(b) The National Development Council

(c) The Inter-state Council

(d) The Constitution of India

3.      Most Favoured Nations (MFN) clause under WTO implies,
(a) Most favour to some countries

(b) Most favour to all countries

(c) No favour to any country

(d) No favour to some countries

4.      Which   of  the  following   is  not  an indicator in measuring Social Progress Index?
(a) Health and wellness

(b) Nutrition
(c) Personal safety

(d) None of the above

5.      "Amrut   Mahotsav",   part   of   budget speech of FM, refers to
(a) Celebration  for  success  of  white revolution,  since  India  is the world's largest Milk producer
(b) Celebration on the eve of 75th  year of Independence in 2022
(c) Successful  cleaning  of  Himalayan rivers
(d) Launch of Rainbow revolution

6.      Allocations  for which of the following schemes are part of plan revenue expenditure
1.   MGNREGA

2.   NFSA (National Food Security Act)

3.   Sarva Siksha Abhiyan

4.   NRHM

(a) 1, 3                  (b) 1, 2, 4

(c) 1, 3, 4           (d) All the above

7.      Consider the  following statements with     respect to GAAR:
1.   Purpose   is    to    check   tax evasion
2.   Prevents misuse of DTAA
3.   Parthasarathy   Shome  panel was  set  up,  in 2012  to review the guide  lines  for GAAR

(a) 1, 2 correct (b) 2, 3 correct

(c) 1, 3 correct (d) All the above

8.      As per agreement on Monetary policy frame  work  between  GOI  and  RBI which of the following are true?
1.   Once  in  every  six  months,  RBI should publish document related to forecasts of inflation for the period between 6 to 18 months
2.   RBI   has   to   surrender   certain powers to GOI as part of inflation targeting
3.  CPI-C inflation is considered for inflation targeting by RBI
4.   The aim is to bring inflation below

6%

(a) 1, 2, 4              (b) 1, 3, 4

(c) 1, 2, 3              (d) All the above

9.      Which  of the following  are true  with respect to the GIFT city?
1. International Financial services centre is going to be part of it
2.   IFSC facilitates Indian companies to raise foreign funds in India, without going overseas
3.   GIFT  city  is  a  multi   specialty

Special Economic Zone

4. It is a joint venture between Government of India and state government of Gujarat
(a) 1, 2, 4              (b) 1, 2, 3

(c) 2, 3, 4              (d) All the above

10.    Consider the following statements:
1. FSLRC   was   set   up   to comprehensively      review      and
redraw the legislations  governing

India's financial system

2.   FSLRC recommended Independent debt management agency
3.   It drafted Indian Financial code.

4. Narasimhan  – I Committee recommended to come up with Monetary   policy   review   frame work agreement between GOI and RBI
(a) 1, 2, 4 correct  (b) 2, 3, 4 correct

(c) 1, 2, 3 correct  (d) All the above

11.    According to GOI disinvestment policy, the term strategic sale of PSU means (a) Majority stake issued to strategic
sectors like Defence

(b) Sale of share of Defence PSUs

(c) Sale of stake along with management
(d) Majority stake issued to PSUs

12.    With reference to TRIPS agreement of WTO, consider the following provisions provided for developing countries:
1.  Parallel imports is a provision provided   for   these   nations   to import drugs at a cheaper rate in certain situations
2. Compulsory licensing allows a government  to  temporarily override a patent, to produce generics when faced with a public health problem

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
3.   Only   product   patent   can   be issued to food, drugs, chemicals, for a period of 20 years
4.   India ratified TRIPS agreement Which of the above provisions are true?
(a) 1, 2                  (b) 2, 3, 4

(c) 1, 2, 3              (d) All the above

13.    Consider the following statements:

1.   Disinflation  is  a  phenomena  of fall in price level
2.   Reflation is to counter deflation

3.   Core   inflation   is   nothing   but inflation excluding inflation in services
4.  Stagflation is an inflation in a stagnated economy
(a) 1, 3, 4 correct  (b) 2, 4 correct

(c) 1, 3 correct      (d) 1, 4 correct

14.    Consider the following taxes

1.   Sales tax

2.    Value-added tax

3.   Property tax

Which of the taxes given above is/are

Advalorem tax/taxes?

(a) 1 and 2         (b) 1 and 3

(c) 2 and 3         (d) All of these

15.    'Other liabilities' of the Central Government of   India include out- standings against which one of the following?
(a) Small saving schemes

(b) Securities    issued    to    Industrial

Development  Bank  of  India,  Unit
Trust   of   India   and   nationalized banks
(c) Deposits under the special deposit schemes
(d) All of the above

16.    With   respect   to   the   latest   budget which of the following statements are correct
1. Pradhanmantri  Gram  Sinchai Yajana to promote rural development    through development of cottage industries
2.   Parampraghat Krishi vikas yojana is to promote organic cultivation
3.   MUDRA is to promote lending for agriculture.
4.   JAM  trinity,   to  promote   direct benefit transfer
(a) 1, 3, 4              (b) 2, 3, 4

(c) 2, 4                  (d) All the above

17.    Consider the following statements:

1.   Liquidity trap is a situation where any decrease in the repo rates will not affect liquidity situation in the market
2.   Crowding out means government taking the money from market leaving less space for the private institutions
3.   Sweat shares are those shares given to the existing share holders in substitute for profit.
4.   Initial public offer and follow up public offer both include new
shares

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
(a) Only 4 is false    (b) Only 2 is false

(c) Only 3 is false    (d) All are true

18.   Consider the following statements:

1.   High   fiscal   deficit might lead to  crowding out  effect   in  the economy
2.   WMAs       replaced       Adhoc treasury bills  since  1997
3.   High      fiscal      deficit    might dampen savings
4.   The      debt      of     government includes outstandings against provident funds
(a) 1, 2, 3 correct (b) 2, 3, 4 correct (c) 1, 2, 4 correct
(d) All the above are correct

19.   Consider the following statements:

1. Fringe benefits are usually enjoyed collectively by the employees
2.   Pump priming is  nothing but deficit  financing     and spending by government
3.   Effective   revenue   deficit  is less than  revenue deficit
4.   Money   printed   by    RBI    is called high  powered money
(a) 1, 2, 3 correct (b) 2, 3, 4 correct (c) 1, 3, 4 correct
(d) All the above are correct

20.    Consider the following statements:

1.   Foreign     Currency     Convertible

Bonds  are  issued  in  currencies
different     from     the     issuing company's domestic currency.
2.   Foreign     Currency     Convertible Bonds   are   quasi-debt instruments  and tradable on the primary capital market.
Which of the statements given above is/are  correct?
(a) Only 1           (b) Only 2

(c) Both 1 and 2 (d) Neither 1 nor 2

21.   Consider the following statements:

1.   Tax     expenditure    refers   to revenue foregone  as  a  result of    exemptions   and concessions
2.   Tax  Buoyancy is a measure of revenue growth in response to growth in GDP
3.  Central Sales  Tax is levied, collected and  appropriated by central government
4.  Direct Taxes help in income redistribution
(a) 1, 2, 4 correct (b) 2, 3, 4 correct (c) 1, 3, 4 correct (d) All the above
22.    Consider the following components of the   PURA model of economic development
1. Facilitate road connectivity in villages.
2.   Enhancement    of   electricity   in rural areas

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
3.   Establishment   of  cyber  café  in villages
4.   Construction  of hospital in rural areas.
Which of the components given above is/are the      major      connectivity formulated by the PURA model?
(a) 1 and 4

(b) 1, 2 and 4 (c) 1, 2 and 3
(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4

23.    Match the following

List-I                  List-II

A. ISO 9001         1. Quality Management Systems Certification
B. ISO 14001       2. Environmental Management Systems Certification
C. ISO 18001       3. Occupational
(c)  5      4      3      1       2 (d)  3      2      4      5       1
24.    Consider the  following statements with     respect to GST
1.   Reduces cascading effect

2.   Is   a   comprehensive  indirect tax
3.  Aimed at forging a common domestic market
4. Alcohol and petroleum are exempted from  GST
(a) 1, 2, 3 correct

(b) 2, 3 correct

(c) 2, 3, 4 correct

(d) All the above

25.    Which of the following are correct with respect to new method of calculating GDP?
1.   It is based on income method
2.   Growth     rate     will     now     be measured by GDP at constant market prices
Health and

Management

3.   GDP  =
 GVA

at  basic  price  +

Systems

Certification

D. ISO 22000       4. Food Safety

Management

E. ISO 15700       5. Service Quality Management Systems Certification
A      B     C     D      E
(a) 1       2      3      4       5 (b) 2       1      4      5       3
product taxes – product subsidies

4.   Stamp   duty  is  an  example   of product tax
(a) 1, 3, 4              (b) 2, 3

(c) 2, 3, 4              (d) All the above

26.    Consider the following statements:

1.   MAT is a tax imposed on the book profits of a zero tax company
2.   The finance Minister in his 2015 budget   levied   MAT   on   capital gains made by FII

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
3.   MAT is also levied on individuals who avail certain tax exemptions
4.   MAT   is   levied   on   companies located in SEZs
(a) 1, 3 correct      (b) 2, 4 correct

(c) 1, 4 correct      (d) 2, 3 correct

27.    Consider the following statements:

1.   Payment bank cannot issue credit cards
2.   There  is  a  limit  on  maximum balance of individual customer in payment bank
3.   SLR   requirements   for  payment banks  and  small  banks  is  less than commercial banks
4.   Priority sector lending up to 40% is mandatory for both private banks and small banks
(a) 1, 2, 4 correct  (b) 3, 4 correct

(c) 1, 2 correct      (d) 1, 3, 4 correct

28.    Which of the following is not a public sector undertaking?
(a) Bharat Earth Movers Limited

(b)   Educational   Consultants   India

Limited

(c) Balmer Lawrie & Co Ltd

(d) None of the above

29.    The   RBI   is   bound   to   maintain   a reserve   against  the  issue  whatever may be the amount. The system is called as
(a) Proportional Reserve System (b) Gold Deposit Reserve system (c) Minimum Reserve system
(d) Simple Deposit system
30.  Consider the following statements:

1. Treaty shopping and round tripping are practiced by companies as part of tax planning
2.   DTAA  will   help   in  attracting more  investments
3.   India   has  a  DTAA with  more than  80 countries
4.   India  has  a negative list  with respect  to   service  tax   from
2012

(a) 2, 3, 4 correct (b) 1, 2, 3 correct (c) 1, 3, 4 correct (d) All the above
31.  Consider the following statements:

1.   Inflation targeting focuses on achieving  price   stability through monetary policy
2. WPI  does  consider various services   for    calculating inflation
3.   The    newly   introduced  CPI (Rural) and CPI (Urban) are announced by         ministry of Rural  development
4.   Inflation discourages exports

(a) 1, 2, 3 correct (b) 1, 3, 4 correct (c) 1, 2, 4 correct (d) All the above
32.    Arrange the following in the increasing order   of their validity periods
1.   Notice money

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
2.   Call money

3.   Treasury Bills

4.   Dated securities

(a) 1→2→4→3    (b) 2→1→3→4 (c) 1→2→3→4    (d) 2→1→4→3
33.    The  growth  rate  of  the  Per  Capita Income at the current price is higher than   the   Per   Capita    Income   at constant prices, because the former takes into account the rate of
(a) Increase in price level

(b) Population growth

(c) Growth in money supply

(d) Increase in wage rate

34.    Consider the following statements regarding           Gold-Exchange Traded Funds (G-ETF)
1.   G-ETF acts as a substitute for physical gold
2.   G-ETF will reduce current account deficit
3.   Security Transaction Tax is not levied on G-ETF
4.   G-ETF can be traded on National

Spot exchange limited

(a) All are false

(b) Only 4 is false (c) Only 3 is false (d) All are true
35.  Consider the following statements:

1.   There is no Universal Banking practice in India
2.   Universal  Banking  leads    to

loss  in specialization
3.   NBFCs   are    also    called   as

Shadow banks

(a) 1, 2 correct (b) 2, 3 correct

(c) 1, 3 correct (d) All the above

36.    Redistribution    policies    geared    to reduce economic inequalities include (a) Rural development schemes
(b) Land reforms

(c) Progressive tax policies

(d) All the above

37.    Which  of  the  following  instruments used   by   private   markets   to   raise capital abroad?
1.      American Depository Receipts

2.      Global Depository Receipts

3.      Indian Depository Receipts

4.      Euro issues

(a) 1, 2                  (b) 1, 2, 4

(c) 1, 2, 3              (d) All the above

38.    With reference  to India, consider  the following
1.  Lead Bank scheme

2.  No frill accounts

3.  Differential     Rate    of    Interest scheme
4.  Teaser loans

Which of the above can be considered as steps taken to achieve "financial inclusion" in India?
(a) 1, 3, 4              (b) 2, 3, 4

(c) 3, 4                   (d) All the above

39.  Consider the following statements:
1.   Secondary    market    is     the financial market for trading of

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
securities that         have    been issued in an IPO/FPO
2.   Futures and  options are  two classes of derivatives
3.   Repurchase of  stock  that  has been  issued is known as buyback of shares
(a) 1, 3 correct (b) 2, 3 correct

(c) 1, 2 correct (d) All the above

40.  Consider the following statements:

1.   Bullion is  also  traded as  part of commodity futures in commodity exchanges
2. Commodity exchanges are regulated by  forward markets commission
3. Currency futures trading is allowed in India
4.   Currency  futures  are   traded in commodity exchanges
(a) 1, 2, 4 correct (b) 1, 2, 3 correct (c) 2, 3, 4 correct
(d) 1, 2, 3, 4 correct

41.    Decrease  in   cash    reserve  ratio might lead  to
1.   Increase in credit creation

2.   Decrease in M3
42.  Consider the following statements:

1.   The  proposed AIIB  is different from  BRICS bank
2. Contingency             Reserve Arrangement between BRICS nations  is   to   forestall  short term Balance of payment pressures
3.   Only   BRICS  nations  can   be part     of    New     Development bank
4.   The     former    chairman    of HDFC  is   appointed  as president of New  Development Bank
(a) 1, 2 correct

(b) 1, 2, 4 correct (c) 1, 3, 4 correct (d) All the above
43.  Consider the following statements:

1.   Amber box  subsidies include those   that  impact on  market prices
2.   As of now  there  is no limit  on

Blue  Box  subsidies
3.  Only   product  patent  can   be issued for  pharmaceuticals in India

3.   Increase in

M 3 
M 0
4.   GI  can  be  granted to  a single person

4.   Increase in interest rate

(a) 1, 2, 3         (b) 2, 3, 4 (c) 1, 3              (d) 1, 2, 4
(a) 1, 2, 3 correct (b) 2, 3, 4 correct (c) 1, 3, 4 correct (d) All the above

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
44.  Consider the following statements:

1.   Ponzi    scheme  has    become very   famous  recently  due   to its      healthy    returns    and ethical investments
2.   IDRs    are    issued   by    Non- Indian companies to Indian Investors
3.   Shariah Index  was  introduced by   BSE    to   attract  Shariah funds from  Arab  countries
4.   India    has   power  exchanges for electricity market.
(a) 1, 2, 3 correct (b) 2, 3, 4 correct (c) 1, 3, 4 correct (d) All the above
45.    What is Levy-Sugar?

(a) The portion of sugar production of the country meant for export
(b) The sugar which is imported by the Government and allotted to Public Distribution System at a cost lower than that incurred by the Government
(c) The  portion  of  sugar  production that the Government takes away from sugar mills at lower than market  rates  for  supplying  to the Public Distribution System
(d) The  portion  of  sugar  production that the State Governments supply to  the  Union  Government  at  less
than market rates
46.  Consider the following statements:

1.  Depreciation of rupee boosts imports
2. J    curve     effect     shows depreciation in  short  run  can worsen the  overall balance of payments
3.   REER is an  inflation adjusted exchange rate
4.    Interest   rates    in    domestic market effect  exchange rates
(a) 1, 2, 4 correct (b) 2, 3, 4 correct (c) 1, 3, 4 correct (d) 2, 3 correct
47.  Consider the following statements:

1.  Insider trading is a healthy practice  of   stock    trade    in India
2.   Nikkei  is  a  market  Index   of

South       Korea

3.   Price  per  share   multiplied by total  number of  shares is  the market capitalization of a company
4.   Optionally convertible debentures are allowed in India
(a) Only  1 true

(b) Only  1, 2 true

(c) Only  3 true

(d) Only  3, 4 true

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
48.    Consider the following statements:

1.   Pigovian tax is a tax on all spot conversions of one currency into another
2.   Tobin tax is a tax on negative externalities
3.   Withholding tax is a tax levied on holding companies
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 1, 2             (b) 2, 3

(c) 1, 3             (d) None of the above

49.    Consider the following statements:

1.   Current     account     deficit     is financed  by  capital  account surplus
2.   Increase    in    current    account deficit might lead to inflation
3.   Trade  deficit  is a part of capital account
4.   An increasing trade deficit may be a symptom of long term deindustrialization
(a) 2, 3, 4 correct (b) 1, 3, 4 correct (c) 1, 2, 4 correct (d) 1, 2, 3 correct
50.    Sales from Domestic Tariff Area(DTA) to SEZs are to be treated as which among the following?
(a) Imports  (b) Domestic sales

(c) Exports  (d) Domestic procurement

51.    Select   the   correct   situation   which defines 'welfare trap?
(a) When  population  in  an  economy continues to remain poor even after increase in nominal income
(b) When rise in the incomes of poor is neutralized by inflation.
(c) When    unemployment    increases along with inflation.
(d) When people getting unemployment allowance does not want to work anymore
52. Zero Based Budgeting (ZBB) lays emphasis on:
1.   Unlimited deficit financing.

2.   New    budget    right    from    the scratch.
3.    The     budget     neglecting     the expenditure.
Choose the correct code: (a) 1, 2 and 3     (b) 2 and 3 (c) Only 2           (d) Only 3
53.   The price at which the Government purchases food grains for maintaining the public distribution system and for building  up buffer stocks  are known as
(a) Minimum Support Prices

(b) Procurement Prices

(c) Issue Prices

(d) Ceiling Prices

54.    Which one of the following is emerged as a major instrument of Monetary Policy in the Indian Economy?
(a) Liquidity Adjustment Facility

(b) Commercial Papers

(c) Treasury Bills

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
(d) None of the above

55. Which one among the following Agricultural  Sectors is covered under the Market Intervention Scheme (MIS) of the Indian Government?
(a) Forestry        (b) Irrigation

(c) Horticulture   (d)Animal Husbandry

56.    World Investment Report is published by which of the following?
(a) WEF              (b) WTO

(c) GATT             (d) UNCTAD

57.    Duty  Drawback  Scheme  is a normal export incentive given by all the economies and is allowed by the World Trade Organisation too. What is the rationale behind it?
(a) As different economies specialise in different products, this equalises their   differential   effects   on   the world trade.
(b) Indirect   taxes   of  the   economies should not be allowed to get exported.
(c) As exporters earn precious foreign exchange for their economies.
(d) This  is  a  declared   bias  in  the provisions of the WTO and was among the reasons why the Doha Round of its talk stuck.
58.    Which one of the following statements related to 'Sovereign  Wealth Fund' is correct?
(a) This   proposed   fund   would   help
Indians  facing  adverse  conditions in an alien country.
(b) This    fund    would    help    Indian lobbyists abroad to seek India's political and economic interests in their respective countries.
(c) This   additional   fund   would   be granted to the Indian forces to meet any exigencies arising out of intrusion in the Indian Territory.
(d) This fund would help India's state run companies  pursue acquisition of oil, gas, coal, LNG and other raw material in other countries.
59.    The natural rate of unemployment is the sum of?
(a) Frictional unemployment and

Structural unemployment

(b) Frictional unemployment and

Cyclical unemployment

(c) Structural unemployment and

Cyclical unemployment

(d) Structural unemployment and

Seasonal unemployment

60.    The Laffer curve shows the relationship between?
(a) Per capita income and environmental pollution
(b) Rate of unemployment and rate of inflation
(c) Tax rate and tax revenue

(d) Economic growth and income inequality
61.    Big-mac index is based on? (a) Official exchange rate
(b) Real effective exchange rate

(c) Nominal effective exchange rate

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
(d) Purchasing power parity exchange rate
62.    Which of the following regarding Financial stability and development council is/are true?
1.   Headed by Finance Minister

2.   A high-level body set up to strengthen and institutionalize the mechanism for maintaining
financial stability, financial sector development.
3.   Takes care of inter-regulatory co- ordination i.e., co-ordination among IRDA, SEBI & PFRDA
(a) 1, 3                  (b) 2, 3

(c) 1, 2                  (d) All the above

63.    Which of the following regarding WTO

is/are true?

1.   Supports Regional Trade

Agreements

2.   The decisions of Dispute settlement body are legally binding
3.   NAMA11 is a group of developing countries fighting against developed countries
(a) 1, 2 (b) 1, 3 (c) 2, 3
(d) All the above

64.    Which of the following is not a reason for cost push inflation?
(a) The existence of a large parallel economy
(b) Excessive indirect taxation
(c) Fluctuations in agricultural and industrial output
(d) Increase in salaries to employees

65.    Which of the following is/are correct regarding banking in India?
1. Capital  Adequacy  Ratio  is determined by RBI
2.   RBI  determines  the  savings  rate of Interest
3.   RBI imposes fine at bank rate on banks if they do not maintain reserve requirements as specified by RBI
(a) Only 1                  (b) Only 2 (c) Only 3                  (d) 2, 3
66.    Which of the following is/are correct?

1. Dedicated     freight    corridor corporation  of India  limited  is a special purpose vehicle under Minister of Railways
2.   Western dedicated freight corridor is supported by JETRO
3.   Eastern dedicated freight corridor is supported by World Bank
4.   Eastern   corridor   extends   from

Ludhiana to Dankuni

(a) 1, 3                  (b) 2, 4

(c) 2, 3                  (d) All the above

67.    Which of the following is considered as an example of dirty subsidy?
(a) Subsidy on Fertilizers

(b) Subsidy on Food (c) Subsidy on Diesel (d) Subsidy on Alcohol

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
68.    The  Nehru-Mahalanobis model of development believes in
(a) Trickle down approach (b) Decentralised approach (c) Capitalistic approach
(d) Socialistic approach

69.    Which of the following are true regarding CACP?
1.   It is a statutory body

2.   It's recommendations are binding

3.   It   is   under   the   ministry   of

Agriculture

4.   It    revises    MSP    before    every agriculture season
(a) 1, 2 are correct

(b) 3, 4 are correct

(c) 1, 2, 4 are correct

(d) All are correct

70.    Which of the following statements are true with respect to Credit Default Swap?
1.   It    is    an    insurance    against nonpayment of debt
2.   CDS are allowed in India

3.   Naked CDS are insurance against

Gilt edged securities

4.   CDS  are  used  by  companies  to raise money from markets
(a) 1, 2                  (b) 1, 4 (c) 1, 2, 3              (d) 2, 4
71.    Devaluation of currency leads to

(a) Fall in domestic prices

(b) Increase in domestic prices

(c) No impact on domestic prices
(d) Erratic fluctuations in domestic prices
72.    The best solution for overcoming the evil effects of small and uneconomic holdings is
(a) Cooperative farming

(b) Using capital intensive technology

(c) Rapid industrialization

(d) Opt for cash crops instead of food crops
73.    Increase in policy rate leads to

(a) Fall in investments

(b) Increase in borrowings

(c) Fall in price of goods and services

(d) Decrease in savings

74.    Which one of the following is part of

Capital Market in Indian Economy? (a) Gilt edge market
(b) Stock Exchange

(c) Mutual funds

(d) Call money market

75.    Consider the following statements:

1. Recapitalization             involves providing   the   bank   with   new capital by government
2.   Recapitalization by GOI is mostly to   ensure   banks   meet   Basel norms
3.   Purchase  of shares of a bank is part of Recapitalization of banks
(a) 1, 2 correct (b) 1, 3 correct (c) 2, 3 correct
(d) All the above are correct

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
76.    Small-Scale  Industries  in  India  are supposed to be
1.      Labour intensive

2.      Capital intensive

3.      Labour light

4.      Skill light

Choose    your   answer    from   the following codes,
(a) 1 and 4            (b) 2 and 3

(c) 2 and 4            (d) 1 and 3

77.    Consider the following statements:

1.  The proceeds from IPO goes to company
2.   The  proceeds  from  offer  for sale by GOI goes to Consolidated Fund of India
3.   Offer for sale is a practice of GOI

to disinvest its stake in CPSUs

4.   Underwriting of securities is done by hedge funds
(a) 1, 2, 4 correct (b) 1, 3, 4 correct (c) 1, 2, 3 correct
(d) All the above are correct

78.    Consider the following statements:

1. Public debt is nothing but government  debt  excluding external debt
2.   Public  debt in India  is managed by RBI as per RBI Act of 1934
3.  Increasing public debt leads to inflation
4.   FIIs   are   allowed   to   invest   in

public debt
(a)1, 2, 3 correct (b) 1, 2, 4 correct (c) 2, 3, 4 correct
(d) All the above are correct

79.    Consider the following statements:

1.   As  per  latest  draft  of  GOI  with respect to Gold Monetisation scheme, jewellery can also be deposited in metal account
2.   Interest earned is paid only in the form of currency
3.   Gold monetization  scheme  might lead  to  decrease  in  current account deficit
4.   Sovereign  gold  bonds  are  called as Gilt-edged securities
(a) 1, 2, 3 correct

(b) 1, 3 correct

(c) 2, 4 correct

(d) All the above are correct

80.    Inflation may result in

(a) Depreciation of currency (b) Appreciation of currency (c) Increase in exports
(d) Decrease in interest rates

81.    Increase  in  domestic  rate  of  interest leads to
(a) Increase in foreign inflows

(b) Decrease in foreign inflows

(c) Depreciation of domestic currency

(d) None of the above

82.    Which  of the following  are true  with respect to frictional unemployment?
1.   Always exist in an economy

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
2.  It is an outcome of voluntary unemployment
3.   Indicates decrease in employment opportunities in the economy
4.   Generally it is not considered as unemployment
(a) 2, 3 (b) 1, 3
(c) 1, 2, 4

(d) All the above

83.    Millennium Development Goals Report is published by
(a) IMF                  (b) WB

(c) WHF                (d) UNDP

84.    A country is said to be in a debt trap if (a) It     has     to     abide     by     the conditionalities   imposed   by   the
International Monetary Fund

(b) It has to borrow to make interest payments on outstanding loans
(c) It has been refused loans or aid by creditors abroad
(d)  The  World  Bank  charges  a  very high rate of interest on outstanding as well as new loans
85.    Which  of the following  are true  with respect to foreign investments?
1.   FPI includes FIIs and QFIs

2.   Foreign Investor with stake of less than 10% in a company is treated as FII and more than 10% as FDI in India
3.   Investments  by  NRIs,  PIOs  and
OCIs    are    treated    as    foreign investment
4.   FII issues P-notes

(a) 1, 2, 3              (b) 1, 3, 4

(c) 1, 2, 4              (d) All the above

86.    According    to   122nd     Constitutional

Amendment Bill,

1.   IGST   will   appropriated   to   the state in which it is collected
2.   No  longer  cess  and  surcharges levied
3.   GST  council  has  right  to  alter GST rate and resolve disputes related to GST
4.   Exports are exempted from GST (a) 1, 2, 3 correct  (b) 2, 3, 4 correct (c) 1, 3, 4 correct  (d) 3, 4 correct
87.    Land reforms are associated with

1.   Tenancy reforms

2.   Imposition of land ceilings

3.   Abolition of intermediaries

4.   Consolidation of land holdings Choose     your    answer    from    the following
Codes:

(a) 1 and 3            (b) 1, 2, and 3 (c) 2and 3             (d) 1 and 2

88.    Consider the following statements:

1.   Headline inflation is measured in terms of WPI
2.   Producer    Price    Index    doesn't track change in tax burden
3.   Service Price Index in India tracks the change in prices of various services
4.   WPI is calculated by MoSPI

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m

(a) 1, 2, 3 correct

(b) 1, 2 correct

(c) 2, 3, 4 correct

(d) All the above are correct

89.    'Golden Revolution' is related to

(a)Precious minerals

(b) Pulses

(c) Jute

(d) Horticulture

90.    Which of the following is/are true with regard to inflation?
1.   It erodes the value of rupee

2.   It leads to decrease in exports

3.   Its affect is similar to indirect tax

4.   It makes imports attractive

(a) Only 1 (b) Only 3 (c) 1, 2, 3
(d) All the above

91.    Which of the following are true with respect to deficits in fiscal policy?
1.   An economy having Revenue deficit mean it has fiscal deficit
2.   An Economy having primary deficit mean it has Revenue deficit
3.   An Economy having Fiscal deficit mean it has both revenue and primary deficits
4.   An Economy having budget deficit mean it has fiscal deficit
(a) 1, 3, 4              (b) 1, 2, 4

(c) 2, 3, 4              (d) All the above
92.    Non-Tax revenue can be increased by improving the working of
(a) Electricity boards

(b) Commercial irrigation projects

(c) Indian Railways

(d) All the above

93.    The term "Open Acreage Licensing

Policy" refers to

(a) Exploration policy of Oil and

Natural Gas

(b) Exploration policy of Coal

(c) Exploration policy of Natural

Resources

(d) Allocation of land to SEZs

94.    Consider the following statements:

1.   Transfer payments are payments made between  the divisions  of a company
2.   Transfer    price    is    one    way payment  of money  for which  no money,  good,  or  service  is received in exchange
(a) Only 1 correct

(b) Only 2 correct

(c) Both 1 & 2 correct

(d) None of the above are correct

95.    Zero Coupon Bond means

(a) Securities on which no interest rate is paid and the issuer only pays the Face value
(b) Bond   issued   against   unsecured asset
(c) A convertible debenture
(d) Security   issued   at   a   very   low interest rate

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
96.    Special category status is awarded to a state based on following parameters
1.   Low population density

2.   Strategic    locations    along    the borders of the country
3.   Backwardness of state

4.   Hilly and difficult terrain

5.   Newly formed state

(a) 1, 3, 4, 5          (b) 1, 2, 3, 4 (c) 1, 2, 4, 5          (d) 1, 2, 4
97.    In India, which of the following have the highest share in the disbursement of credit to agriculture and allied activities?
(a)  Commercial Banks

(b)  Cooperative Banks

(c)  Regional Rural Banks

(d)  Microfinance Institutions

98.    'Base Rate' is a banking term. The

Base Rate s determined by

(a) RBI

(b) Commercial Bank (c) Finance Ministry (d) Loan Recipient
99.    Which of the following statements with

respect to external debt are true?
1.  It is total amount due by the government and private sector to foreign creditors
2.   External debt of GOI is managed by ministry of finance
3.   NRI deposits are part of external debt
4.   The  long  term  external  debt  of GOI is lesser than short term external debt
(a) 1, 4        (b) 1, 2, 4

(c) 1, 2, 3    (d) None of the above

100.  The   recent   announcement    of   fed tapering
1.   Is to reduce inflation and increase interest rate in US economy
2.   It  led  to  steep  appreciation   of rupee
3. Led  to  increase  in  dollar denominated inflows into India
4.   It is related to quantitative easing in USA
Which  of  the  above  statement   are correct?
(a) 2, 3 correct      (b) 1, 4 correct

(c) 1, 3, 4 correct  (d) 1, 2, 4 correct