

1.   Consider  the  following  regarding Ordinance issuing powers of the president and identify the correct option.
1.  The   President   can   issue ordinances when Parliament is in recess.
2.   The promulgated ordinance has similar effect to an act of parliament.
3.    Every ordinance must be laid and approved  by  both  houses  of the parliament  within  6  weeks  from the reassembling.
4.    It may be withdrawn at any time by the President.
(a) 1, 3, 4              (b) 2, 3, 4 (c) 1, 3 only          (d) None
2.      Consider   the   following   statements with regard to The Negotiable Instruments (Amendment) Bill, 2015 .
1.   The bill adds provision to specify the territorial jurisdiction of the courts  in  cases  related  to bouncing  of  cheques  which  was not present in the parent Act.
2.   Cases  in this  regard  need  to be

filed  only  in  a  court  in  whose
jurisdiction  the  bank  branch  of the payee lies.
3.   The bill amends the definition of cheque to include the electronic form which is signed in a secure system with a digital signature .
Choose the incorrect statement(s) (a) 1 only              (b) 2 only
(c) 1, 3                  (d) None

3.      Which among the following  is not an implication of the 119th constitutional amendment bill 2013?
(a) It  will  secure  the  long  stranded boundary  and enable  to curb  the illegal migration, smuggling and criminal acts cross the border.
(b) It   would    help    those    stateless citizens by granting the citizenship from their respective countries
(c) It would  help settle the boundary dispute at several points in Meghalaya, Tripura, Assam, and west Bengal.
(d) None

4.   Which of the following is/ are recommendations of Shanta Kumar panel on Food reforms
A.   Deregulate fertilizer sector

B.   Give    direct    cash   subsidy    to farmers
C.   Link PDS grains to 50% of MSP

D.   Restrict  FSA coverage  to 40% of population.
(a) All are true      (b) B, C, D are true

(c) Only C is true. (d) All are false.

5.      Which among the following sessions of parliament is the longest?
(a) Winter session

(b) Monsoon session

(c) Budget sessions

(d) All sessions are of equal period.

6.      Which of the following is/ are charged upon consolidated fund of India
A.   Administrative expenses of courts.
B.   Salaries of High court judges.

C.   Salaries of election commissioners.
D.   Salary of CAG (a) All are true
(b) A and D are true. (c) B, C, D are true. (d) All are false.
7.     Who among the following is appointed by a High  Powered  committee  which has Home minister as its member?
(a) Chairman National Human Rights

Commission

(b) Chief vigilance commissioner

(c) Chief Information commissioner

(d) Both A and B are true
8.      Who   among   the   following   are   not eligible for further employment under
the  government  of  India  after  their retirement?
A.   Comptroller and Auditor General

B.   UPSC chairman.

C.   Members of UPSC

D.   Chief justice of India

(a) All are true.

(b) A, B, D are true (c) A and B are true (d) Only D is true.
9.      Which  of  the  following  states  shall have minister in charge for tribal affairs?
A.   Chhattisgarh

B.   Madhya Pradesh

C.   Orissa

D.   Bihar

(a) All are true.

(b) Only D is false (c) Only A is true. (d) All are false
10.    Which     of     the     following     is/are

Executive powers of Governor?

A.   Appoints Advocate General

B.   Appoints chief electoral officer to state
C.   Appoints    Vice    chancellors    to universities
D.   Nominates members to legislative council.
(a) All are true.

(b) B, C, D are true. (c) A, C are true
(d) A, B, C are true

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
11.    Consider the following statements

A.   Supreme  Court  doesn't  have  a single judge bench
B.   Judgment of any bench of SC is based on majority decision.
C.   Curative  petition  is  used  before review petition.
(a) All are true

(b) A and B are true (c) B and C are true (d) All are false
12.    Statement  A:  SC  judges  hold  office until he attains age of 65 years Statement  B: HC  judges  hold  office until they attain age of 60 years.
(a) Statement A is true

(b) Statement B is true

(c) Both A and B are true

(d) Both A and B are false

13.    Which of the following committees are loksabha committees
(a) Public Accounts committee

(b) Estimates committee

(c) Committee on public undertakings

(d) Both A and B are true

14.    Statement A: parliament can punish its   members   or   outsiders   for   the breach  of  its  privileges  or  its contempt.
Statement B: Parliament can recommend removal of CAG (a) Both statements are false (b) Both statements are true (c) Only statement A is true
(d) Only Statement B is true
15.    Which of the following statements are true
A.   Immediately   after  independence

Delhi had a legislature

B. Lieutenant  Governor  is  the constitutional  head  of  Delhi union territory
C.   Jind,  karnal  and  muzzafarnagar are assimilated into National capital territory
(a) All are false

(b) Only A is true (c) Only B is true (d) Only C is true
16.    Consider   the   following   statements about AP reorganisation.
A.   Governor has power over law and order in Hyderabad
B.   Sheila bedi committee is working on  division  of  RTC  between  AP and Telangana
C.   Shiv Rama Krishna committee is appointed  for  division  of employees between AP and Telangana
(a) All are true           (b) Only A is false

(c) Only B is false      (d) Only C is false

17.    Consider   the   following   statements about the proceedings of Indian Parliament & choose the correct option(s)
1.   The  proceedings  begin  with  zero hour
2.   The        Question        hour        is

characterized    by   MP'S   asking

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
questions  to  the  Govt  &  follows the zero hour
3.   Opposition     Parties     are     not allowed to ask supplementary question  in question hour, while they can do it in zero hour.
(a) 1 & 2               (b) 2 & 3 (c) 1 & 3               (d) None
18.    Which of the following are correct w.r.t recently setup 'Social Justice Bench'
1.   It has been setup in SC as well as

HC's

2.   The Bench will dispose off PIL's

3.   It will be headed by chief justice of respective courts.
(a) Only 1             (b) Only 2 (c) Only 3             (d) 1 & 3
19.   Which of the following are laid by Constitution on qualification of person to   be   chosen   as   a   Member   of Parliament (MP):
i.    He must be citizen of India.

ii.   He must make and subscribe  to an oath or affirmation before the person authorized by Election Commission for this purpose.
iii.  He  must  be  not  less  than  30 years  of  age  in  case  of  Rajya Sabha  & not less than 25 years in case of Lok Sabha.
iv.  He   must   be   registered   as  an elector for a Parliamentary constituency.
(a) i, ii, iii              (b) i, iii, iv

(c) i, ii, iv              (d) i, ii, iii, iv
20. Which of the following are extra Constitutional and non-statutory devices for securing Cooperation  and Coordination between states in India
i.       NITI Aayog

ii.     The Governor's conference

iii.    Zonal council

iv.     Interstate council

(a) i, ii, iii              (b) ii, iii, iv

(c) i, iii, iv             (d) i, ii, iv

21.    Parliament constitutes of

i.       Lok Sabha

ii.     Rajya Sabha

iii.    Governors

iv.     President Of India

v.      Attorney General

(a) i, ii, iii              (b) i & ii

(c) i, ii, iv              (d) i, ii, iii, iv, v

22.    Which of the following are true

i.     3  High  Courts  have  jurisdiction over more than one state.
ii.   To change  the name  of an High court  a  simple  majority  is required.
iii. Collegium system has judicial judicial majority
(a) i                       (b) i & ii

(c) i, iii                  (d) ii, iii

23.    According to NHRC act, 1993 which of the following is true
(a) NHRC is a constitutional body.

(b) NHRC  Chairman  can    only  be  a retired Supreme Court judge.
(c) Members hold office for 3 years or

they attain 65 years age.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
(d) President has to refer the matter to Supreme Court for an inquiry to remove  chairman  or  any  member on grounds of proved misbehavior or incapacity
24.    Consider  the  following  in  respect  of

Financial  Emergency  (under  Article  -

360)  of  Constitution  and  choose  the right option.
i.    A   proclamation   of   Article-360 issued  shall  cease  to  operate  at the   expiration    of   2   months, unless  before  the  expiration  of that period it has been approved by a resolution of both houses of Parliament.
ii.   If any proclamation of Article-360 is in operation it is competent for President to issue directions for reduction of salaries and allowances  of all or any class of persons   serving   in   connection with union but excluding High Court & Supreme Court judges.
(a) i only               (b) ii only

(c) i  & ii only        (d) None

25.    Which   of   the   following   are   true regarding Cantonment Board:
i.  It  is  created  as  well  as administered by Central govt. It works  under  administrative control of Defense ministry of Central Government.
ii.   Consist partly elected and partly

nominated members.
iii. Executive officer of cantonment is appointed by President.
(a) i, ii, iii              (b) i & ii

(c) ii & iii              (d) i & iii

26.   Which of the following provisions of Constitution have a bearing on education?
i.       Directive Principles

ii.     Rural & Urban local bodies

iii.    Fifth Schedule

iv.     Sixth Schedule

v.      Seventh Schedule

(a) i & ii                (b) iii, iv, v

(c) i, ii, v               (d) i, ii, iii, iv, v

27.    Which   of   the   following   are   true regarding Cooperative Societies?
i.    Right     to     form     Cooperative

Societies a Fundamental Right.

ii. 43-B  of  Directive  Principles promote Cooperative Societies & this is a Gandhian principle
iii. It has a new part ix- B in the Constitution   which   is   entitled. "The co-operative societies".
(a) i, ii                   (b) ii & iii

(c) i & iii               (d) i, ii, iii

28.    The   most   powerful   Parliament   in among the given options is
(a) Indian parliament (b) England parliament (c) US congress
(d) Australia

29.   Which of the following are the only grounds       challenged       on       the
Constitution  validity  of  a  Legislative

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
Enactment   or   an   Executive   order based  on  procedure  established  by law?
i.    It   infringes    the    Fundamental

Rights.

ii. It  is  outside  competence  of authority which has framed it.
iii.  It is repugnant to the constitution provisions.
iv. On grounds of reasonableness, suitability or policy implications.
(a) i  & ii               (b) ii & iii

(c) iii & iv              (d) i, ii, iii

30.    Which  of  the  following  comes  under the Jurisdiction of both High Court & Supreme Court?
(a) Disputes between Centre & State. (b) Disputes between States inter se. (c) Protection of Fundamental rights. (d) Interstate river disputes.
31.    Which   of   the   following   are   true regarding Delhi?
i.    CM is appointed  by President  of India,  where  as  other  ministers are appointed by  Governor.
ii.   The  oath  to CM is administered by  Governor.
iii. The strength of assembly is 70 members,  all are directly elected by people.
(a) i, ii                   (b) ii & iii

(c) i & iii               (d) i, ii, iii

32.    Recent attack by insurgents in north east  killer  18  brave  soldiers,  which
was  the  state  the  attack  happened
and        which        group        claimed responsibility respectively
(a) Manipur and NSCN (K) (b) Mizoram and ULFA
(c) Nagaland and NSCN(IM)

(d) Arunachal Pradesh and MNF

33.    Which of the following Article prohibits the state from making law that either takes away totally or abrogates in part a Fundamental Right?
(a) Article 13 (b) Article 32 (c) Article 226
(d) All of the above

34.    Amendment of which of the following require  special majority of Parliament and consent of States
1.   Election of President of India and its manner.
2.   Extent of executive powers of the union and the states.
3.   Directive Principles of State Policy

(DPSP).

4.   Powers  of  Parliament  to  amend the procedure of amendment of constitution.
(a) 1, 2, 3              (b) 2, 3, 4 (c) 1, 3, 4              (d) 1, 2, 4
35.    With reference to the State Legislative Council in India, which among the following statements is / are correct?
1. The Legislative Council is a continuing  House & two-third  of the members retire in two years.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
2.   Members of local bodies elect one- third of the total number of members of the legislative council
3.   If a state legislative council is to be created or abolished, a resolution  to that effect is to be first  passed  by  the  State legislature   by  a  two-third majority.
Choose the correct option from the codes given below:
(a) Only 1             (b) 2 & 3

(c) Only 3             (d) 1, 2 & 3

36.    In  which  of  the  following  cases,  a court of law cannot take up a case suo motu?
(a) Contempt of court cases

(b) Cases    involving    application    of judicial review
(c) Cases  falling  under  the  Appellate jurisdiction of a court
(d) None of these

37.  Which of the following categories of political  parties  have  been  asked  by the Central Information Commission (CIC) to disclose information under Right to Information Act?
(a) National Political Parties only

(b) All Recognized Political Parties

(c) Both   Recognized   and   Registered

Political Parties

(d) None of the above

38.    In  which  of  the  following  cases,  the
Whip  issued  by  political  party  to its members would be binding on them?
i.    Passage of No-Confidence motion

ii.   Passage of Vote of Thanks to the

President's address.

iii.  Passage of money bill.

iv.  Passage of Confidence motion. Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) i, ii and iv only

(b) ii, iii and iv only

(c) i and ii only

(d) i, ii, iii and iv

39. Consider the following statements regarding Parliamentary system of governance:
1.   The  Head  of  State  is  elected  by the people.
2.   Prime    minister    is    the    sole executive  in whom the authority is vested.
3.   There  is  a  Upper  House  in  the

Parliament.

Which   of   the   statements   given above are correct?
(a) 1 and 2 only

(b) 2 and 3 only

(c) 1 and 3 only

(d) None of the above

40.    Match  List-I  with  List-II  and  select correct answer using the codes given below:
A. Withholding of    1. Qualified Veto assent
B. Overridden by    2. Suspensive Veto ordinary majority
C. Overridden by    3. Absolute Veto

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
higher majority

D. Taking no         4. Majority Veto action on the bill
5. Pocket Veto

A      B      C      D (a)     5       4       1       3 (b)     5       4       2       3 (c)      3       2       4       5 (d)     3       2       1       5
41.    Which  of  the  following  are  correctly matched?
1.   Rule of Law - Equal protection of the laws
2.   Freedom of Press - article 19(1)(a)

3.   Right  to  fair  and  speedy  trail  - Right to life
4.   Fair and free elections - part XV Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 1, 2 and 3 only

(b) 1, 2 and 4 only (c) 2, 3 and 4 only (d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
42.    Consider the following statements:

1.   Originally,   the   Citizenship   Act (1955), also provided for the Commonwealth Citizenship.
2.   The provision for Commonwealth Citizenship was repealed by the Citizenship    (Amendment)    Act,
2005.

Which   of   the   statements   given above is/are correct?
(a) Only 1             (b) Only 2

(c) Both 1 and 2   (d) Neither 1 nor 2
43.  The Central government can issue directions to the State with regard to subjects in:
(a) The Union list

(b) The State list only

(c) The Concurrent list only

(d) All these lists

44.    The Centre  provides  Grants-in-aid  to the states
(a) To    maintain    friendly    relations between the Centre and States
(b) For  use  in  Centrally   Sponsored

Schemes

(c) To cover gaps on revenue accounts so that the states can undertake various beneficial activities.
(d) For meeting expenses of State plan project
45.  Which of the following is a leading recommendation of the Sarkaria Commission?
(a) Abolition of All-India Services

(b) Activation of Zonal Councils.

(c) Drastic changes in the division of functions between the Finance Commission and Planning Commission
(d) Abolition of Zonal Councils

46. The  Constitutional  rights  and safeguards provided to children are mentioned in which of the following Articles:
(i) 15                    (ii) 21-A
(iii) 23(1)              (iv) 24 (v) 45 (a) i, ii, iv              (b) ii, iv, v

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
(c) i, ii, iv, v           (d) i, ii, iii, iv, v

47.    Which of the following is not matched correctly:
Committee                   Headed by (a) Union powers     (i) S.L Nehru committee
(b) Provincial           (ii) Sardar patel constitution
committee

(c) Steering             (iii) B.R Ambedkar committee
(d) States                 (iv) J.L Nehru committee
48.    Which of the following require Simple Majority and these changes "shall not be deemed amendment of the constitution".
i.    Change   in  names,   boundaries, areas of and amalgamation and separation of states.
ii.  Abolition or creation of second chamber of State legislature.
iii.  Administration  of Schedule areas and Schedule tribes.
iv.  Creation     of     legislature     and council  of  ministers  for  certain UTs.
(a) i & ii                (b) iii & iv

(c) i, ii, iii              (d) i, ii, iii, iv

49.    Match the following:

(a) Dyarchy in      (1) Morley-Mintow provincial             reforms, 1909 government
(b) Rigid                (2) Government Of

centralization         India act 1935
(c) Federal scheme (3) Montague-

of government       chelmsford reforms,

1919

(d) Communal      (4) Indian council representation      Act, 1861
a       b       c       d (a)     2       1       3       4 (b)     2       4       3       1 (c)      3       1       2       4 (d)     3       4       2       1
50.  Which of the following are true during

National Emergency?

i.    Article-358 automatically suspends all Fundamental rights except Article-19.
ii.   Article-359 empowers President of

India to suspend Article-19. (a) i                       (b) ii
(c)  i & ii               (d) None

51.    Which  of the following is not correctly matched
Leaders                        Province (a) Nana sahib               (1) Kanpur (b) Begam Hazat Mahal  (2) Lucknow (c) Maulavi Ahmedulla    (3)  Bareilly (d) Rani Ishwori             (4) Tulsipur
Kumari Devi                    (Awadh)

52.    Which of the following statements are true regarding  Budget  in Indian Council Act 1892
i.    For  the  first  time  non-officials became majority.
ii.   The    budget    cannot    not    be amended
iii.  It can be voted upon.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
iv.  Answers  could  not be  discussed further, neither could supplementaries be asked
(a) i and iii            (b) ii and iv

(c) i and ii             (d) iii and iv

53.    Dominance of extremist ideology could be seen after 1905. The factors supposed to be responsible are:
i.   Failure of moderates to achieve results.
ii.   Embittering of nationalists by the divisive tactics of government.
iii.  Suppressive  methods followed by government
(a) i and ii             (b) ii and iii

(c) i and iii            (d) i, ii and iii

54.    Which  of  the  following  is  not  true about Swadeshi Movement?
(a) There  was  formal  party  structure and unity of leadership.
(b) Self reliance was emphasized upon

(c) Vernacular  medium  of  education was employed by Aurobindo Ghosh
(d) It was confined to the upper middle class and could not truly enter the masses as peasantry remained unaffected by it.
55.    Which of the following is/are true:

i.  Shyamji      Krishna      Verma established Indian Home rule society called 'Indian House' and a journal 'The Sociologist' in 1905 in London.
ii.   Madam  Bhikaji  Cama  – base  at

Berlin    to    carry    forward    the
revolutionary  activities  and include sympathetic  Germans  as supporters for the cause.
iii. Virendranath Chattopadhyay- a paris  revolutionary  brought  out
'Bande Mataram' and established contacts with French Socialist.
(a) Only i              (b) i and ii

(c) ii and iii           (d) None

56.    Which of the following is/are not true regarding Ghadar Movement:
i.    Initially   the   party   called   the Pacific Coast Hindustan Association, was formed in US, under the leadership of Hardayal, with Sohan Singh Bhakna as its president
ii.   Ghadar's   ultimate   goal  was  to help  British  in  expanding colonies.
iii.  Ghadar established the Yugantar

Ashram press in San Francisco.

iv.  Komagata Maru incident attached to this party.
(a) Only i (b) Only ii (c) Only iii (d) ii and iv
57.    Which  of the following  is true about

The Home Rule Movement:

(a) Tilak's league and Besant's league was set up on the same day.
(b) Declared    crusade    against    cast system and communalism, villages

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
became  target  for  socio-economic reforms.
(c) There   was   communal   harmony during the movement.
(d) Montagu-    Chemlmsford    reforms was cause of the movement.
58.    Arrange the following in order of year

1.   Second Anglo-Maratha war

2.   First Anglo-Sikh war

3.   Second Anglo-Mysore war

4.   Anglo-Bhutan war

(a)1-2-3-4             (b) 1-3-2-4 (c) 1-4-3-2            (d) 1-4-2-3
59.    Which of the following are true about

Lucknow session of the INC-1916

i.    Presided    by    Ambika    Charan

Majumdar

ii.   Extremists  were readmitted  back to the fold of congress
iii.  Congress    and   Muslim    league came together to present common demands to the government
iv.     The  pact  sowed  the  seeds  of partition
(a) i, ii, iii              (b) ii, iii, iv

(c) i, ii, iv              (d) i, ii, iii, iv

60.  Which of the following commission appointed for famine relief by Lord Curzon:
(a) MacDonnell's commission

(b) Hunter commission

(c) Auckland's commission

(d) Wood's dispatch
61.  Which of the following pairs is not correctly matched:
(a) Jamanlal Bajaj  : Satyagraha

Ashram at Wardha

(b) Dadabhai Naroji : Bombay

Assosiation

(c) Lala Lajpat Rai  : National

School at Lahore (d) Bal Gangadhar  : Satya Shodhak Tilak                         Sabha
62.    Which one of the following not correct about the Cabinet Mission Plan?
(a) Provincial grouping

(b) Interim Cabinet of Indians

(c) Acceptance of Pakistan

(d) Constitution framing right.

63.    Match List I with List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below:
List I                          List II A.Chittagong Armory 1. Lala Hardayal raid
B. Kakori Conspiracy 2. Latin Das

C. Lahore Conspiracy 3. Surya Sen

D. Ghadar party 4. Ram Prasad Bismil

5. Vasudeo Phadke

A      B      C      D (a)     3       4       1       5 (b)     4       3       2       5 (c)      3       4       2       1 (d)     2       4       3       1
64.    The first venture of Gandhi in all-India politics was the:
(a) Non-cooperation Movement

(b) Rowlatt Satyagraha

(c) Champaran Movement

(d) Dandi March

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
65.    The Indian National Army (INA) came into existence in 1943 in
(a) Japan              (b)  Burma

(c) Singapore        (d)  Malaya

66.    Consider the following statements.

A.   Ambika charan Mazumder is the first female to preside over a Annual session of Indian National Congress.
B.   Annie Besant is the only foreigner to preside ove INC session.
C.   Sarojini   Naidu   never   presided over INC annual session.
(a) All are true

(b) Only C is true (c) Only B is true (d) All are false
67.    Consider   the   following   about   Ras

Behari Bose & choose correct one

1.  He was associated with Lahore conspiracy care
2.   He was associated with Hardinge

Bomb care

3.   He    founded    Indian    National

League

4. He  was  arrested  for  his involvement in Nasik conspiracy case
(a) 1, 3, 4              (b) 2, 3, only

(c) 3, 4, only         (d) 1, 2, 3

68.    Match the following

A. Bhagat Singh    1. Chittagong

Armory Raid

B. Laxmi sehegal   2. Kakori

Conspiracy case
C. Ram Prasad Bimil 3. Indian

National Army

D. Suryaren           4. Lahore conpiracy care
A          B      C      D (a) 1            2       3       4 (b) 1            3       2       4 (c) 4            1       3       2 (d) 4            3       2       1
69.    Which   of  the   following   is  wrongly matched?
(a)   Dadabhai   Naoroji-   Poverty   and

UnBritish rule in India.

(b) Romesh Chandra  Dutt- Economic

History of India

(c) R.P. Dutt- New India

(d) All of the above

70.    Consider the following statements:

A.   Bal Gangadhar  Tilak started two popular  journals  Kesari  in English and Maratha in Marathi
B. Bhagat     Singh     established Hindustan Socialist Republican Army to avenge the Lathi charge on Tilak.
C.   Gandhi was termed as Unofficial Ambassador fighting for the cause of country.
(a) All are true

(b) Only C is true (c) Only B is true (d) All are false

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
71.    Statement A: Sir Sayyid Ahmed Khan was a separatist, who was bent on separating Muslim way of life style rather than Indian way
Statement B: Jinnah carried forward the ideology of Sir Sayyid Ahmed Khan (a) A is true
(b) Both A and B are true (c) Both A and B are false (d) B is true
72.    Consider the following statements

A.   Gandhi's  policy on partition  was not uniform.
B.   Jinnah     was     in     favour     of partitioning Punjab and Bengal
C.   Mountabatten   idea   was   forced upon jinnah
(a) All are true

(b) Only C is false (c) Only B is false (d) All are false
73.  Which of the following is not true during/after 1857 Revolt:
(a) There  was  equal  participation  of both Hindus and Muslims without any communal antagonism
(b) After   revolt   all   of   East   India Company possessions were taken over by the British crown.
(c) Secretary  of  State  for  India  was abolished and brought Board of Control and Board of Directors.
(d) British there after followed a policy of 'division and counterpoise'.
74.  Which  of  the  following  is  true regarding Ilbert bill controversy?
i.   The  bill  introduced  by  Sir Courtney   Ilbert,   viceroy   during that time
ii. The bill aimed to distinguish European and Indian members of judiciary.
iii. European  Defence  Association formed to protest the bill.
(a) i and iii            (b) ii and iii

(c) iii only             (d) i and ii

75.    Which    of   the   following    are   not correctly matched?
List I                            List II

(a) Poona sarvajanik       Mahadeo sabha                       Govind
Ranade

(b) Madara Mahajana   Ananda Charlu

Sabha                    & Ramaswami

Mudailiar

(c) East India             Dadabhai Naroji

Association

(d) Indian League        Debendranath

Tagore

76.  Which of the following is not true regarding  Indian  National Congress(INC) :
(a) First   session   of   congress   was presided  by  W.C.  Benerjee  and  it was attended by    72 delegates.
(b) Objective of congress is to  provide to foster greater unity among different    people    irrespective    of
caste, region, language, or religion.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
(c) Moderates  followed  the  policy  of prey, petition and protest.
(d) Moderates   supported   British,   in increasing expenditure of Army.
77.    Assertion : The revolt of 1857 was the first struggle  of the Indians to throw off British
Reason: The soldier who revolted was inspired by Nationalistic feelings
(a) Both  A  &  R  are  true  &  R  is  the correct explanation of A
(b) Both A & R are true but R is not the correct explain of A
(c) A is true, R is false

(d) A is false, R is true

78.    Consider the following about Kathak

1.   It was promoted by Muslim rulers

2.   It  was  performance   in  Mughal courts
3.   Aurangazeb     was     the     most prominent promoter
Which of the the following options are correct?
(a) Only 1             (b) 1, 2

(c) 2, 3                  (d) 1, 2, 3

79.    Nastaliq was

(a) A type of Dance

(b) A Type of puppetry

(c) Persian   script  used  in  Medieval

India

(d) A Sufi saint

80.    Which   of   the   following    pairs   is

Incorrect?

(a) Thali : Himachal Pradesh

(b) Mukha: Manipur
(c) Korkru : Maharastra

(d) Jhammar : Haryana

81.    Which of the following is not matched correctly?
Dance form            State

(a) Keli Gopal           Assam

(b) Guravayyalu       Andhra Pradesh

(c) Lum-kut-lam       Meghalaya

(d) Dhan Nach          Sikkim

82.    Which    of   the    following    correctly denotes a musical interval?
(a) SARGAM          (b) SHADAVA (c) SHISHYA         (d) SHRUTI
83.    Consider the following statements

A.   The Harijan is a Published by Dr.

B.R. Ambedkar, in Nagpur.

B.   Harijan is a weekly launched for the removal of untouchability and emancipation of lower castes.
C.   Harijan was published in English, Hindi and Marathi
(a) All are true

(b) Only C is true (c) Only B is true (d) Only A is true
84.   During which of the following Years Annual sessions of Congress could not be held
(a) 1940                (b) 1928

(c) 1930                (d) All of the above

85.    Which among the following is/are not a cause for growth of communalism in India?
A.   Interpretation  of  Indian  History

by British writers.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
B.   The  religious  reform  and  revival movements of 19th century.
C.   Patronage      in      higher      and subordinate services.
D.   Separate electorates. (a) All are true
(b) Only C and D are true

(c) All are false

(d) Only D is false.

86.    Which of the following is  not a feature of Mathura school of Art?
(a) The      Buddhist      symbols      are transformed into human form
(b) Statues    have    moustaches    and beards
(c) Buddha  is  shown  sitting  on  the throne
(d) Images of 'yakshas' and 'yakshinis'

are common

87.    Which of the following is not  a ritual theatre form of Kerala?
(a) Teyyam            (b) Krishnattam

(c) Terrakkuttu     (d) Muttiyettu

88.  Which of the following schools of Architecture  is sometimes  referred as the 'Vesara style of Architecture'?
(a) Nayaka Architecture

(b) Pala Architecture

(c) Orissa Architecture

(d) Chalukyan Architecture

89.    Which   of   the   following   dances   of

Gujarath  is  not  a  variation  of  the

'Dandiya Raas'?

(a) Gof Gunthan   (b) Gher Raas

(c) Mer Dance       (d) jhummar Dance
90.    The Tughlaq dynasty was established by:
(a) Ghiyasuddin Tughlaq

(b) Firuz shah Tughlaq

(c) Muhammad bin Tughlaq

(d) Ulugh Khan

91.  Which of the following is correctly matched?
(a) Amil- Landowners

(b) Khut- Village accountant

(c) Muqaddam- Headman

(d) Patwari -Head of paraganas

92. Who among the following Mughal emperors  introduced  the Mansabdari System in his Administration?
(a) Jahangir (b) Aurangzeb (c) Akbar
(d) Bahadur Shah

93.    Tuzk-e-Babri was written by Zahir-ud- Din-Mohammad-Babar  in  memoir form. It was written in which one of the following languages?
(a) Chaghatay Turkish

(b) Pharsi (c) Arabi (d) Urdu
94.    Which among the following terms was used for the Royal cavalry of the Maratha Army System?
(a) The Shiledars

(b) The Bargirs

(c) The Hazari

(d) The Subedars

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
95.    Hoysala monuments are found in

(a) Hampi and Hospet

(b) Halebid and Belur

(c) Mysore and Banglore

(d) Sringeri and Dharwar

96.    Which of the following is not correctly matched?
Religious movements     Founder

(a) Atmiya sabha        Raja RamMohan

Roy

(b) Prarthana Samaj  Keshub Chandra

(c) Faraizi movement  Haji Shariat- Allah
(d) Deoband               Mirza Gulam movement             Ahmed
97.    Which   of   the   following   are   true regarding Arya Samaj?
i. It   launched    attack   on untouchability, caste rigidities, idolatry
ii. It was silent on polytheism, superstition, practice of Sharaaddhs, animal sacrifice
iii. It   increased   the   minimum marriage age to 25 years for boys and 16 years for girls
iv. They also mobilized support for people   suffering   from   famines,
floods and earthquakes.
(a) i, ii, iii              (b) ii, iii, iv

(c) i, ii, iv              (d) i, iii, iv

98.    Regarding Child rights during British times, which of the following is false? (a) The Native marriage act 1872
(b) Age of consent act 1891 (c) The Sarada act
(d) None of these

99.    Who  among  the  following  introduced the Vernacular Press Act?
(a) Sir Ashley Eden

(b) Alexander John Arbuthnot

(c) Lord Lytton

(d) Lord Stanley

100. Which    among    the    following    are features  of  Non-Cooperation Movement?
A.   Hindu Muslim Unity B.    Non payment of taxes C.    Boycott of foreign cloth
D.   Establishment of national schools and colleges
(a) All are true

(b) A, C, D are true

(c) B, D are true

(d) All are falsew w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
Place for Rough Work

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
Place for Rough Work

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
Place for Rough Work

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
