

1.     Ans: B
Exp:   When   parliament   is   in recess president cannot issue an ordinance, that is the reason why during last budget session goverment  prorogued  the  house, so  that  land  ordinance  is reissued.
2.     Ans: D
Exp: Lok Sabha  recently  passed The Negotiable Instruments (Amendment) Bill, 2015 by a voice vote on 13th  May, 2015. The Bills amends  the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 in order to make   cheque-bounce    filing   of cases more convenient  for check payees.   Now   it   defines   it   as cheque   in  the   electronic   form which   is   signed   in   a   secure system with a digital signature or using  electronic  system  and drawn in electronic medium using any computer resource. So all the above statements are correct.
3.     Ans: B
Exp: The Bill amends the First Schedule  of  the  Constitution  to give  effect  to an agreement entered into by India and Bangladesh on the acquiring and transfer of territories between the two    countries    on    May    16,
1974.The           India-Bangladesh
Agreement  was  signed  in  1974, but was not ratified as it involved transfer  of  territory  which required a Constitutional Amendment.  Hence, the Bill has been introduced, option of opting for citizenship is providing in the act.
4.     Ans: A
Exp: The committee has been constituted           by           Prime Minister Narendra            Modi for reforming FCI under                the chairmanship   of  former   Union food minister Shanta Kumar had recommended  lowering  the grain entitlement under the Food Security  Act to 40 per cent and

also cash transfer in select cities. It  has   also   suggested   shifting FCI's grain procurement from northern India to eastern parts of the  country  to  boost  farm growth.In addition to above it also recommended raising minimum quantity of grains per person from
5 to 7 kg.
5.     Ans: C
Exp: Budget session is longest of all sessions, it almost spread over
2 months.
6.     Ans: B
Exp: Salaries of election commissioners is not part of CFI, while pensions  of HC judges are part of CFI, salaries  are paid by those states in which judges are working.
7.     Ans: D
Exp: CIC is appointed by high powered    committee    consisting any minister chosen by prime minister as a member not home minister  only,  while  other  two have home minister as member .
8.     Ans: C
Exp: Chief Justice of India can be made  chairman  of NHRC,  while members    of   UPSC   can't   get second term as members but can be made chairman of UPSC, there is no explicit ban on employment of CJI,  while  members  of UPSC may become its chairman.
9.     Ans: B
Exp: Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Jharkhand, Odisha and Bihar   shall   have   minister   in charge   of   tribal   affairs,   after division of Jharkhand, Bihar was exempted from the list.
10.   Ans: C
Exp: Governor appoints state election commissioners to undertake   elections   to Panchayats and municipalities; nomination to council is a legislative function not a executive function.
11.   Ans: B

Exp:  SC  doesn't   sit  in  single bench format, judgments of multiple judge benches are based on majority, curative petition is of last resort after review petition.
12.   Ans: A
Exp: HC Judges  can hold office until they attain 62 yrs.
13.   Ans: D
14.   Ans: B
Exp: Parliament  can recommend removal of CAG, CEC, Judges
15.   Ans: B
Exp: Immediately after Indepence Delhi had a legislature, which as removed  later and re introduced under  Government   National capital territory  act, lt. Governor doesn't have a constitutional head status, new territories  are added to national capital region by planning board.
16.   Ans: D
Exp:  Shiv  Rama  Krishna committee is to decide on capital of AP
17.   Ans: D
Exp: Zero    hour    follows    the question hour. It is referred so as the time gap between the end of Question Hour and the beginning of the regular business. Zero Hour doesn't  find  a  mention  in  the Rules of Procedure and hence it's considered an informal procedure for all the members of Parliament to raise matters of serious importance
18.   Ans: B
19.   Ans: A
20.   Ans: A
Exp: Interstate        council        is mentioned  under Article 263
21.   Ans: C
Exp: Article-79 states parliament consist of LS, RS and POI.
22.   Ans: C Ans: C
Exp:  3  High  Courts  (Mumbai,
Chandigarh,  Gauhati),  to change a high court name a consti amendment is required, collegium

system has CJI and two senior most judges, while two belong to civil society, one belongs to executive.
23.   Ans: D
Exp: NHRC statutory body, NHRC chairman only retired CJI. Members hold office for 5 years or until 70 years age.
24.   Ans: A
Exp: In case of Financial Emergency  POI  can  reduce salaries of government officials, including judges of supreme court and High court.
25.   Ans: A
26.   Ans: C
Exp:  Articles  45 & 46  in DPSP promote   education   to   children and weaker section respectively. Eleventh  and  Twelfth  Schedule has the provision to promote primary & secondary education. Seventh Schedule, education is in concurrent list.
27.   Ans: D
Exp: The 97th constitutional amendment act gave a constitutional  status  and protection to cooperative societies. All the above are mentioned in the act.
28.   Ans: B
Exp: England unwritten constitution, places parliament to enact any law, so its sovereignty is higher than the rest others.
29.   Ans: D
Exp: First 3 are under 'procedure established  by law' & last one is
'due process of law'. Procedure established by law is enshrined in our constitution.
30.   Ans: C
Exp: Articles 32 & 226 give rights to Supreme court and High court writ jurisdiction of both courts.
31.   Ans: B
Exp:  CM  &  his  ministers appointed  by  president  of India, oath to them is administered by it governor. All the members are directly  elected,  unlike  in states where governor can nominate a member to legislative assembly.
32.   Ans: B
33.   Ans: A
Exp: Article 13 explicitly prevents state from making a law, while article 32 and 226 protects individual fundamental rights.
34.   Ans: D
Exp: President election, executive powers  of union,  amend  article-
368,  supreme   court   and  high
court, distribution of legislative powers,  list  in seventh  schedule require consent of states and special majority in parliament.
35.   Ans: B
Exp: Legislative Council is a continuing  House  and  one-third of  the  members   retire   in  two years.
36.   Ans: D
Exp: In all cases it is possible.
37.   Ans: A
38.   Ans: D Ans: D
Exp: The whip is binding only  on
these 4 issues.  Rest they are not bound by party directives.
39.   Ans: D
Exp: In UK king is the head, not elected by people. Upper House in not   necessarily   present   in   all cases. (Sweden, Denmark, NZ)
40.   Ans: D
41.   Ans: C
42.   Ans: A
43.   Ans: D
44.   Ans: C
45.   Ans: B
Exp: Sarkaria    Commission was set  up  in  June  1983  by  the central  government  of India.  The Sarkaria                 Commission's charter was    to    examine    the relationship and balance of power between     state     and     central governments  in the country  and suggest    changes    within    the framework of Constitution of India
46.   Ans: D
Exp: 15(3) the state is empowered to make special provisions for children
21-A-state  shall provide free and
compulsory education to all children of the age of 6-14 years. Article 23(1) –Traffic is human being and forced labour are prohibited
Art  24-  children  are  banned  to employ in hazardous occupation DPSP  45: State shall endeavor to provide early childhood care and education for all children until 6 years of age.
47.   Ans: C
Exp:   Steering   committee:    DR Rajendra Prasad
48.   Ans: D
Exp: All the above are not deemed art amendment to contusion and parliament enact it by simple majority. In case of creation of council,   state   assembly   must ratify by 2/3 majority.
49.   Ans: D
50.   Ans: D
Exp: Article-358 automatically suspend the Fundamental  rights under Art-19 as soon as the emergency   is   declared.   A-359 does  not  automatically  suspend all fundamental rights. It only empowers president of India to suspend enforcement  of specified fundamental rights.
51.   Ans: C
Exp: Maulavi Ahmedulla from Faizabad.   He   defeated   British forces under Henry Lawrence in battle of Chinhat. Khan Bahadur from Bareilly, he assumed administration,     organized     an army   of   40000   soldiers   and offered stiff resistance to British.
52.   Ans : B
Exp: Non-official voice was ineffective as officials still were in majority in the Council Budget can't be voted upon.
53.   Ans : D
54.   Ans:  A
Exp: Failure  of swadeshi movement  due to lack of formal party structure  and an essential part of the movement which could have been led by its office bearers was absent due to it. The unity of leadership   was  broken   by  the surat split in 1907.
55.   Ans: A
Exp: Sarvarkar and Hardayal also became  members  of  'Indian House'. Madam Bhikaji Cama, a paris  revolutionary  brought  out
'Bande Mataram' and established contacts   with  French   Socialist. Ajit   singh   also   operated   from these centres. Virendranath Chattopadhyay-  base at Berlin to carry forward the revolutionary activities and include sympathetic Germans as supporters for the cause.
56.   Ans: B
Exp: Ghadar's ultimate goal was to overthrow British colonial authority in India by means of an armed revolution. It viewed the congress-led mainstream movement for dominion status modest and the latter's constitutional metrhods as soft. Ghadar's foremost strategy was to entice Indian soldiers to revolt.
57.   Ans: B
Exp: Tilak league set up on April
1916, and Besant's league set up on September 1916.Communal riots were one of the reason  for failure  of of the  movement.  The

moderates were disillusioned with Morley-Minto reforms. montagu- Chelmsford reforms in 1919, divided the nationalist ranks and became reason for downfall of movement.
58.   Ans: B
Exp: Second Anglo-Maratha  war:
1775-82   first   Anglo-Sikh   war:
1845-46  second  Anglo-Mysore war: 1780-84 Anglo-Bhutan  war:
1864-65
59.   Ans: D
Exp: The acceptance  of separate electorate  by congress  led to the recognition  of Muslim  league  as representing a separate section of Indian society. This was major event   in  the  evolution   of  two nation   theory   of   the   Muslim league.
60.   Ans: A
Exp:  The  commission   accepted the  principle  of  relief. Appointment of Famine Commissioner  in  a  province where relief operations are extensive. The commission also stressed the desirability  of better transport facilities, opening of agriculture   banks,  improvement of irrigation facilities and vigor measures to foster improved methods of agriculture. Appointed after 1899-1900 famine.
61.   Ans: D
Exp: Satya Shodhak Sabha founded   by   Mahatma   Jyotiba Phule in 1873.
62.   Ans: C
Exp: Cabinet Mission Plan(1946) stood  for  united  India  and rejected Pakistan demand.
63.   Ans: C
Exp:  Chittagong   Armoury   raid took place in Bemgal under leadership of Surya sen 1930. Shaharnapur-Lucknow   train looted at Kakori railway station under leadership  of Ram Prasad Bismil .Jatindas became the first martyr on the 64th day of his fast, who was tried in Lahore Conspiracy. Ghadar party established  by  Lala  Hardayal  in
1913
64.   Ans: B
Exp: Champaran was localized movement.   Rowlatt   Satyagraha all-India   movement   started   in
1919.
65.   Ans: C
Exp: Initially INA formed by Captain  Mohan  Singh  at Singapore,  it  was  collapsed  and
was revived by S.C Bose in 1943. The aim of the army was to overthrow   the   British   Raj   in colonial India, with Japanese assistance.
66.   Ans: D
Exp: Ambika charan is a leading male   Bengal   politician,   George Yule, William Eederburn, Henry cotton, Mr. Webb are other foreigners presiding over INC sessions, Annie Besant, Sarojini Naidu, Mrs. Nellie Sengupta are females who presided Annual sessions of INC.
67.   Ans: D
68.   Ans: D
69.   Ans: C
Exp: R.P Dutt wrote India today, while New India was written by Henry cotton.
70.   Ans: D
Exp: Kesari was in Marathi, Maratha in English, Bhagat singh wanted to avenge lathi charge and subsequent  death of Lala Lajpat Roy, Dada Bhai Naoraji was called Unofficial ambassador.
71.   Ans: C
Exp: Sir Sayyid was not a separatist  he was pained by the state   of   Muslims,   he   had   a different   vision   of   nation,   the nation  of  his  view  was  a federation of communities, with different entitlement of political rights  subject  to  their  ancestry and political importance.
72.   Ans: A
Exp: Gandhi initially was not in favor later he said that if majority wants partition  it shall be done, Jinnah was not in favor of partitioning  Punjab  and  Bengal, he wanted wholesale transfer, Mountbatten did not give Jinnah a chance.
73.   Ans: C
Exp: Board of Control and Board of Directors of the company abolished and State of Secretary(a member  of  British  Cabinet) brought in , who was assisted by Indian Council.
74.   Ans: C
Exp:  The bill aimed at removing distinction    between    European and Indian  member  of judiciary. However the British opposed the bill on the grounds that an Indian member of judiciary not fit to try European offenders. Later viceroy succumbed to pressure and it provided  that European  subjects had right to claim a trial by a jury
of twelve, atleast seven of whom, were European or Americans.
75.   Ans: D
Exp: Indian League was set up by Sisir Kumar Ghosh in 1875 to stimulate the sense of nationalism among the people and encourage political education. It was later succeded  by  The  Indian Association  of Calcutta  in 1876. New crop of leaders like Surendranath  Benarjee  and Anand Mohan Bose.
76.   Ans: D
Exp: Moderates wanted reduction of expenditure on army
77.   Ans: C
78.   Ans: D
79.   Ans: C
Exp:   Nastaliq   is   one   of   the main calligraphic   hands used  in writing   the Perso-Arabic    script, and traditionally the predominant style   in Persian   calligraphy.[1]  It was developed  in Iran in the 8th and 9th centuries.
80.   Ans: C
81.   Ans: C
Exp: Lam-Kut-lam  is the harvest dance   of   the   Kom   tribe   of Manipur.
82.   Ans:  D
Exp: SARGAM: presentation of melody in actual notes
SHADAVA: is the sexatonic mode emphasizing any six notes SHISHYA: means pupil
SHRUTI: musical interval
83.   Ans: C
Exp: Harijan was a weekly published by Gandhi, for emancipation of lower castes published in English, Gujarathi and Hindi.
84.   Ans: C
Exp: Annual  sessions  could  not be  held  in  1930  on  account  of Civil Disobedience movement, and in between 1941-45 on account of launching Quit India Movement.
85.   Ans: C
Exp: All of the above are reasons for growth of communalism, along with Muslim league and Hindu MahaSabha propaganda.
86.   Ans: B
Exp: The figures produced by the Mathura school of art do not have moustaches and beards as in the Gandhara art.
87.   Ans: C
Exp:          'terukkuttu'          and
'kattaikkuttu' is a tamil street theatre,   which   is   a   form   of

entertainment,   a  ritual,  and  a medium of social instruction.
88.   Ans: D
89.   Ans: D
90.   Ans: A
Exp: Ghiyasuddin Tughlaq established   tughlaq   dynasty which ruled till 1412. First two rulers (Ghiyasuddin  Tughlaq and Muhammad   bin  tughlaq)   ruled over an empire which comprised almost entire country.
91.   Ans: C
Exp: Khut- landowners
Patwari- village accountant
92.   Ans: C
Exp: Mansabdari   system started by Akbar was the system of providing ranks to the officials of the Mughal        Empire.        The mansabdars governed the empire and commanded its armies in the emperor's   name.   Though   they were usually aristocrats, they did not form a feudal aristocracy, for neither the offices nor the estates that supported them were hereditary.  There  were  33 categories of mansabdars.
93.   Ans: A
94.   Ans: B
Exp: Bargir was the Royal cavalry of   the   Maratha   army   system. There  were two kinds  of cavalry viz. Bargirs and the Shiledars. Bargirs were provided horses from the  state  and  thus,  the  horses were property of the royal household  and were looked after by state officers. Shiledars used to keep their own horses.
95.   Ans: B
Exp: Hoyasala capital city was Halebid  and  its  monuments found in Halebid and Belur.
96.   Ans: D
Exp:    Faraizi movement, started with the aim of dismantling  the social changes introduced in East Bengal. It was revivalist in nature and soon became ilitant. Deoband movement sought to bring purity in Islamic teachings  by following only   Quran   and   the   Hadiths, under the leadership of Qasim Nanotavi and Rashid Gangohi.
97.   Ans: D
Exp: Arya samaj revitalized to an extent, it tried to bring reforms in the Hinduism as it was practiced then.  It  attacked  on  polythesis,
superstition,         practice         of
Sharaaddhs, animal sacrifice.
98.   Ans: D
Exp:  The   Native   marriage   act
1872:  prohibitive   of  child marriage.   Age   of   consent   act
1891:  this  act  forbade  the marriage of girls below the age of
12. The Sarada act : marriage age of boys(18years)  and  girls(14 years) fixed.
99.   Ans:
Exp: Lord  Lytton  in 1878,  Lord Lytton introduced the Vernacular Press  Act to ban the vernacular press in India. The first victim was nationalist Newspaper 'Soma Prakash'.
100.  Ans: A
Exp: The movement was to be nonviolent  and to consist  of the resignations  of titles; the boycott of government educational institutions,  the  courts, government service, foreign goods, and elections; and the eventual refusal to pay taxes. Noncooperation  was agreed to by the Indian   National   Congress at Calcutta in September 1920 and launched that December

