

1.    The Union government has recently constituted a 10-member committee to review and revitalise public private partnership  (PPP) mode of infrastructure development. In this regard  identify  the  Correct Statement(s)
1.   The committee will be chaired by former finance secretary Vijay Kelkar
2.   The report is to be submitted on or before 31st Oct 2015.
3.   It is expected  to suggest optimal risk sharing mechanism in PPP projects
4.   Risk rebalancing is a major issue involved in PPP projects.
(a) 1, 2, 4              (b) 1, 3, 4

(c) 2, 3, 4              (d) All the above

2.      Which  of  the  following  organization makes 'Doing Business Report' every year?
(a) IMF                  (b) WTO

(c) UNCTAD          (d) World Bank

3.      CENVAT is related to- (a) Sales Tax
(b) Excise Duty

(c) Customs Duty

(d) Octroi tax
4.      Consider the following statements:

1.   With increase in the interest rates in the economy, bond prices tend to increase.
2.   With higher prices of the bonds, the bond yield tends to rise.
Which of the following statements given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 only

(b) 2only

(c) Both 1 and 2

(d) Neither 1 nor 2

5.   Which  sectors  are  included  in calculation of Index of Industrial Production (IIP):
i.       Manufacturing

ii.     Mining

iii.    Electricity iv.     Quarrying v.      Agriculture
(a) i, ii, iii              (b) i, ii, iii, iv

(c) i, ii, iv, v          (d) All the above

6.    Forward Markets Commissions is a financial regulator of-
(a) Micro Finance

(b) Mutual Funds

(c) Non-life Insurance

(d) Commodity Future Market

7.      Mega    Food    Parks    Scheme    was initiated  by the Government  of India with the objective of-
(a) To ensure better prices of products to farmers.
(b) To     increase      productivity      of agriculture crops.
(c) To control food prices.

(d) To   reduce   the   wastage   of   food items.
(a) a, c, d are true (b) b, c, d are true (c) All are false
(d) All are true

8.      Consider the following statements

A.   Infant mortality rate is calculated by taking 1000 as its base
B. Maternal   mortality   rate  is calculated by taking 1 lakh as its base
C.   Infant mortality rate in India is 28

D.   Maternal mortality rate in India is

109

(a) All are true      (b) All are false

(c) C, D are false   (d) A, B are false

9.      Which of the following are true about Modified National Agricultural Insurance Scheme (MNAIS):
i.    NAIS used to subsidize premium, MNAIS dropped this clause.
ii.  The claim liability on insurance company.
(a) i only               (b) ii only

(c) Both i and ii

(d) None of them
10.  Recently  WTO  adopted  the  first worldwide trade reform in its history. These reforms are related to?
(a) Subsidies and Fair Trade Practices

(b) Customs     checks     and     border procedures
(c) Tariff and Non-tariff Barriers

(d) None of them

11.    Recently   RBI   has   introduced   the concept of 'niche banking' in India. Which among the following is most correct statement about this?
A.   It   for   ultra   high   net   worth banking individuals.
B.   It is related to opening branches in remote villages.
C. It involves mobile firms and supermarket chains.
D.   It is not under RBI supervision. (a) All are true
(b) All are false

(c) b and c are true

(d) a and c are true

12.    Which of the following true regarding Trade Receivables Discounting System (TReDS)?
i.    The aim of TReDS is to set up and operate  institutional  mechanism to facilitate financing of trade receivables of MSMEs.
ii. Faster       monetization       of receivables.
iii.  It  builds  safeguards  against  the risk of double financing, diversion

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
of   working   capital   funds   and dilution of control over security.
(a) All of the above

(b) i and ii

(c) ii and iii

(d) None of them

13.    Which among the following will be the headquarters of proposed Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank and BRICS New Development Bank respectively?
(a) Shanghai and Beijing (b) Macau and Shanghai (c) Beijing and New Delhi (d) Beijing and Shanghai
14.    Which  of  the  following  states  is/are have 100 percent bank accounts in every household?
i)    Gujarat

ii)   Kerala

iii)  Madhya Pradesh

iv)   Goa

Choose the correct answer from the codes given below
(a) Only i, ii & iv

(b) Only ii & iv

(c) Only ii, iii & iv

(d) i, ii, iii & iv

15.    Which  of  the  following   true  about

Advance Pricing Agreement (APA):

i)    It provides a predictable  transfer pricing regime.
ii)   India's  first  bilateral  APA  signed with a Japanese company.
iii)  APA must at least have  one tax authority.
Choose the correct answer from the codes given below
(a) i and ii             (b) ii and iii

(c) i and iii            (d) i, ii, iii

16.    Tarapore   Committee   submitted   its report   on   "Full   Convertibility    on Rupee" on-
(a) Current account

(b) Capital account

(c) Both   in   current   as   well   as   in

Capital account

(d) Special Drawing Rights (SDR)

17.    CAPART is related with-

(a) Assisting    and    evaluating    rural welfare programs
(b) Computer hardware

(c) Consultant     service     of     export promotion
(d) Controlling     pollution     in     big industries.
18.    Which statement of the following false for IMF?
A.   It is not an agency of UNO

B.   It can grant loan to any country of the world
C.   It   can    grant    loan    to   State

Government of a country.

D.   It offers only conditional loans. (a) b, c, d are true (b) a, c, d are true (c) b, c, d are true (d) a, c, d are true
19.    The cause of deflation is-
(a) Lack   of   goods   and   services   as compared to money supply.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
(b) Lack  of  imports  as  compared  to exports.
(c) Lack of money supply as compared to supply of goods and services.
(d) None of these.

20.    Mixed Economy means:

(a) Co-existence      of small  and  large industries.
(b) Promoting   both   Agriculture   and

Industries in the economy.

(c) Co-existence   of rich and poor. (d) None of these.
21.    Which among the following states has maximum  number  of  Special Economic  Zones  (SEZ)  till  February
2015?

(a) Karnataka       (b) Andhra Pradesh

(c) Tamil Nadu      (d) Telangana

22.  Which of the following true about Renewable Energy Global Investors Meet and Expo (RE-INVEST)?
i)    France  is  partner  country  with

India.

ii)   Objective  is to meet the country energy requirements through scaling up of renewable energy.
(a) Only I              (b) Only ii

(c) Both i and ii    (d) Neither of them

23.    In the case of agricultural goods if the government  fixes the price above the market clearing price together with banning  exports  and  buys  up surpluses in production, which one of the   following   will   characterize   the
market outcome?
(a) Consumers pay more for their food while  producers  get  higher revenues.
(b) Consumers get cheaper food while producers get higher revenues.
(c) Consumers pay more for food while producers get lower revenues.
(d) Consumers    gain    but    whether producers gain it cannot be said.
24.    Dachigam National park is present in (a) Jammu                     (b) Srinagar (c) Himachal Pradesh     (d) Punjab
25.    Which of the rate is not determined by

Reserve Bank of India? (a) Bank Rate
(b) Cash Reserve Ratio

(c) Statutory Lending Rate

(d) Prime Lending Rate

26.    Which of the following will be correct if an  economy  follows  a  floating exchange rate regime'?
(a) The  exchange  rate  will  adjust  to keep the current account deficit/surplus just equal to the capital account surplus/deficit.
(b) The government  does not need  to maintain a forex reserve.
(c) For   such   regime   to   follow,   the economy  must  maintain  more foreign  assets  than  foreign liabilities
(d) The  current  account  deficit  must be maintained at a zero level by the economy.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
27.    Consider the following statements:

i.  Under    the    World    Trade Organisation (WTO) agreements, countries cannot normally discriminate   between   their trading partners.
ii.   Any member country of the WTO granting one country a special favour needs to be extended to all other WTO members.
Select correct option:

(a) Only 1             (b) Only 2 (c) Both 1 and 2
(d) Neither 1 nor 2

28.    What does a short-run 'phillips curve'

show?

(a) The  rate  of  money-wage  inflation for each level of possible unemployment and for a specific expected rate of inflation.
(b) The  rate  of  money-wage  inflation that is generated at fully- employment.
(c) The  rate  of  money-wage  inflation which was already expected.
(d) None of the above.

29.    Which of the following is correct about

'hedging'?

(i)   This   is   an   act   of   reducing uncertainty about future price movements.
(ii) It may be done in commodity, security and currency.
(iii) This  may  be  done  by  forward

sales or purchases.
(a) i only               (b) i and ii

(c) ii and iii           (d) i, ii and iii

30.    Consider the following statements and select the correct code:
i)   Alpine Convertible Bond (ACB) is a bond issued by the Indian companies to the West European investors.
ii)  The ACBs are a kind of foreign currency   convertible   bond (FCCB).
(a) Only I              (b) Only ii

(c) Both I and ii    (d) Neither I and ii

31.    Select   the   statement    which   best explains the concept of 'bubble':
(a) Manipulate  price  rise  of  an  asset usually riding the expectations of novice investors.
(b) Price rise of an asset unexplained by the fundamentals yet people showing interest to hold it.
(c) Speculative  price  rise  of an  asset when inflation is higher and employment shows expansion.
(d) A  phase  of  boom  in  an  economy with  bubbles  of  strong fundamentals besides strong investors confidence.
32.    Select the correct statement regarding the 'debt swap':
(a) A  situation  when  unpaid  part  of loan of a borrower is written off by the lender.
(b) A  phenomenon   of  replacing   old

loans with newer ones.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
(c) Two bodies exchange their mutual loans on the same rate of interest.
(d) None of these (ELSS)

33.    Select the correct statement regarding

'environmental audit':

(a) It is done to guage the damage a firm is doing to the environment.
(b) It  is  done  with  the  objective  to reduce or eliminate the pollution aspect of firms.
(c) It is done  to calculate  the  'Green

GDP' of an economy. (d) None of the above.
34.  Select   the  incorrect   statements regarding  'equity  linked  schemes (ELSS)'
i.    They are offered by mutual fund companies, but unlike the mutual funds, they do not have a lock-in period.
ii.   They  fall  under  'low  risk'  and

'high return' category. (a) Only I              (b) Only ii
(c) Both I and ii    (d) Neither i and ii

35.    Select the correct statement about the

'Fisher Effect'

(a)   Higher   the   income   one   earns, lower part of it spends on the fulfillment of food.
(b)   Consumers non-durables are the major drivers of high economic growth  in  the  developed economies  driven  by  the  rise  of
consumerism.
(c)   The nominal rate of interest on a loan  is  sum  of  the  real  interest rate and the rate of inflation expected over the duration of the loan.
(d) International trade's volume is directly proportional to the expansion of the multinational companies away from their home countries .
36.    Select  the  correct  difference  between the NEER and REER:
(a) While in NEER the current rate of inflation is adjusted, it is not adjusted in REER
(b) While   the   rate   of   inflation   is adjusted in REER, it is left un- adjusted in the REER
(c) While  the  REER  is  calculated  by the IMF for a currency, the REER is calculated by the economy whose currency it is.
(d) While the REER shows the nominal value of the exchange rate of currency, the NEER shows it in comparative contest.
37.    Consider the following statements and select the incorrect statement:
i.    Dual Rate of exchange is seen in a kind of fixed exchange rate system.
ii.   In  Dual  Rate  of  exchange  there are  two  rates  of exchange  for  a
currency –one driven by the IMF

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
and   the   other   derived   by  the economy who owns the currency.
(a) Only I              (b) Only ii

(c) i and ii both

(d) Neither I nor ii

38.    Select the incorrect statement(s) about the concept 'Gini Coefficient':
i.    It is an inequality indicator in an economy, which was developed taking the clue from the 'Phillips curve'.
ii.   The coefficient varies from zero to one–where shows absolute inequality one indicates the situation of perfect equality.
iii.  It has been highly useful tool in achieving perfect equality in Finland, Norway and Sweden.
(a) i and ii             (b) ii and iii

(c) iii and I            (d) i, ii and iii

39.    Which of the following statements are correct  with  regard  to  RuPay  debit card?

1.   It is issued by National Payment

Corporation.

2.   It can  be  used  both  within  and outside the country.

3. It can be used for unlimited transactions.

4.   It can be used only in India for limited value of transactions.
Select the correct answer using the codes given below
(a) 1 and 2 only

(b) 1, 2 and 3 only

(c) 1 and 4 only

(d) 1, 3 and 4 only

40.    Which of the monetary policy tool(s) is

/are NOT with government securities?

1.   Cash Reserve Ratio

2.   Repo Rate

3.   Statutory Liquidity Ratio

4.   Marginal Standing Facility

Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 1 and 2 only

(b) 1 only

(c) 1 and 4 only

(d) 4 only

41.    As   per   the   Budget   2015-16,   the General Anti-Avoidance Rule (GAAR) has been deferred for-
(a) 2016-17 (for 1 year) (b) 2017-18 (for 2 years) (c) 2018-19 (for 3 years) (d) Totally abandoned
42.    Select the situation /situations related to a period of 'inequality trap':
i.  Interest   rate   going   so  low  that people prefer to hold money rather than invest it.
ii. Cutting  interest  rate  further  low rejuvenates investment.
(a) Only i

(b) Only ii

(c) Both i and ii

(d) Neither i and ii

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
43.    Select  the  incorrect  statement  from the given list:
(a) Banking  year  of  India  runs  from

January to December.

(b) Financial year of the IMF runs from

July to June.

(c) Agricultural year of India runs from

June to May.

(d) Financial   year  of  the  USA  and Pakistan  one most similar  to that of the IMF.
44.    Select    the    correct    statement    /

statements from the given list:

i.  A situation when people think that they are getting  richer  during  the times   of   inflation   is   known   as
'money illusion'.

ii. It  is  believed  that  lower  levels  of

'money  illusion'  are  beneficial  to

'grease the wheels of the economy'. (a) Only i
(b) Only ii

(c) Both i and ii

(d) Neither i or ii

45.    Select the correct statement about the

Mumbai Inter Bank Bid (MIBID):

(a) The weighted average interest rate at which certain banks in Mumbai are ready to borrow the long term lenders.
(b) The weighted average interest rate at which certain banks in Mumbai are  ready  to  lend  for  long  term
purpose.
(c) The weighted average interest rate at which certain banks in Mumbai are ready to borrow  from the call money market.
(d) The freighted average interest rate at which certain banks in Mumbai are ready to lend in the call money market.
46.  Select  the  in  correct  statement regarding a 'Mutual Fund' from the given list:
i.    The  'promoter'   of  this  fund  is known as the 'sponsor'
ii. 'Trustees'  of  the  fund  are appointed by the 'sponsor'
iii.  'Sponsor'  and the 'trustees'  as a team are responsible to the investors.
(a) Only i              (b) Only ii

(c) i and iii           (d) None of the above

47.    The goods whose demand increases as income of the people increase are
(a) Inferior goods  (b) Giffen goods

(c) Normal goods  (d) None of the above

48.    Consider  the  statements  given  below and select the incorrect code:
i.    Liquidity trap is a situation when people   prefer   to   hold   money rather invest it.
ii.   Liquidity     preference     is     the situation when people prefer to invest money rather hold it.
(a) Only I              (b) Only ii

(c) Both i and ii    (d) Neither i and ii

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
49.  Select  the  correct  statement  / statements regarding 'numeraire' from the given list:
i.  It  is  a  monetary  unit  for denominating international exchange on a common basis.
ii.   Today the special Drawing Rights (SDRs) of the IMF is accepted as the standard numeraire in the world.
(a) Only I              (b) Only ii

(c) Both i and ii    (d) Neither i and ii

50.    Select  the  correct  situation  of voting and non-voting shares in India:
(a) Voting shares are the equity shares of a company, which have voting rights. They have higher dividend than the non-voting shares, too.
(b) Non-voting  shares  have  no  voting power at the general meeting of a company also get  lower-dividend than the voting shares.
(c) Non-voting  shares  may  be  given

20%   higher   dividend   than   the voting shares by a company.
(d) Voting  shares  may  be  given  20% higher dividend than the voting shares by a company.
51.    'Sensitive  sector'  as  defined  by  RBI

includes(s)-

(a) Capital Market

(b) Real Estate

(c) Commodities

(d) All of the above
52.    Select     the     incorrect     statement

/statements   about   the   co-operative banks in India from given choices:
i.    Co-operative    banks   are   small sized units organized in the co- operative sector, which operate both in urban and non-urban centers.
ii. They  are  regulated  by  RBI, Banking   Regulation   Act,   1949 and Banking laws (Co-operative societies) Act, 1965.
(a) Oonly I            (b) Only ii

(c) Both i and ii    (d) Neither i and ii

53. Select the incorrect statement / statements related to the national income accounting of the economy:
i.    An  economy  may  have  its  NDP

and GDP of the same value.

ii.   None of the developing economies had their NDPs and GDPs of the same values for any year.
iii.  Few  developing  economies  have been able to have their NDPs and GDPs of the same values but at the purchasing power parity(PPP) only.
(a) i and ii             (b) ii and iii

(c) i and iii            (d) i, ii and iii

54.  What is correct about the headline inflation  of India?  Select  the  answer given below:
i.  It is measured at the wholesale as

well as consumer prices.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
ii. We  see  enough  diversities  among the Indian consumers; that is why we   have   four   variants   of   the inflation index at the consumer prices.
iii. The concept was first forwarded by

Mr.C.Rangarajan in the late 1980s. (a) Only i              (b) i and ii
(c) Only iii             (d) None of these

55. When   the   Government   starts repurchasing    its   bonds   from   the public before their maturity period, it means
(a) The  Government  is  promoting  an

'expansionist' monetary policy

(b) The    Government    is    trying    to increase the saving rate of the economy
(c) The Government is trying to check the rising inflation
(d) The    Government    is    trying    to promote  more  credit  creation  by the banks
56.    Which of the following  countries  has registered top source of foreign direct investment  (FDI)  into  India  in 2014-
15?

(a) Singapore        (b) Mauritius

(c) China               (d) USA

57.    Select the correct statement related to the  "Ambedkar  Hasthilip  Vikas Yojana":
(a) A scheme of Government of India to

promote   handicrafts   among   the
rural women of India belonging to the Schedule Cast category
(b) A    scheme    to    promote    tribal handicrafts.
(c) A  scheme  of  the  Government  of Maharashtra  to  promote handicrafts  among  the  Mahar women of the state.
(d) A scheme of Government  of UP to promote  women  empowerment  in the state through handicrafts.
58.    Match List-1 with List-2 and select the correct answer using the code given below:
List-1                  List-2

1. Core inflation   A. Profit calculation after adjusting inflation
2. Inflation           B. upward pull

Premium              of prices and wages by each other.
3. Inflation         C. inflation excluding Accounting manufactured items.
4. Inflation spiral D. The bonus brought by inflation to borrowers.
Code:

A      B      C      D (a)     1       2       3       4 (b)     3       4       1       2 (c)      2       1       4       3
(d)     4       3       2       1

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
59.    What is the basic difference  between bank and a non-bank?
(a) While  banks  allow  withdrawal  of money  from  savings  accounts,  a non-bank  does  not allow  the opening of a saving account.
(b) Current  account  could  be  opened in non-banks.
(c) While  banks  are regulated  by the RBI, non-banks are directly regulated  by  the  Ministry  of Finance.
(d) All limited companies  in India are entitled to set up non-banking institutions.
60.    Which one of the following statements regarding   'financial   literacy'   is   not true?
(a) Its  objective   is  to  make   people aware of the risks and rewards of investments so that they can make an informed choice.
(b) India   has   a   formal   nationwide structured financial education programme.
(c) This       would       enhance       the effectiveness and integrity of financial markets.
(d) It reduces the government  burden in protecting the common person from elements of market failure.
61.    Consider  the  following  about  Capital

Adequacy Ratio:
1.   It is the ratio of the total deposits of a bank to its non-performing assets.
2.   It is the ratio of the total capital of a bank to its non-performing assets.
3.   It is the ratio of the total capital of a  bank  to  its  risk-weighted assets.
4.   It   is   the   ratio   which   ensures strength and stability of a bank.
Select  the  correct  answer  using  the codes given below:
(a) 2 and 4 only    (b) 3 and 4 only

(c) 1 and 3 only    (d) 1, 3 and 4 only

62.    The     percentage     contribution     of indirect taxes to India's GDP is close to:
(a) 5.5 percent      (b) 4.5 percent

(c) 7.5 percent      (d) 9 percent

63.    Laffer    Curve    is    a    curve    which establishes relationship between
(a) Tax concessions and tax revenue. (b) Expenditure incurred for collecting
taxes  and  revenue  collected  from taxes
(c) Revenue collected from direct taxes vis-à-vis indirect taxes
(d) Tax rates and tax revenues

64.    Consider the following about All India

GST:

1.   It is a destination based tax
2.  India will become one common market without state barriers.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
3.   It is proposed to keep alcohol and petroleum  out  of  the  ambit  of GST.
4.   It is proposed  to keep Entry tax out of the ambit of GST.
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 1, 2, 3 and 4

(b) 1, 3 and 4 only

(c) 2 and 3 only

(d) 1, 2 and 3 only

65.    GDP Deflator is defined as

(a) GDP growth adjusted for wholesale price Index (WPI) based inflation rate.
(b) GDP growth adjusted for Consumer Price  Index  (CPI)  based  inflation rate.
(c) Ratio of GDP at current  Prices to

GDP at constant prices. (d) Ratio of GNP to GDP.
66.    In  the  context  of  India's  Five  Year Plan, a shift in the pattern of industrialization, with lower emphasis on heavy industries and more on infrastructure begins in
(a) Fourth plan (b) Sixth plan (c) Eighth plan (d) Tenth plan
67.    An increase in interest rate in the economy will
1.   Decrease investment Expenditure

2.   Decrease Consumption

Expenditure
3.   Lead to higher demand pull inflation
4.   Lead to lower level of Effective

Demand

Select the correct answer using the codes given below
(a) 1 only

(b) 1 and 2 only

(c) 1, 2 and 3 only

(d) 1, 2 and 4 only

68.    Which  is  correct  about  the  Indian

Depository Receipts (IDR)

i.    An   IDR   listed   on   an   Indian exchange represents ownership in shares of a foreign firm.
ii. Stan Chart is the first and only issuer of IDR in the Indian markets.
(a) Only 1             (b) Only 2

(c) Both 1 and 2   (d) neither 1 nor 2

69.   Consider   the   following   about   the recently  released  Human  Capital Index and Identify the correct statement(s)
1.   It   is   prepared   by   the   World Economic Forum based on 25 indicators
2.   India   is  currently   ranked   100 among the 124 nation list
3.   Human capital deployment is one of the indicators
4.   Norway has topped the list

(a) 2, 3                  (b) 3, 4

(c) 1, 2, 4              (d) Only 4

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
70.    Consider   the   following   statements about DD Kisan and identify the incorrect statement(s)
1.   It is a 24 x 7 channel owned by public service broadcaster Doordarshan   (DD)  and  is dedicated  to  agriculture  and allied sectors.
2.   DD  Kisan  will  disseminate  real- time inputs to farmers on best farming practices.
3.  Prior to launching this channel, Prasar    Bharati    was    running
'Krishi  Darshan'  programme  on

DD1 for farmers.

4.   The Scheme includes Provision of low cost Television sets to enable the farmers to view the channel.
(a) 1, 3                  (b) 1, 4

(c) 2, 4                  (d) Only 4

71.    The tail of comet is directed away from the sun due to:
(a) The tail of comet always exists in the same orientation.
(b) Radiation emitted by sun exerts a radial pressure on the comet, throwing its tail away from the sun.
(c) Comet   rotates   around   the  Sun, lighter mass of the comet is pushed away due to centrifugal force.
(d) As the comet rotates, lighter mass of comet is attracted by stars situated in the direction of its tail.

72.    Match the following
List I              List ii

A. Photoelectric effect    1. Tesla

B. Magnetic field            2. Eienstein C. Electric press    3. Henry Becquarle D. Radioactivity     4. Henry Sheile Choose the correct answer:
A      B      C      D

(a)     2       1       4       3 (b)     1       2       4       3 (c)      2       1       3       4 (d)     1       2       3       4
73.    Consider the following statements and select the correct code:
1.   In order that an echo may occur, the reflecting surface must be at least 33 meter away.
2.   The air is able to distinguish two sounds as separate sounds only if they reach the ear at least 1/10 of the second part.
Code:

(a) Only 1             (b) Only 2

(c) Both 1 and 2   (d) neither of them

74.    The   specific   resistance   of   a   wire depends upon which of the following: (a) Mass
(b) Cross section

(c) Length

(d) Nature of the material wire

75.    If an iron ball and wooden ball have same  radius  are  released  from  the same  height  in a  vacuum.  The  time taken by both ball to reach the ground is:

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
(a) Unequal

(b) Iron    ball    take    minimum    and wooden ball take maximum time
(c) Equal

(d) Cannot be determined

76.    Which of the following statements are correct?
1.   Alpha-particle is positively charge particle
2.   Penetrating  power  of Beta-ray  is more than Gamma-ray.
3.   Atomic number of parent element is reduced by two units when Alpha-ray is emitted.
4.   Radioactivity is measured by G.M.

Counter.

Choose the correct option:

(a) 1 and 2            (b) 1 and 3

(c) 1, 2 and 4        (d) None of these

77.    Duraluminium     used    for    aircraft construction consist of:
(a) Mg and Al

(b) Mg and Zn

(c) Mg, Al and Cu

(d) Mg, Al and Zn

78.    Consider the following statements and select the correct code:
1.   Slag is the compound formed by the combination of flux and gangue.
2.   Flux is the rock in which ones are embedded.
3.   Gangue  is a substance  which is added to ore during smelting.
(a) 1 and 2            (b) 2 and 3
(c) 3 and 1            (d) Only 1

79.    Match the following

List I                        list ii

A) Bauxite            1. Uranium

B) Hematite          2. Aluminium

C) Machelite         3. Iron

D) Pitch Blend      4. Copper

Choose the correct answer:

A       B       C       D (a)     1       2       3       4 (b)     2       3       4       1 (c)      2       3       1       4 (d)     3       2       4       1
80.    A small pouch containing silica gel is often found is bottles  of medicine  in tablet  or powder  from  because  silica gel:
(a) Absorb moisture

(b) Kill virus

(c) Kills germ and spores

(d) Absorb all who present  inside the bottle
81.    Consider the following statements: Assertion (A): DNA finger printing has enough   powerful   tools  to  establish paternity and identify the criminals in rape and other assault cases.
Reason  (R): Trace  evidence  such  as hairs, saliva and dried semen are adequate for DNA analysis.
Codes:

(a) Both  A  and  R  are  true  and  R  is correct explanation of A.
(b) Both A and R are true but R is not

correct explanation of A.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
(c) A is true but R is false. (d) A is false but R is true.
82.    The stones  formed  in human  kidney consist mostly of:
(a) Sodium sulphate

(b) Sodium acetate

(c) Magnesium sulphate

(d) None of these

83. Consider  the following  statements  and select the correct code:
1. A plant gains weight during photosynthesis but loses weight during respiration.
2.   Respiration    is    a    continuous process where as photosynthesis occur only during day time.
Code:

(a) Only 1             (b) Only 2

(c) Both 1 and 2   (d) neither of them

84.   Consider the following statements and select the correct code:
1. Cancer  is  characterized  by uncontrolled  growth  and  spread of abnormal cells.
2.   Cancer   cells   and  normal   cells differ in their life spans.
3.   The only known immortal cells in the body are germ cells.
Code:

(a) 1, 2 and 3        (b) 1 and 3 (c) Only 1             (d) 1 and 2
85.    Consider the following statements and select the correct code:
1.   Higg's   Boson   is   a   theoretical particle which is believed to have given matter its mass.
2.   It is also called God's particle.

3. Large Haldrone Collider (LHC) recently  created mini "Big Bang" in laboratory.
Codes:

(a) 1, 2 and 3        (b) 1 and 3 (c) Only 1             (d) 1 and 2
86.    Consider the following statements and select the correct code:
1. Chandrayan-1 did not provide support  for  the  idea  that  solar wind is made of mostly hydrogen ion. It found water on moon.
2. Solar  wind  compresses  the magnetic field of the earth on its sun facing side.
Code:

(a) Only 1             (b) Only 2

(c) Both 1 and 2   (d) Neither of them

87.    If parents are of blood group AB and O, then the possible blood group of children would be which among the following.
(a) A or B              (b) A or O

(c) A, B or AB       (d) O, A, B or AB

88.    Which of the following disease is not

caused by fungi: (a) Softtret
(b) Wheat rust

(c) Ringworm

(d) Late blight of potato

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
89.    Consider  the  following  statements  in light of  "neuromorphic chips"
(a) This  was  developed  by  computer engineers.
(b) These are also called as mimicking human brain.
(c) 'True north' is such kind of chip. (d) All the above
90.  Consider  below  statements  regarding

Helico Bacter pylori

(a) It  originated  60000  years  ago  in

Africa.

(b) The  bacterium  is  found  in  about half of world population.
(c) This   bacteria   is   responsible   for stomach   or   peptic   ulcers   and leading to cause of cancer related diseases worldwide.
(d) All are correct.

91.    Temporary    hardness    of   water    is caused by
(a) Calcium bicarbonate

(b) Calcium sulphate (c) Calcium chloride (d) Calcium nitrate
92.    Identify      the      correct      statement regarding solar impulse 2.
(a) It  is  world's  first  solar  powered aircraft on global journey.
(b) It is 1st aircraft to fly day and night without consuming conventional fuel.
(c) Emits zero carbon dioxide.

(d) All the above
93.    For  manufacturing   of  lenses  which type of glass is used
(a) Soda glass

(b) Borosilicate glass

(c) Lead glass

(d) Fiber glass

94.    Which  of  the  following   are  list  of payloads released by NASA to be installed  onto  Mars  2020  Rover mission
(a) Mastacum-Z (b) SuperCam
(c) RIMFAX

(d) All the above

95.   Ajeya Warrior is a biannual military exercise between
(a) India and Japan

(b) India and Srilanka

(c) India and UK

(d) India and Nepal

96.    Regarding neutrino project

1.  The setting up of India based neutrino observatory (INO) project approved to be set in TN.
2.   Neutrino is an electrically strong particle interacting elementary subatomic particles.
3.   It belongs to lepton family.

4.  It will study in particular mass hierarchy  among  different  types of neutrino.
(a) 1 & 2 only       (b) 2 only

(c) 1, 3, 4              (d) 2, 3, 4

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
97.    Which of the following  is the longest and  strongest  bone  in  the  human body?
(a) Spinal Cord

(b) Humerus

(c) Fibula

(d) Femur

98.    Assertion   (A):   Coal-based   thermal power stations contribute to acid-rain. Reason (R): Oxides of carbon are emitted when coal burns.
(a) Both A and R are individually true and R is the correct      explanation of A
(b) Both A and R are individually true and    R    is    not    the    correct
explanation of A
(c) A is true, R is false

(d) A is False, R is true

99.    Who is the chairman of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR)?
(a) President of India (b) ISRO Chairman (c) Prime Minister
(d) Minister of Science & Technology

100. In   June,   2015,   World   Health Organisation has declared India free of which disease?
(a) Jaundice

(b) Maternal and Neonatal Tetanus

(c) Pneumonia

(d) Diphtheriaw w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
Place for Rough Work

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
Place for Rough Work

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
