

1.     Ans: B
Exp: The Committee is chaired by Mr. Kelkar and its report has to be submitted within a period of 3 months from the date of its Constitution. It has to suggest optimal  risk sharing  mechanism by analyzing risks involved in PPP projects in different sectors. It will also look into existing framework of sharing of such risks between the Government and project developer. For firming-up its recommendations,  the Committee may consult various stake holders in the different  sectors  including private, government sector, legal experts, banking and financial institutions and academia.
2.     Ans: D
Exp: A World  Bank  Group flagship  publication,  Doing Business measures      regulations affecting 11 areas of the life of a business.  Ten of these areas are included in this year's ranking on the   ease   of   doing   business: starting a business,  dealing with construction permits, getting electricity, registering property, getting    credit,    protecting minority investment,           paying taxes, trading across borders, enforcing contracts and resolving insolvency. Doing     Business also measures   labor   market regulation, which is not included in this year's ranking.
3.     Ans: B
Exp:  Under  the Cenvat Scheme, a manufacturer of final product or provider of taxable service shall be allowed to take credit of duty of excise  as  well  as  of  service  tax
paid on any input received in the

factory   or   any   input   service received by manufacturer  of final product.
4.     Ans: D
5.     Ans: B
Exp: Manufacturing: 478
Mining & quarrying: 64
Electricity: 1
Total 543 items.
6.     Ans: D
Exp: The Commission allows commodity  trading  in 22 exchanges in India, of which 6 are national. Finance Minister Arun Jaitley announced its merger with SEBI  in  his  Budget  speech  of
2015.
7.     Ans: A
Exp:  Mega  Food Park Scheme  is the flagship  program  of the Ministry of Food Processing Industries,  Government  of India. Mega Food Park Scheme proposes a demand driven/pre-marketed model with strong backward/forward linkages and sustainable supply chain.
8.     Ans: C
Exp: IMR in India is around 39, while  MMR  is 138,  target  is 28 and 109 respectively.
9.     Ans: B
Exp: MNAIS is improvised version of NAIS, the actuarial  premiums are charged which are subsidized by farmers.
10.   Ans: B
Exp: WTO will introduce new standards   for   customs   checks and   border   procedures   under Trade  Facilitation  Agreement signed in Bali 2013.
11.   Ans: C
Exp: By allowing mobile firms and supermarket      chains,     among

others, to enter the banking arena and cater to individual and small businesses.
12.   Ans: A
Exp:  Last  month,  the  Reserve Bank  of India  (RBI)  released  its Draft Guidelines for setting up of and  operating  a  "Trade Receivables Discounting System (TReDS)" and sought feedback on it. The aim of TReDS is to set up and operate an institutional mechanism to facilitate financing of   trade   receivables   of   micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) from corporate buyers through multiple financers. The need for setting up such a system arises from the fact that MSMEs, despite  playing  a very important role in the country's economy, continue to face constraints in obtaining adequate finance, particularly   in   terms   of   their ability to convert their trade receivables into liquid funds.
13.   Ans: D
Exp: the purpose of AIIB is to provide finance to infrastructure projects in the Asia Pacific region. Headquartered in Beijing, is expected to operationalize soon.
14.   Ans: D
Exp: Gujarat has become the fourth state after Kerala, Madhya Pradesh and Goa to achieve 100% target of opening  bank accounts in each household under PMJDY.
15.   Ans: D
Exp: An APA is a agreement between  a taxpayer  and at least one tax authority concerning  the TP method functional to a taxpayer's              inter-company
transactions    and   will   usually

cover multiple years. Through the APA, the tax authority accept not to look  for a TP adjustment  for enclosed transactions  as long as the  taxpayer  obey  to  the  terms and conditions  as agreed by the APA
16.   Ans:  B
Exp:   Tarapore committee was constituted by RBI for suggesting a roadmap on full convertibility of Rupee on capital account.
17.   Ans: A
Exp: Council for advancement  of peoples action and rural technology.
18.   Ans: D
19.   Ans: C
20.   Ans: D
Exp: Co-existence  of public  and private sectors.
21.   Ans: C
Exp: As of now 196 SEZ operating in the country.  TN with 36 has maximum SEZ, followed by Maharashtra and Karnataka (25 each) and Telangana (24).
22.   Ans: B
Exp: Germany, world leader in renewable  energy,  is the partner country for India's RE-INVEST.
23.   Ans: A
24.   Ans: B
25.   Ans: D
Exp: The interest rate charged by banks   to   their   largest,   most secure, and most creditworthy customers on short-term loans. This rate is used as a guide for computing interest rates for other borrowers.
26.   Ans: A
27.   Ans: C
28.   Ans: A
29.   Ans: D
30.   Ans: B
31.   Ans: B
32.   Ans: B
33.   Ans: B
34.   Ans: C
35.   Ans: C
36.   Ans: B
37.   Ans: B
38.   Ans: D
39.   Ans: C
40.   Ans: B
41.   Ans: B
Exp:   It  has  been  decided  that when implemented,  GAAR would apply prospectively  to investment made on or after April 1, 2017," Jaitley  said while presenting  the
2015-16 Budget.
42.   Ans: A
43.   Ans: D
44.   Ans: C
45.   Ans: C
46.   Ans: B
47.   Ans: C
48.   Ans: D
49.   Ans: A
50.   Ans: C
51.   Ans: D
Exp:  Sensitive  sectors  as  more risky  sector.  There  is  huge amount of speculation in these sectors and hence the risk of default is also higher
52.   Ans: D
53.   Ans: C
54.   Ans: D
55.   Ans: A
56.   Ans: B
Exp:  Mauritius  has  emerged  as top source of foreign direct investment   (FDI)   into  India   in
2014-15.     Mauritius     replaced
Singapore  to  second  position  in
2014-15. Mauritius accounted for about 29 per cent of the country's total  FDI  inflows  last  fiscal.  In
2013-14, Singapore had replaced Mauritius as the top source of FDI into India. According to the data of the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP), India attracted USD 9.03 billion in FDI from Mauritius in 2014-15, whereas  it was USD 6.74 billion from Singapore
57.   Ans: B
58.   Ans: B
59.   Ans: A
60.   Ans: B
61.   Ans: B
62.   Ans: B
63.   Ans: D
64.   Ans:  D
65.   Ans: C
66.   Ans: C
67.   Ans: D
68.   Ans: C
69.   Ans: A
Exp: The Human capital Index is prepared by World Economic Forum based on 46 indicators about how well countries are developing and deploying their human capital, focusing on education, skills and employment. India has been ranked at 100 on Human Capital Index, which measures countries  on development and deployment of human  capital.  Finland  has topped  the  124  nation  list. Finland is followed by Norway, Switzerland, Canada, Japan, Sweden, Denmark, Netherland, New Zealand and Belgium.
70.   Ans D
Exp: 1, 2, 3 options  are correct and only 4 is wrong hence None DD Kisan has been launched by Prime Minister Narendra Modi on
26 May 2015 in Delhi. The 24X7 channel   is   owned   by   public service broadcaster Doordarshan (DD)  and  is  dedicated  to agriculture and allied sectors. Features  of DD Kisan DD Kisan will disseminate  real-time  inputs to farmers on new farming techniques,   water   conservation and organic  farming.  It will also share best farm practices in different parts of the country, quiz shows for farmers, a bottoms-up approach involving agriculturists. Prior  to  launching  this  channel, Prasar    Bharati    was    running
'Krishi  Darshan'  programme  on DD. During the Budget of 2014, NDA government led by Prime Minister Narendra Modi had had earmarked  100  crore  rupees  to this dedicated channel.
71.   Ans: C
Exp: due to centrifugal force.
72.   Ans: A
73.   Ans: B
Exp: reflecting surface must be at least 16.5 m away since speed of sound is 330m/sec
74.   Ans: D
75.   Ans: C
Exp: as  height  is same,  and  in vacuum takes same time.

76.   Ans: C
Exp:  Penetrating  power  of Gamma -ray is more than alpha& beta-rays.
77.   Ans: C
Exp:  all 3 are good conductors of heat and electricity
78.   Ans: D
Exp: flux is substance  added to the ore during smelting.
Gangue is a rock in which one is embedded.
79.   Ans: B
80.   Ans: A
Exp: Silica gel, found in medicinal bottles   absorbs   moisture   and saves   the   medicines.    It   has greater applications in medicine packaging  .It is not to kill virus, germs, and spores and does not absorb all gases that are present inside the bottle.
81.   Ans: D
Exp: DNA   finger printing has become a powerful tool due to its ability   in  tracing   evidences   of crime and to establish the paternity. These  evidences can be collected   from   hairs,   semen   , saliva.
82.   Ans: D
Exp: Uric acid is relatively less solution in water and many crystallize  and  gets  deposited  in the  joints  causing  gouts. Excessive  uric  acid  and  certain salt like calcium  oxalate  become the source of kidney stones, when the kidneys are not functioning properly.
83.   Ans: C
84.   Ans: A
85.   Ans: A
86.   Ans: B
Exp:  it  provided  solar  wind  is made mostly of hydrogen ion interacts with oxygen in lunar soil and rocks to produce water.
87.   Ans: A
Exp: genotype of blood group AB and O would be AB or OO respectively.  Children  with blood
group O and AB is not possible in this case.
88.   Ans: A
Exp  :  softtret  is  a  disease  of plants caused by bacteria. This characterized   by  large  scale  of death cells resulting in the formation of soft shining masses in edible part of these plants.
89.   Ans: D
Exp:  These  chips  are  developed by engineers at IBM. The neuromorphic  chips  can process information  in a manner  similar to human brains.
90.   Ans: D
Exp: The stomach cancer caused due to H.pylori  is also called as African enigma. The genes that protected individuals with African ancestors were not yet known.
91.   Ans: A
Exp: Bicarbonates of calcium and magnesium cause hardness to water
92.   Ans: D
Exp: It first halted in Muscat, Omen and started its 35000km long  journey  from  Abu  Dhabi, UAE.  It  was  piloted  by  Swiss pilots. It weighs 2300kg made of carbon fiber.
93.   Ans: C
Exp: Lead glass is used as it is highly transparent, has high refractive index and absorbs radiation.
94.   Ans : D
Exp: There are totally 7 payloads. Remaining  4 are MOXIE, MEDA, PIXL and SHERLOC
95.   Ans C
Exp: Ajeya Warrior is a joint exercise  between  the  armies  of India and UK. The exercise will be conducted  from  13  June  to  28
June 2015 at West down Camp, Salisbury   Plains  Training  Area, UK.  The  Exercise  is  held biannually  in the two countries, alternatively. The aim of the Exercise is to build and promote
positive military relations between Indian and UK Army and to enhance their ability to undertake joint tactical level operations in Counter Insurgency/Counter Terrorism Environment under United Nations Charter.
96.   Ans: C
Exp:  2 is  wrong  as  neutrino  is electrically neutral particle weakly interacts with elementary subatomic  particles.  There are 3 types of neutrinos: electron, muon and tau.
97.   Ans: D
Exp:  Femur  (Thigh  bone)  is the longest   and  strongest   bone  in your body. Because the femur is so strong, it usually takes a lot of force   to   break   it.   The   long, straight part of the femur is called the femoral shaft.
98.   Ans B
99.   Exp: Prime Minister of India is the chairman of the Council of Scientific   and  Industrial Research.   Council   of   Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) established in 1942, is an autonomous body and India's largest research and development (R&D) organisation, with 37 laboratories and 39 field stations or  extension  centres  spread across the nation, with a collective staff of over 17,000.
100. Ans: B
Exp: World Health Organisation has  declared  India  free  of maternal  and  neonatal  tetanus. The  elimination  of  neonatal tetanus  is  defined  as  less  than one  case  in  1000  live  births  in every district across the country. The disease usually occurs in newborns through infection of the unhealed umbilical stump, especially when the stump is cut with a non-sterile instrument. Nagaland   was   the   last   Indian state to achieve maternal and neonatal tetanus elimination

