

1.      Identify the correctly matched ones

(a) Bundelkhand      -     sand     stone formation- Madhya Pradesh

(b) Baghelkhand   -  dry  and  drought region- Rajasthan

(c) Chotanagpur   plateau   -   Archean formation- Fharwar rocks

(d) Gurgat Hills- Maharastra- iron ore

2.      Which  of the following  together  form

Southern Hill Complex?

A.   Niligiris

B.   Annamalai ranges

C.   Palani hills

D.   Cardamom hills

(a) All are true

(b) Only A is true

(c) A and B are true

(d) A and C are true

3.      Arrange the following in East to West direction:

A.   Chota Nagpur plateau
C.   Garo hills

D.   Jantia hills

(a) A, C, B, D        (b) D, B, C, A (c) A, B, C, D        (d) D, C, B, A
4.      Consider the following statements:

1.   China spans five time zones but runs on a single national time using the standard meridian of Beijing.

2.   Russia  uses eight standard  time zones.

Identify the correct statements

(a) 1 only              (b) 2 only

(c) Both 1 & 2       (d) None

5.      Identify the correct sequence of Great

Lakes of USA from East to the west:

(a) Huron   -   Michigan   -   Ontario   - Superior - Erie

(b)   Superior   -   Ontario   -   Erie   - Michigan - Huron
(c) Michigan    -   Ontario    -   Erie    - Superior - Huron

B.   Khasi hills

(d) Erie - Superior - Huron - Michigan

- Ontario

6.      Which of the following is a Nitrate rich soil in India?

(a) Pagar plains    (b) Chuars

(c) Terai                (d) Barind

7.      Farmer suicides in the country can be linked to the 'agrarian distresses' caused  due  to structural  changes  in the economy as well as changes in economic and agricultural policies. Which of the following can be counted among those?

1.   Shift to cash crops

2.   Exposure of Indian agriculture to forces of globalization

3.   Withdrawal      of      state      from agricultural extension activities

Choose  the  correct  answer  using the codes below:

(a) 1 and 2 only    (b) 2 and 3 only

(c) 1 and 3 only    (d) All of the above

8.      Wet   lands   in  the   lower   plains   of Bengal, which are important fishing Zones are called Usar

(a) Maidan            (b) Bheel

(c) Chuar              (d) Usar
9.      If  winds  have  an  outward  circular motion in an anti-clockwise  direction these are called

(a) Anti-cyclone          in         Northern

Hemisphere

(b) Cyclone in southern Hemisphere

(c) Anti-cyclone         in         Southern

Hemisphere

(d) Cyclone in Northern Hemisphere

10.  South East Asia has captivated the attention of global community over space  and  time  as a  geostrategically significant region. Which among the following is the most convincing explanation  for  this  global perspective?

(a) It  had  a  rapid  economic  growth after cold war and earned the name of Asian tigers

(b) Its   location   between   the   Asian powers of China and India

(c) It  was  the  arena  of  super  power confrontation  during  the cold war period

(d) It's location between the Pacific and Indian ocean and its preeminent maritime character.
11.    Which of the following national parks would be affected if the proposed Ken- Betwa River linking project takes off?

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
(a) Panna National Park

(b) Bandhavgarh National Park

(c) Kanha National Park

(d) None of the above.

12.    Which  among  the  following  elements has the highest composition in basalt rock?

(a) Aluminum       (b) Calcium

(c) Iron                 (d) Silicon

13.    Some  of the  cities  in North  America and Western Europe are showing a decrease in overall size. This process is called

(a) Anti Urbanisation (b) Retro Urbanisation (c) Rurbanisation
(d) Counter urbanisation

14.   With   reference    to   Indian   gharial, consider the following statements

1.   They are widely seen in the Indus River, in the Brahmaputra of Bhutan  and Bangladesh,  and in the Irrawaddy River.

2.  These are infamous for killing humans and eating them in many parts of India, especially in delta regions
3.   It is listed as critically endangered by the IUCN.

Which of the above statements is/are

INCORRECT?

(a) 1 and 2 Only

(b) 1, 2 and 3 Only

(c) 2 and 3 Only

(d) 3 Only

15.    With   reference   to   seismic   waves, identify the following statements:

1.   P–waves  travel  through  a  solid rock faster than sound waves travelling through air.

2.   S-Waves travel at about half the speed of P-waves

(a) Only 1             (b) Only 2

(c) Both 1 & 2       (d) Neither 1 nor 2

16.    Consider the following and identify the correct option:

1.   Glacial  valley  floors  are flat and their  walls  steep,  in  contrast  to the V-shaped valleys of many mountain rivers.

2.  Unlike rivers, valley glaciers at coastlines  may erode their valley floors far deeper than sea level.

(a) Only 1             (b) Only 2

(c) Both 1 & 2       (d) Neither 1 nor 2

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
17.  Which among the following is not required for the formation of Photochemical smog?

(a) Oxygen

(b) Oxide of Nitrogen (c) Carbon Monoxide (d) Sun light
18.    Consider the following statements and identify the correct option.

1.   Neap tides occur when the Moon, Earth and Sun are collinear.

2.   When  an  intense  storm  passes near  the  shore  during  a  spring tide, the waves at high tide may cause tidal waves.

(a) Only 1             (b) Only 2

(c) Both 1 & 2       (d) Neither 1 nor 2

19.    Which among the following is a graph that shows a relation between human activities, or agricultural/climate factors, and a seasonal year?

(a) Seismograph    (b) Sketch Graph

(c) Ergo graph       (d) Agro graph

20.    Which   of   the   following   pairs   are correctly matched?

1.   Karst Topography : Blind Valley

2.   Humid Topography : Stone Lattice
4.   Periglacial Topography : Pingo

(a) 1, 2, 3              (b) 1, 3, 4 (c) 1, 2, 4              (d) 2, 3, 4
21.  Which   of   the   following   plate movements is responsible for the formation of mid-oceanic ridge?

(a) Divergent movement

(b) Convergent movement

(c) Transform fault movement

(d) Parallel movement

22.    Consider    the    following    regarding

Seaweeds:

1.   They  have  no  differentiation  of true tissues such as roots, stems and leaves.

2.   They grow in deep sea waters.

3.   They    grow    in    shallow    and intertidal zones of the sea.

Choose the TRUE statements?

(a) All are true      (b) None are true

(c) 1 and 3 only    (d) 1 and 2 only

23.    Consider the statements:

1.   The  Wild  Life  Protection  Act  of

1972 provides for the declaration of National Parks by State governments.

3.   Aeolian Topography : Ventifacts

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
2.   The   difference   in   conservation value of a National Park from that of a sanctuary is not specified in WPA 1972.

3. Sanctuary     enjoys     greater protection than National Park.

4.   Wild life sanctuary can be created for a particular species where as national park is not focused on particular species.

Choose the TRUE statements.

(a) All are true      (b) 1, 2 and 4 only

(c) 1, 2 and 3 only (d) 1 and 4 only

24.    Consider   the   statements   regarding

International Year of Biodiversity (IYB)

1.   The UN declared 2010 as IYB.

2. The  main  objective  was  to encourage individuals and organizations to take immediate steps to halt Biodiversity loss.

3.   The year 2010 was selected as it was critical because it is time to reflect  about  what  needs  to  be done  if  we  are  to  change  this trend.

Choose the correct option?

(a) All are true      (b) 1 and 2 only

(c) 1 and 3 only    (d) 2 and 3 only
25.    Consider   the   following   statements regarding 'Project Tiger':

1.   It    is    a    centrally    sponsored scheme.

2. Its  objective  was  to  ensure available population of tigers in India for scientific, economic, aesthetic,  cultural and ecological value.

3.   It was launched in 1973.

4.   Now there are 42 tiger reserves in

India.

Choose the correct option.

(a) 1, 2 and 3 only

(b) 2 and 3 only (c) All are true (d) 3 and 4 only
26.    Consider the following:

1.   'Haathi     mere     Saathi'     is    a campaign launched by MoEF in partnership  with  Wild Life  Trust of India.

2.   The   campaign   was   aimed   to improve conservation and welfare prospects of the elephant.

3.   Elephant    is    India's    National

Heritage Animal.

4.  It was launched at 'Elephant-8' Ministerial meeting.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
Choose the TRUE statement?

(a) All are true      (b) 2, 3 and 4 only

(c) 1, 2 and 3 only (d) 1 and 2 only

27.  The  Nairobi  Convention  is  for protection, management and development of which of the following?

(a) Marine environment

(b) Desert Biomes

(c) Coastal and Inland wetlands

(d) Arctic and Antarctic

28.    Consider the following regarding Black

Carbon (BC):

(a) It is a solid particle or aerosol. (b) It is commonly known as soot.
(c) 25%  to  35%  of  BC  in  the  global atmosphere  comes from India and China.

(d) All of the above

29.    An expert committee report "Drowning a valley: Destroying a civilization" is related to which dam project?

(a) Sardar Sarovar Dam

(b) Hirakud Dam

(c) Nagarjuna Sagar Dam

(d) Alamatti

30.    Which bird has been voted as United

Kingdom's first national bird?
(a) Bald eagle        (b) Robin flies

(c) Barn owl          (d) Blackbird

31.    Which of the following is/are correct?

i.    Latitude is the angular distance, measured in degrees along the equator east or west of the prime meridian.

ii.   Longitude is the angular distance of a point on the earth's surface, measured in degrees from the centre of the earth.

iii.  As the earth is slightly flattened at the poles, the linear distance of a degree of latitude at the pole is smaller than at the equator.

Code:

(a) i and ii (b) ii and iii (c) iii only
(d) None of these.

32.    Which of the following is correct?

i.    Indian Standard Time(IST) follows
82.5⁰ W
ii.   When 10.00 P.M in London, time
in New York (74⁰ W) is 4 hours 56
minutes behind London.

iii.  Canada   and   USA  has  5  time zones

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
Code:

(a) i and ii             (b) ii and iii

(c) i and iii            (d) all of the above.

33.    Which of the following is correct about

Igneous Rocks?

i.    They  are  formed  by  the  cooling and solidification  of molten  rock (magma) from beneath the earth's crust.

ii.   They occur in strata and contain very little fossils.

Code:

(a) Only I              (b) Only ii

(c) Both i and ii    (d) None of these

34.    Which of the following is correct about

Sedimentary Rocks?

i.    These   distinguished    from   the other rock types in their characteristic layers formation.

ii.   They are termed stratified rocks.

iii. Peat,   lignite    or   coal   are Organically formed Sedimentary Rocks.

iv. In       mechanically       formed Sedimentary  Rocks, coarser  type of sand stone is called grit.

Code:

(a) i, ii and iii        (b) i, ii and iv
(c) i, iii and iv       (d) all of the above

35.    Fold Mountains  are caused by large- scale earth movements when stress is set up in the earth's crust. Which of the following are such stresses?

1.   Increased  load  of  the  overlaying rocks.

2.   Flow movement in the mantle.

3.   Magmatic    intrusions    into   the crust.

4.   Expansion or contraction of some part of the earth.

Code:

(a) i, ii and iii        (b) i, ii and iv

(c) i, iii and iv       (d) all of the above

36. Due to the complexity of the compressional forces, the folds developed much more complicated forms(when compression increases further). Arrange the following in order of formation:

1.   Recumbent fold

2.   Nappe

3.   Overfold

4.   Over thrust fold

Code:
(a) 1-4-2-3            (b) 3-1-4-2 (c) 3-4-1-2            (d) 1-2-4-3

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
37.    Consider the following regarding Indo- European Languages:

1. It is the most widely spoken languages family.

2.   About half the people in the world speak Indo-European language.

3.   The  languages  originated  in  an area that extended from northern India to Western Europe.

Which  of  the  above  statements  are

TRUE?

(a) All are true      (b) 1 and 2 only

(c) 2 and 3 only    (d) 1 and 3 only

38. Which  is the term used for the super cooled   droplets    which   freeze   the instant they fall onto a surface that is also at a below-freezing temperature?

(a) Hail                 (b) Sleet

(c) Glaze               (d) Snow

39.    What does Axial-Parallelism  refers  to

(earth revolution)?

(a) The unchanging  orientation  of the earth's axis with ecliptic plane.

(b) The   unchanging   relationship   of earth with the sun.

(c) The    unchanging    orientation    of earth's axis with ecliptic plane and Polaris.
(d) The    unchanging    orientation    of earth's axis with Polaris

40.    Consider the following:

1.   Altitude

2.   Temperature

3.   Rotation of the earth

Which   of   the   above   affect/s   the pressure of the air for any region?

(a) 1 only              (b) 1 and 2

(c) 2 and 3 only    (d) 1, 2 and 3

41.    Teesta  River  is  related  to  a  glacier which is at the base of kachenjunga which glacier is it?

(a) Zemu glacier

(b) Gangotri glacier

(c) Nubra glacier

(d) None of the above

42.    Recently, India witnessed a number of disasters like Cloudburst, Landslides, Cyclones etc., In this regard, consider the following statements:

1. Cloudbursts occurs in the hilly regions like Jammu and Kashmir, Uttarakhand only.
2. The Himalayan region is more vulnerable to landslides than the Western Ghats.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
Which of the statements  given above is/are correct?

(a) Only 1             (b) Only 2

(c) Both 1 and 2   (d) None of these

43.    Identify the crop:

1.   It is a perennial bushy herb.
2.  Grows in temperature: 10 to 35⁰ C
3.   Soil type preferred is forest loamy

soil.

4.   Cultivated   at   altitude   between

700mm   and   1500   mm   along

Western Ghats.

5.   It is used  for flavouring  curries, cakes and bread.

Select the correct crop:

(a) Cinnamon        (b) Clove

(c) Cardamom       (d) turmeric

44.    Identify incorrect statement:

(a) Central   belt   is   known   as   the mineral heartland of India.

(b) Magnetite is the best quality of iron ore and are found in only certain pockets of the country.

(c) Bailadila    mine    is    the    largest mechanized mine in Asia.
(d) Marmagao    port   is   famous   for exporting iron ore.
45.  Regarding  watershed  management, which of the following statement(s) is/are correct?

1.   Watershed management basically refers   to   efficient   management and  conservation  of surface  and groundwater resources.

2.  Watershed management aims at bringing about balance between natural   resources   on   the   one hand and society on the other.

3. 'Haryali'    is   a   watershed development project sponsored by the   central   government,   which aims at enabling the urban population to conserve water.

Select correct code:

(a) Only 1 and 2   (b) Only 1 and 3

(c) Only 2 and 3   (d) All of the above.

46. Consider the following statements regarding  problems due to decline in ground water:

1.   Over withdrawal of ground water in some areas like Maharashtra has increased arsenic concentration in groundwater.

2.   Over withdrawal of ground water in states like Bihar has led to increase in concentration of fluoride.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
Which    of    the    statements    is/are correct?

(a) Only I              (b) Only ii

(c) Both i and ii    (d) None of these

47.    Consider the following statements:

1.   Andhra   Pradesh   has   both   on shore and off shore oil reserves.

2.  Mumbai High is located on the continental  shelf off the coast of Maharashtra.

Which    of    the    statements    is/are incorrect?

(a) Only i              (b) Only ii

(c) Both i and ii    (d) None of these

48.    Humid climate is a favorable condition for cotton  textile  industry.  The main reason for this is:

(a)   Humid climate is a favorable  for growth of long staple cotton.

(b)   Humid climate is a favorable  for operating spinning mills.

(c)   Humid climate is a favorable  for preservation of total weight of cotton as it is a weight loosing material.
(d)   Humid climate is a favorable  for spinning  as the thread  does not break frequently.
49.    Bio-gas has a greater potential in the plains and hills of North India due to the following reason:

1.   There   is  dense   vegetation   and large  number  of  cattle  and livestock are reared here.

2.   Due to high density of population especially  in the northern  plains huge decay and human waste material is available.

Which    of    the    statements    is/are correct?

(a) Only i              (b) Only ii

(c) Both i and ii    (d) None of these

50.    Consider the following statements

1.   Cloud  seeding  is  a  process  to provide condensation nuclei to clouds  to  control  excessive rainfall.

2.   Silver iodide and dry ice is used for the purpose.

Which    of    the    statements    is/are correct?

(a) Only i              (b) Only ii

(c) Both i and ii    (d) None of these

51.    What are the favorable conditions for the river capture to occur?

1.   Steep channel gradient.

2.   Relatively broad valley.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
3.  Higher volume of water so that velocity and discharge may be sufficiently high.

4.   Soft rocks.

5.   More sediment load.

Which    of    the    statements    is/are correct?

(a) Only 1, 2 and 3 (b) Only 2, 3 and 5 (c) Only 1, 3 and 4 (d) All of the above
52.    Consider the following statements:

1.   Cold  air  mass  is  one  which  is colder  than  the  underlying surface and is associated with stable weather conditions.

2. Warm air mass is one which is warmer than the underlying surface and is associated with instability and atmospheric turbulence.

Which    of    the    statements    is/are correct?

(a) Only i              (b) Only ii

(c) Both i and ii    (d) None of these

53.    Consider   the   following   statements related to plate tectonics:
1.  The convectional currents which causes  divergence  and convergence   activities   of  plates
are    produced    due    to    radio- activity.

2. Transform   fault   leads   to formation  of  "zone  of preservation".

3.   At   convergent   boundary   when both   plates   are   of   maritime nature, trenches are formed and when one is continental and other is maritime then mountains are formed.

Which    of    the    statements    is/are correct?

(a) All of the above (b) Only 1 and 3 (c) Only 2 and 3    (d) Only 1 and 2
54.    Consider   the   following   statements related to weathering:

1.  Plates contribute to mechanical weathering.

2.   The weathering process by which the outer layers of the rock peel out in concentric cells due to difference of temperature in the outer layers is called exfoliation.

3.   The process of weathering help in giving different colors and properties to the soil.

Which    of    the    statements    is/are correct?

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
(a)  All of the above (b) Only 1 and 3 (c) Only 2 and 3    (d) Only 1 and 2
55. Season is a period of the year characterized by a particular set of weather  conditions.  Seasons  are caused by:

1.   Rotation of the earth.

2.   Ocean current and rotation of the earth.

3.   Inclination of the earth's axis and earth's revolution.

4.   Air mass and jet-streams.

Which of the above stated reasons are incorrect?

(a) Only 1, 2 and 3 (b) Only 1, 2 and 4 (c) Only 2 and 4
(d) Only 1 and 3

56.    Consider the following statements:

1.   Alluvial  soil  is  the  largest  soil group of India.

2.   Alluvial soils rich in nitrogen but it has low portion of potash.

Which    of    the    statements    is/are correct?

(a) Only i              (b) Only ii

(c) Both i and ii    (d) None of these
57.    Which one of the following statement is not correct about the Sargasso Sea?

(a) There is no mixing of the water of the  Sargasso  Sea  with  the remaining  water of the North Atlantic Ocean.

(b) The   Sargasso   Sea   records   the lowest salinity of North Atlantic Ocean.

(c) The  Sargasso  Sea  plays  a  major role  in the migration  of the European eel and the American eel.

(d) This  Sea  is  covered  with  rootless sea weeds.

58.    Consider the following statements:

1.   The  major  jet  streams  on  the earth are westerly winds

2. Jet streams are caused by a combination  of  the  earth's rotation on its axis and atmospheric heating by solar radiation.

3.   The strongest jet streams are the polar jets.

Which of the statements  given above is/are correct?

(a) 1 and 2 only    (b) 2 only

(c) 1 and 3 only    (d) 1, 2 and 3

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
59.    Which   of   the   following    pairs   is correctly matched?

Geographic feature      Region

(a) Guiana                      North region of

South America

(b) Kimberley Plateau     Central Africa

(c) Caucasus region       Western Europe

(d) Piedmont Plateau      Eastern Asia

60.    Consider the following dams:

1.   Jawahar Sagar Dam

2.   Rana Pratap Sagar Dam

3.   Indira Sagar Dam

4.   Gandhi Sagar Dam

Which of the dams given above are included  in the  Chambal  Valley Project?

(a) 1, 2 and 3 only (b) 2, 3 and 4 only (c) 1, 2 and 4 only
(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4 only

61. Consider the following statements regarding tropical moist deciduous forests:

1.   These forests are found in areas of annual  rainfall  of 100 to 200 cm       and       mean       annual
temperature of about 27⁰c.
2.   The  trees  of  these  forest  shed their leaves for about 6-8 weeks during early summer due to insufficiency of moisture availability for the leaves.

Which of the statements  given above is/are correct?

(a) Only I              (b) Only ii

(c) Both i and ii    (d) None of these

62. Consider the following statements regarding the Desert Development Programme of India:

1.   It is the only associated with only the hot desert areas of Rajasthan, Gujarat and Haryana.

2.  It is conceived as a long term measure for restoration of ecological balance.

3. It addresses the conservation, development and harassing of the land, water, livestock and human resources.

Which of the statements  given above is/are correct?

(a) 1 only              (b) 1 and 2 only

(c) 2 and 3 only    (d) 1, 2 and 3

63.    Which of the following statements are wrong?
1.   Glaciers    and    ice-sheets    may deposit  a  widespread  mantle  of

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
unsorted fluvio-glacial sands and gravels  in  the  outwash  plain  or may drop boulder clay to form a till plain or drift plain.

2.   Winds may blow Aeolian deposits very fine particles known as loess from interior deserts or barren surfaces  and deposit  them upon hills, valleys or plains forming a Loess plateau.

3.   In glaciated  regions  glaciers  and ice-sheets scoured and leveled the land forming ice-sourced plains.

Code:

(a) 1 and 2 only    (b) 1 and 3 only

(c) 2 and 3 only   (d) None of the above

64.   Consider    the   following    statements regarding the Indus river:

1. After        originating        near Manasarovar lake, the river flows in  the  southwest  direction through Ladak.

2.   It  has  courses  through  western Tibet and Northern India and Pakistan.

3.   The  Indus  river  among  the  few rivers in the world that has a tidal bore.
4.   The Zanskar river and the Shyok river  are  the  tributary  of  Indus river
Which of the statements  given above are correct?

(a) 1 and 2 only

(b) 2 and 3 only

(c) 2, 3 and 4 only

(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4 only

65.    Which of the following is/are not the cause  of infertility  of  Saline  or  Usar soil?

1.   They lack sodium, Potassium and Magnesium and thus they are infertility and do not support any vegetative growth.

2.   They are deficient in calcium and nitrogen   and  hence   they  have very low water bearing capacity.

3.  Such soils have also have been formed in areas of canal irrigation and high sub-soil water-table.

Which of the statements  given above are correct?

(a) 1 only              (b) 2 only

(c) 1and 2 only     (d) 1 and 3 only

66.  In  the   context   of   recent   US-China Climate Pact consider the following statements:

1.   The  US  would  cut  Greenhouse Gas emissions to 26 to 28 percent below 2005 levels by 2030.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
2.   China  has  promised  to  increase its use of energy from zero- emission source to 20 percent by
2025.

Which of the statements  given above are correct?

(a) Only I              (b) Only ii

(c) Both i and ii    (d) None of these

67.    Consider the following statements:

1. In  the  absence  of naturally occurring green house effect, the earth would be a frozen lifeless planet.
2.   CO₂      is    the    biggest    overall
contributor  to  the  green  house

effect.

Which of the statements  given above are correct?

(a) Only i              (b) Only ii

(c) Both i and ii    (d) None of these

68.    Consider the following statements:

1.  The vegetation has a park like appearance.

2.   The trees are of medium  height, flat topped and umbrella shaped.

3.   Species may be xerophytic or the broad leaf deciduous types.
4.   The     plant     varieties     include elephant grass, flat topped acacia etc.

Which   of  the   vegetation   or  biome possess the above characteristics?

(a) Savanna          (b) Monsoon

(c) Desert              (d) Temperate

69.    Consider   the   following   statements about major objectives of the social forestry:

1. Social   forestry   term   was introduced in India by National Commission on Agriculture

2.   Social forestry doesn't include the component of Afforestation

3.   This   sche   recognises   rights   of village  people  over  forest resources

(a) 1 and 3 are true   (b) 2 & 3 are true

(c) All are false          (d) All are true

70.    In the contest  of ecosystem,  primary production is defined as:

(a) The amount of biogas produces per unit  area  over  a  time  period  by plant during photosynthesis.
(b) The  amount  of  oxygen  produced per unit area over a time period by plants during photosynthesis.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
(c) The  amount  of  inorganic  matter produced per unit area over a time period by plants during photosynthesis.

(d) The amount  of food produced  per unit area over a time period by plants during photosynthesis.

71.    In  which  of  the  following  states  the

Red Panda are found naturally?

1.   Jammu and Kashmir

2.   Himachal Pradesh

3.   Assam

4.   Sikkim

Select  the  correct  answer  using  the codes given below:

(a) 1, 2 and 3 only

(b) 3 and 4 only (c) 1 and 4 only (d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
72.    How  do  the  burning  fossil  fuels  like coal and petroleum produce air pollution?
1.   Fuels such as coal and petroleum have  some  amount  of  nitrogen and Sulphur in them and the combustion  results  in  the formation  of  oxides  of  Sulphur and nitrogen which are major pollutants in environment.
2.  Oxides of Sulphur and Nitrogen dissolve  in  rain  to  produce Methane which gives rise to acid rain.

3.   The  combustion   of  fossil  fuels also increases the amount of suspended particles in air.

Select  the  correct  answer  using  the codes given below:

(a) 1 only

(b) 2 and 3 only (c) 1 and 3 only (d) 1, 2 and 3
73.    The self purifying capacity of water is unable to purify the water, the reason is:

(a) When  concentration  of suspended particles organic and inorganic substances increases it becomes polluted.

(b) When  concentration   of  dissolved substances  gets  increased  it becomes polluted.

(c) When the organic matter increased it becomes polluted.

(d) When     the     inorganic      matter increases  it becomes  polluted and unfit for use.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
74. Ocean-Grabbing      and     Ocean- Encroachment are associated with

(a) Big fishing concern

(b) Oil spilling

(c) Hijacking of ships by pirates

(d) Oil drilling on the shores

75.  The Clean Development Mechanism allows developing countries to do their bit to reduce carbon emissions. In this regard consider the following statements:

1)   The  mechanism  allows  projects that  reduce  green-house emissions  in  poor  countries  to earn a carbon credit for each ton of Carbondioxide avoided.

2)   The credits cannot be sold to firm in rich  countries  which  are obliged Kyoto protocol to cut their emissions.

Select  the  correct  answer  using  the codes given below:

(a) 1 only              (b) 2 only

(c) Both 1 and 2   (d) Neither 1 nor 2

76. Consider the following statements regarding the HFC-134:
1)  HFC-134 is an inert gas used primarily  as a high  temperature refrigerator         for         domestic
refrigeration  and  automobile  air conditioners.

2)   HFC-134  can  result  in  frostbite when it contacts skin, as well as blindness upon eye contact.

Select  the  correct  answer  using  the codes given below:

(a) 1 only              (b) 2 only

(c) Both 1 and 2   (d) Neither 1 nor 2

77.    Consider   the   following   statements about Basel convention?

1.   It is an international  treaty that was designed to reduce the movement of hazardous waste between nations.

2.   It   specifically    focuses    on   to prevent   transfer   of   hazardous waste from developed to less developed countries.

3.   It also addresses the movement of radioactive  waste  between different nations.

Select  the  correct  answer  using  the codes given below:

(a) 1 and 2only (b) 2 and 3 only (c) 1 and 3 only
(d) All of these

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
78.    Consider   the   following   statements related to Indian Rhinos Vision 2020:

1.   The goal of IRV 2020 to increase the   total   rhino   population   in Assam from 2,000 to 3,000 by the year 2020.

2.  Pabitora National Park has the largest number of one horned rhinos in the world.

3.   Kaziranga  national  Park has the highest  density  of rhinos  in  the world.

4.   Translocation    of    rhinos    from source populations in Kaziranga and Pabitora to target areas such as Manas.

Select  the  correct  answer  using  the codes given below:

(a) 1 and 2 only    (b) 1 and 4 only

(c) 1, 2 and 3 only (d) 2, 3 and 4 only

79.   Consider    the   following    statements related to the benefits of wetlands:

1.   It is storehouse  of plant  genetic material.

2.  It maintains water tables and nutrient retention in floodplains.
3.  It helps in controlling floods by trapping suspended solids and nutrients to the lakes
Select the incorrect answer using the above statements:

(a) 1 only              (b) 1 and 2 only

(c) 2 and 3 only   (d) None of the above

80.    Consider   the   following   statements related to the benefits of artificial recharge:

1.   Aquifer water can be improved by recharge  with  high  quality injected water.

2.   Recharge       can       significantly increase  the sustainable  yield  of an aquifer.

3.   It is contamination free.

Select  the  correct  answer  using  the codes given below:

(a) Only 1 and 2   (b) Only 2 and 3

(c) Only 1 and 3   (d) All of the above

81.    The     important     consequences     of

Temperature Inversion are

1.   Occurrence of Fog

2.   Accidents

3.   Damage to crops

4.   Unseasonal rains

Choose the TRUE statements.

(a) All are correct  (b) 1, 2 and 3 only

(c) 1, 2 and 4 only (d) 1 and 4 only

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
82.    Consider    the    following    regarding

'Meridonial Circulation'

Assertion:   This   concept   was   put forward by George Hadely.

Reason: The model based on the basic pressure differences brought about by uneven heating of the Earth's surface.

Choose the correct option?

(a) Both A and R true

(b) Both A and R are False. (c) A is True R is False
(d) A is False R is True

83.    Consider the following statements:

A.   Trade  winds  are  permanent  or primary winds

B.   Seasonal   reversal   of   winds   is character of trade winds

(a) Only A is true  (b) Only B is true

(c) Both are false  (d) Both are false

84.    Which  of the  following  are  the  main causes of Ocean Currents?

(a) Differential      heating      of      the equatorial and polar oceans.

(b) Trade and anti trade winds. (c) Coriolis effect.
(d) All of the above.

85.    Which    branch    of    monsoon    hits Malabar Coast first and causes monsoon Burst?
(a) Indian ocean branch (b) Arabian sea branch (c) Bay of Bengal branch (d) None of the above
86.    Which of the following ethnic group is

Indigenous People of Asia?

1. Ainu

2. Chakmas

3. Kurds

4. Efe

Choose the correct option

(a) All are correct  (b) 1, 2 and 3 only

(c) 1, 2 and 4 only (d) 2 and 3 only

87.    The pedogenic regime of podzolisation associated with which among the following areas?

(a) Hot & Dry        (b) Hot & Humid

(c) Wet and Dry    (d) Cool & Humid

88.  Consider  the  following  regarding  Heat

Wave:

1. According   to   Meteorological Department of India when the maximum  temperature  is  5 degree or more than normal is called heat wave.

2.   It is formed when high pressure builds  from above  (3000-7500m)

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
and hangs  over a region  for the same time.

3.   The heat wave has killed largest number of people in Andhra Pradesh, this summer.

Choose the TRUE statements?

(a) 1 and 3 only    (b) 2 and 3 only

(c) None are true  (d) All are true

89.    Match the following

Multipurpose river valley project      State

1.      Nagarjun Sagar     1. Andhra Pradesh

2.      Hirakud project     2. Odisha

3.      Kosi project           3. Bihar

4.      Mahanadi project  4. Madhya Pradesh

Choose the correct Option

(a) 1-1, 2-2, 3-3, 4-4 (b) 1-1, 2-4, 3-3, 4-2 (c) 1-1, 2-3, 3-4, 4-2 (d) 1-1, 2-2, 3-4, 4-3

90.    Consider    the    following    regarding

Cloud Burst:

1.   It is charecterized by sudden and heavy downpour.

2. Generally,      cumulous-nimbus clouds  which can extend  upto a height  of  15km  above  the  sea level are involved.

3.   The  hard  rain  characteristics  of

Cloud   burst   is   caused   by   a
phenomenon known as Langmuir

Precipitation.

Choose the correct option

(a) All are true      (b) 1 and 2 only

(c) 1 only              (d) 1 and 3 only

91.    The main cause for Kalahari being a desert is

(a) The cold currents near the coast

(b) Its location on the west coast in the tropics

(c) The warm currents near the coast

(d) None of the above

92.    Duns/    Doons    are    characteristic feature of Himalayan ranges they are related to
(a) River valleys

(b) Small river streams

(c) Dry river valleys

(d) Himalayan slopes

93.    If you travel  through  the Himalayas, you are likely to see which of the following plants naturally growing there?

1.   Oak

2.   Rhododendron

3.   Sandalwood

Select the correct answer

(a) 1 only              (b) 2 only

(c) 1 and 2 only    (d) 2 and 3

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
94.    Which one is wrongly matched?

1.   Labrador-Cold   current   -   North

Atlantic Ocean

2.   Kurile    current-Warm    current- North Pacific Ocean

3.   Peru-Cold   current-South   Pacific

Ocean

4.   Aghulus - Warm current - Indian

Ocean

Choose from the below Options

(a) 1 only              (b) 2 only

(c) 1 and 2 only    (d) None

95.  China,  Malaysia,  Philippines  and Taiwan claim sovereignty on which of the following island in South China Sea?

(a)  Caroline Island (b) Spratly Island (c) Senkaku Island (d) Mariana Island
96.    Consider the following statements

A. Knot is an area from where mountains seem to be radiating out.

B.   Pamir knot is the only Knot in the world.
C.   Mount. K2 is the highest peak in India it belongs to Himalayan ranges.

D.   Himalayas are in between Nanga parbat and Namcha barwa.

(a) All are true

(b) All are false

(c) A and D are true

(d) B and C are true.

97.    Which among the following are part of

Purvanchal Hills A.   Patkai Hills B.   Mizo Hills
C.   Naga Hills

D.   Manipuri Hills

(a) All are false     (b) All are true

(c) Only A is true  (d) Only C is false

98.    Consider the following statements:

A.   A Gulf is a deep inlet of sea with a narrow mouth

B.   The city of Surat is at the mouth of Tapi

C.   Gulf   of   Mannar   is   the   only maritime   biosphere   reserve   of India
D.   Tapi, Narmada,  Sabarmati,  Mahi end in Arabian Sea.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
(a) A, B, C are true (b) B, C, D are true (c) All are true
(d) All are false.

99.    Which of the following are components of Sethu Samudram project?

A.   Digging up of adams bridge

B.   Widening  and  deepening  of Palk

Strait

(a) Only A is true  (b) Only B is true

(c) Both are true   (d) Both are false.
100.  Consider  the  following  and  identify wrongly matched ones.

(a) Aravallis     -     precambrian     fold mountains - Gurushikar is highest peak

(b) Eastern      Ghats      -      Archean mountains  -  Mahendragiri  is highest peak

(c) Western    Ghats    -    Precambrian mountains - Anamudi is highest peak

(d) Sikkim- Kanchenjunga- Himalayasw w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
Place for Rough Work

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
