

1.     Ans: C
2.     Ans: A
3.     Ans: B
4.     Ans: A
Exp: All time zones in the globe are described in terms of the number of hours between the standard meridian of that time zone and the Greenwich meridian. China spans five time zones but runs on a single national time using the standard  meridian  of Beijing.  Russia uses 11 standard time zones.
5.     Ans: B
6.     Ans: C
7.     Ans: D
Exp:  The  spate  of farmers‟  suicides  that  has  been occurring  in the different  parts of the country  since
1997-98  can  be  linked  to  the  "agrarian  distress‟
caused  by  structural   changes   in  agriculture   and changes in economic and agricultural  policies. These include: the changed pattern of landholdings; changing cropping  patterns especially  due to the shift to cash crops; liberalisation policies that have exposed Indian agriculture to the forces of globalisation; heavy dependence on high-cost inputs; the withdrawal of the state   from   agricultural   extension   activities   to  be replaced  by  multinational  seed  and  fertiliser companies;  decline  in  state  support  for  agriculture; and individualisation of agricultural operations.
8.     Ans: B
9.     Ans: A
10.   Ans: D
11.   Ans: A
12.   Ans: D
Exp: Basalt is an example of extrusive igneous rock. These rocks contains silica content between 45 -60 %.
13.   Ans: D
14.   Ans: A
Exp: Gharials(Fish-eating,  Long-nosed crocodiles) once thrived  in all the major  river systems  of the Indian Subcontinent.  Today,  they  are  extinct  in  the  Indus River, in the Brahmaputra of Bhutan and Bangladesh, and in the Irrawaddy River. Their distribution is now limited to only 2% of their former range. Gharials do not kill and eat humans. Jewellery found in their stomachs may have been the reason for the myth that gharials are man-eaters. They may have swallowed this jewellery   as  gastroliths   used  to  aid  digestion   or buoyancy   management.    As   the   population    has

declined drastically in the past 70 years, the gharial is listed as Critically Endangered by the IUCN.
15.   Ans: C
Exp: Primary waves also called as Longitudinal or Compressional  waves are analogous  to sound waves wherein particles move both to and fro in the line of propagation  of the  ray.  'P' waves  travel  with fastest speed through solid materials.
16.   Ans: C
Exp:   The   cross   section   of   glacial   valleys   are characterized by U-shaped valleys with conclave slope, steep walls and flat floors. When floating up to nine- tenth of a body of glacial ice lies below  water level. Therefore a glacier several hundred meters thick can erode to considerable depth below sea level before the buoyancy of the water reduces its erosive power where it enters the open water.
17.   Ans: C
Exp: At the high temperatures, in the petrol and diesel engines of cars and trucks N2  & O2  react to form a small quantity of No, which is emitted into the air with the exhaust gases. This NO is oxidized in air to NO2 which  in  turn  absorbs  energy  from  sunlight  and breaks up into nitric oxide and free oxygen atom which is known as Photochemical decomposition.
18.   Ans: C
Exp: The Sun, the Earth and the Moon came in the position  of quadrature  i.e right angle  on seventh  or eighth day of every fortnight of a month and thus the tide producing forces of the sun and the moon work in opposite direction and as a result low tide is caused.
19.   Ans: C
Exp: An ergo graph is a graph that shows a relation between   human   activities,   or   agricultural/climate factors, and a seasonal year. The name was coined by Dr. Arthur Geddes of the University of Edinburgh.  It can  either   be  a  polar  coordinate   (circular)   or  a Cartesian coordinate (rectangular) graph, and either a line graph or a bar graph. It is prepared to show the area  as  well  as  growing  season  of  crop  along  with climatic  (temperature  +  rainfall)  relationship  of  that crop in the same area.
20.   Ans: B
Exp: Karst  Topography  refers  to that surface  which disappears  in limestone formation through a swallow
hole or sink hole. Cobbles and pebbles  are abraded by long periods of wind erosion.
21.   Ans: A
Exp: In mid-oceanic ridges the movement of plates is in opposite direction and there is consequent formation of faults  and  ruptures  and  upwelling  of  magma  or fissure flow of basaltic lavas.
22.   Ans: C
Exp: Option C is correct. As Seaweeds  only grow in coastal shallow water where ever sizeable substrata is available.
23.   Ans: B
Exp: National park enjoys greater protection than sanctuary. Grazing of livestock is totally prohibited in National park, which is regulated in sanctuary.
24.   Ans: A
25.   Ans: C
Exp: 42  tiger reserves are spread over 17 states.
26.   Ans: A
Exp: E-8 countries are India, Botswana, The Republic of Congo,  Indonesia,  Kenya,  Srilanka,  Tanzania  and Thailand. E-8 was held at Delhi in May 2014.
27.   Ans: A
Exp:   The   Nairobi   Convention   of   1985   or   the Convention of the Protection, Management and Development of the Marine and Coastal Environment of the Eastern African Region is a regional framework agreement for marine environmental management. It is implemented  by the Consortium  for Conservation  of Coastal and Marine Ecosystems in the Western Indian Ocean (WIO-C) in coordination with the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) as well as non- governmental   organizations   such  as  World Conservation Union (IUCN) and Western Indian Ocean Marine Science Association (WIOMSA).
28.   Ans: D
29.   Ans: A
Exp:  A Central  fact  finding  committee  has  released "Drowning  a valley:  Destroying  a civilization"  report warned against increasing the height of Sardar Sarovar Dam on the Narmada river in Gujarat. The report says that it could lead to a calamity bigger than the earthquake in Nepal.
30.   Ans: B
Exp: Robin flies became national bird of United Kingdom. Robin flies the red-breasted bird has topped a poll of more than 200,000 people to choose the UK's first national bird, winning a landslide victory. The bird received 34% of votes, followed by the barn owl, which received 12%, and the blackbird, 11%.
31.   Ans: D
Exp: In (iii) it increases as we move up higher latitude.
32.   Ans: B
Exp: it is 82.5⁰ E    1⁰ = 4 mins: 74 x 4 =296 mins
33.   Ans: A
Exp: They don't occur in strata and contain very little fossils.
34.   Ans: D
35.   Ans: D
36.   Ans: B
37.   Ans: A
38.   Ans: C
39.   Ans: C
40.   Ans: D
Exp: As we move up pressure decreases, increase in temperature decreases pressure.
41.   Ans: A
42.   Ans: D
Exp:  Cloud  Bursts  can  occur  anywhere   provided moisture source and intense convection are available. Western Ghats region is more vulnerable to landslides than the Himalayas.
43.   Ans:  C
44.   Ans: A
Exp:  Chotanagpur  plateau  is  mineral  heartland  of
India.
45.   Ans: A
Exp: this project aim at enabling the rural population to conserve water for drinking, irrigation, fisheries and afforestation.
46.   Ans: D
Exp: Rajastan and Maharashtra - flouride content. WB
and Bihar - arsenic content.
47.   Ans: D
48.   Ans: D
49.   Ans: C
50.   Ans: B
Exp: Cloud seeding enhances the cloud formation thus give rainfall.
Silver iodide and dry ice is used for the purpose.
51.   Ans: C
Exp: Conditions include there should be relatively narrow valley so that river may not spread in the otherwise wide and flat valleys and there should be low sediment so that river may resort to active erosion.
52.   Ans: D
Exp: Cold air mass is associated with instability and atmospheric  turbulence  while warm air mass and is associated with stable weather conditions.
53.   Ans: A
54.   Ans: A
55.   Ans: B
Exp: Season  is a period  in the year  resulting  from inclination of the earth's axis and earth's revolution.
56.   Ans: A
Exp: Nitrogen is generally low, potash and alkalic are adequate.
57.   Ans: B
Exp:   It   records    highest   salinity   due   to   high temperature and evaporation.
58.   Ans: D
59.   Ans: A

Geographic feature            Region
(a) Guiana                            North region of south America
(b) Kimberley Plateau            Northern region of
western Australia
(c) Caucasus region              Eastern Europe
(d) Piedmont Plateau           South eastern USA
60.   Ans: C
Exp: 4 projects under Chambal valley project, another is  Kota  Barrage.  Indira  Sagar  Dam  is on  Narmada river.
61.   Ans: C
62.   Ans: C
Exp: it is also associated with cold deserts in J&K....
63.   Ans: D
64.   Ans: C
Exp:  River   flows   in  northwest   direction   through
Ladakh-baltistan.
65.   Ans: A
Exp: They contain Na, K and Mg which make them infertile and do not support vegetative growth.
66.   Ans: D
Exp: US by 2025, China by 2030
67.   Ans: A
68.   Ans: A
69.   Ans A
Exp: Social forestry or community based forestry has the basic objective of involving the local community in forest activities
70.   Ans: A
71.   Ans: B
Exp: they are endemic to the temperate forests of the Himalayas. A disjunct population include in Meghalaya plateau.
72.   Ans: C
Exp: they produce Nitric and Sulphuric acid.
73.   Ans: A
74.   Ans: A
75.   Ans: A
Exp: the credits can be sold to firms in rich countries
(Kyoto protocol)
76.   Ans: B
77.   Ans: D
78.   Ans: B
Exp:  Our ambitious goal is to attain a wild population of  at  least  3,000  greater  one-horned  rhinos  in  the Indian state of Assam - spread over seven protected areas - by the year 2020.
79.   Ans:  D
80.   Ans:  D
81.   Ans: B
Exp:   Generally   Temperature   decreases   as   move upward in Troposphere at the rate of 6.4degree C/1000m. If it decreases it is called Temperature Inversion.  And  its Consequences  are:  Occurrence  of
Fog, Accidents,  Damage to crops, Impact on Human
Settlements.
82.   Ans: A
Exp: Hadely postulated according to Meridonial circulation  as  Cold  air  descended  at the  poles  and flowed along the Earth's  surface  toward the warmer equator. This flow will be countered by rising warm air at the equator and a flow aloft toward the poles so that two large Hadely cells existed in each hemisphere.
83.   Ans: A
84.   Ans: D
Exp: The main causes are: Differential heating, trade and anti trade winds, Coriolis effect, variation in the salinity and temperature of oceans, configuration of the coast line and ocean floor.
85.   Ans: B
86.   Ans: B
Exp: Efe is African Ethnic Community.
87.   Ans: D
Exp: The pedogenic regime of podzolisation associated with areas of cool & humid climate which have forests as natural vegetation
88.   Ans: D
89.   Ans: A
90.   Ans: A
Exp:  Langmuir  precipitation   is  a  phenomenon   in which drops of rain fuse together to create large drops as they fall, falling more quickly as they grow.
91.   Ans: B
Exp: Kalahari is a trade wind hot desert of the world. The trade winds spend most of their moisture through rainfall in the eastern margins of the continent and as they reach the western margins of the continents they become dry and hence are unable to give rainfall.
92.   Ans: C
93.   Ans: C
94.   Ans: B
Exp: Kurile current is also known as Oyashio current which is cold current.
95.   Ans: B
Exp:  The  Spratly   Islands   dispute   is  an  ongoing territorial  dispute  between  Brunei,  China,  Malaysia, the Philippines, Taiwan (Republic of China), and Vietnam, concerning ownership of the Spratly Islands, a group of islands  and associated  maritime  features located in the South China Sea. The dispute is characterised by diplomatic stalemate and the employment  of low-level military pressure techniques (such as military occupation  of disputed territory)  in the advancement of national territorial claims.
96.   Ans: C
97.   Ans: B
98.   Ans: C
99.   Ans: C
100. Ans: C

