

1.      Which of the following  is/are  correct regarding  the definition  of 'planet' set in Prague in 2006 by the International Astronomical Union (IAU) is:
1.    is in orbit around the Sun

2.    has       sufficient       mass       to assume hydrostatic     equilibrium (a nearly round shape)
3.   has "cleared the neighbourhood" around its orbit.
4.    Pluto   does   not   have   sufficient mass      to     assume hydrostatic equilibrium, so it is called "dwarf" planet.
Choose the correct answer:

(a) Only 1 and 2 (b) Only 2 and 3
(c) Only 1, 2 and 3 (d) All of the above
2.      Which of the following events occurred during  the  Non-Cooperation Movement?
1. Foundation       of      Working Committee of 15 members of the Indian  National  Congress.   This was first proposed by Gandhiji.
2.   Visit of India by Prince of Wales.

3.   Foundation   of   All   India   Kisan

Sabha.
Which  of  the  statement  given  above is/are not correct?
(a) 2 and 3 only    (b) 1 and 2 only

(c)   1 and 3 only  (d)  1, 2 and 3 only

3.      Which   of   the   following   paintings was/were prevalent in India during Delhi Sultanate?
1.   Mural paintings.

2.   Miniature paintings

3.   Paintings on cloths.

Which of the statement is given above is/are not correct?
(a) 2 and 3 only    (b) 1 and 2 only

(c)   1 and 3 only  (d)  1, 2 and 3 only

4.      Consider the following statements:

1.   Cold ocean currents which bring cold  water  are  usually  found  in east coast of continent in the low and middle latitudes (in both hemispheres).
2.   Cold ocean currents are found in west coast of higher latitudes  in northern hemisphere.
3.   Warm ocean currents which bring warm ocean water are usually in west coast of the continent in the low and middle latitudes (in both hemispheres).

4.   Warm  ocean  currents  found  in east coast of the continent in high latitudes in north hemisphere.
Select   the   correct   answer   from following codes:
(a) 1, 2, 3 and 4

(b) 1, 2 and 3 only (c) 1, 2 and 4 only (d) None of these
5.      Which  of  the  following  are  correct about  Delhi-Mumbai  Industrial Corridor (DMIC):
1. This corridor covers 5 states Maharashtra, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Haryana only.
2.   It is a state sponsored Industrial Development  project  of Government of India.
3.   Recently  the  cabinet  revised  the cost of the project.
Select the correct answer:

(a) 1 and 2 only    (b) 1 and 3 only

(c) 2 and 3 only    (d) 1, 2 and 3

6.      Consider the following statements:

1. The               inter-governmental agreement  for  the  establishment of SAARC  University  was  signed at 14th summit.
2.   The governments decided that the university would be established in Bangladesh.
Which of the given above are correct? (a) 1 only              (b) 2 only
(c) 1 and 2            (d) Neither 1 nor 2
7.      Consider  the  following  reasons  why the Vaishyas  (third varna)  supported to  both  Gautam  Buddha  and Mahavira Swami and the concurrent merchants  (setthis) presented  gifts to Buddha and his disciples:
1.   Both preached the gospel of non- violence  which  was necessary  to promote trade and commerce.
2.   Dharmasutras,  the  brahmanical law books, condemned lending of money on interest.
3.   Both Jainism and Buddhism  did not oppose private property.
Which of the statement is given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 only              (b) 1 and 2 only

(c)   1 and 3 only  (d)  1, 2 and 3 only

8.      Consider the following features of the Indian capitalists class during the Indian National Movement.
1.   This  class  grew  as  subordinate and junior partner of the British capital.
2. This     class     argued     for comprehensive land reforms in India.
3.   Close  to  the  independence  this class cornered major share of the domestic market.
Which of the statement is given above is/are correct?
(a) 2 and 3 only    (b) 1 and 2 only

(c)  1 and 3 only   (d) 1, 2 and 3 only

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
9.   Consider the following statements regarding Council of Ministers:
1.   It shall always be present to aid and advice the President.
2.   It may not always present to aid and advice the Governor of the state.
3.   The advice tendered by it cannot be inquired into any court of law except Supreme Court.
Which of the statement is given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 only              (b) 1 and 2 only

(c)  2 and 3 only   (d) 1, 2 and 3 only

10.    Which   of   the   following    are   not mentioned   in   the   Constitution   of India?
1.   No-confidence Motion.

2.   Tenure  of  office  of  the  Attorney

General.

3.   The President address to a joint- session  of  the  Parliament  after the general election to the Lok Sabha.
Select  the  correct  answer  using  the codes given below:
(a) 1, and 3 only   (b) 1 and 2 only

(c) 2 and 3 only    (d) 1, 2 and 3

11.    A leave  of the House  is required  for which of the following?
1.   Introduction     of     Adjournment

Motion.
2.   Introduction of Appropriation Bill in the House.
3.   Withdrawal  of any  Bill  from  the

House.

4.   To move a Censure Motion.

Select  the  correct  answer  using  the codes given below:
(a) 1, 2 and 3 only (b) 1, 3 and 4 only (c) 2 and 3, 4 only (d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
12.    Consider   the   following   statements regarding the Parliament of India:
1.   On  all  the  occasions  of  a  joint sitting of both the houses of Parliament  so  far,  the  decision has always  gone  in the  favor  of the Lok Sabha.
2.   No private member Bill has been ever passed in India.
3.   The Presiding Officer of the House is the final authority in matters of regulating the business of the House.
Select  the  correct  answer  using  the codes given below:
(a) 1 and 2 only    (b) 1 and 3 only

(c)   2 and 3 only  (d) 1, 2 and 3

13.    Consider the following statements:

1.   Western  Coastal  plains  of  India are an example of submerged coastal plain while the eastern coastal plains are examples of emerged coastal plains.
2.   Delta formation by rivers is more

frequent  in  the  western  coastal

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
plains   of   India   than   on   the eastern coastal plains.
Which of the given above statements is/are correct:
(a) Only 1             (b) Only 2

(c) Both 1 and 2   (d) None of these

14.    Vitamins     are     required     for    the metabolic  activities  of our body.  The reasons are:
1.   It is classified for their biological and chemical activities, not for structural activities.
2.   It   is   mainly   stored   in   small intestine.
3.   It is not synthesized in sufficient quantities by body.
Select the correct answer:

(a) 1and 3             (b) 1 and 2 only

(c) 2 and 3 only    (d) All of above

15.    Consider the following statements and select correct answer from the code given below:
1.   Some bacteria have a special type of   chlorophyll   that   can   even absorb the longer wavelength infrared radiation.
2.   Chlorophyll is an iron containing protein.
3.  Chlorophyll occur in two forms: Chlorophyl-a and Chlorophyl-b
Code:

(a) 1and 3             (b) 1 and 2 only

(c) 2 and 3 only    (d) All of above
16.    Consider the following statements and select correct answer from the code given below:
1.   Stem cells are unspecialized.

2.   It   is   capable   of   dividing   and renewing.
3.   It  can  give  rise  to  specialized cells.
Code:

(a) 1and 3             (b) 1 and 2 only

(c) 2 and 3 only    (d) All of above

17.    Consider the following statements and select correct answer from the code given below:
1. For generic manufactures "the product is the product", while manufactures  of  innovator biologics claim "the process is the product".
2.   Biosimilar  medicines  are  replica of biologic drugs.
Code:

(a) Only 1             (b) Only 2

(c) Both 1 and 2   (d) None of these

18.  Within biological communities, some species are important  in determining the ability of large number of other species  to persist  in the community. Such species are called:
(a) Threatened species (b) Key stone species. (c) Allopatric species
(d) Sympatric species

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
19.    Which of the following is/are causes of

Thermal Pollution?

1.   Use of water as coolant.

2.   Storm water by power plants.

3.   Silting affect in the river.

Select  the  correct  answer  using  the code given below?
(a) 1 and 2            (b) 2 and 3

(c) Only 3             (d) 1, 2 and 3

20.    Consider  the  following  about  Green

India Mission (GIM):

1.   Elimination  of poverty is also an aspect of GIM.
2.   The  target  is  to  be  5  million hectares of forest and non-forest land under green cover and improve the quality of forest cover by an another 5 million hectares.
Select  the  correct  answer  using  the code given below?

(a) Only 1             (b) Only 2

(c) Both 1 and 2   (d) None of these

21.    Which of the following are components of Photochemical Smog?

1.   Ozone

2.   Peroxyacetyl Nitrate

3.   Nitrogen Oxide

4.   Sulphur Dioxide

Select  the  correct  answer  from  the codes given below:
(a) 1, 2 and 3        (b) 1, 3 and 4

(c) 1, 2 and 4        (d) 1, 2, 3 and 4

22. Consider the following statements regarding Bharatiya Mahila Bank (BMB):
1.   Deposits   to   be   accepted   from women only.
2.   The  staff  of  bank  comprises  of women only.
3. The bank has launched some innovative schemes like kitchen loans etc.
Which of the above statements  given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 and 2 only    (b) 3 only

(c) 2 and 3 only    (d) All of the above.

23.    Why    are    transactions    in    shares excluded from the GDP calculations? (a) Because       share       market       is
speculative in nature.

(b) Because   share   market   involves investments  from foreign investors called FIIs
(c) Because   buying  a  share  is  not buying the product of a company.
(d) Because   shares   are   virtual   in nature and not real goods.
24.    Which of the following conceal the real level of GDP?
1.   Black money in the economy.

2.   Household service by a woman.

3.   Voluntary and charitable work.

4.   Pollution     of    a    water    body

(externalities).

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
Select  the  correct  answer  using  the codes given below:
(a) 1 and 2 only    (b) 1 and 4 only

(c) 1, 2 and 3 only (d) 1, 2, 3 and 4

25.    Match List 1 and List 2

A. Black Soil   1. These are also called reh, kallar, usar, thur, rakar, karl and chopan.
B. Red Soil      2. This is the end product of weathering, it cannot be weatherd much further and is indefinitely durable.
fallow  while  in  others  different crops may be sown.
2.   Terracing  and  Contour  Bunding is done at right angles to the hill slopes, following the natural contours  of  the  hill,  the  ridges and  furrows  break  the  flow  of water down the hill.
Choose   the  correct  answer  from following codes:
(a) Only 1 is correct

(b) Only 2 is correct

(c) Both 1 and 2 are correct
C. Laterite

Soil

D. Saline and Alkaline Soils

Code:
3. The soils are poor in lime,

magnesia, phosphates, nitrogen   and  humus,   but are fairly rich in potash. The major crops are cotton, wheat, rice, pulses, millets, tobacco,  oil seeds, potatoes and fruits.
4. The soil has 'self- ploughing' character.
This is a soil group of high temperature  and  low rainfall.

(d) None of these

27.    Consider the following statements:

1. Interaction between the two organisms,  in  which  one organism kills and feeds on the second organisms, is called Parasitism.
2. Mutualism  is  the  way  two organisms of different species biologically interact in a relationship,     in    which    each
individual     derives     a     fitness

A      B      C      D (a)     4       3       2       1 (b)     3       4       2       1 (c)      4       3       1       2 (d)     3       4       1       2
26.    Consider the following statements:
1.   Contour Ploughing, crops may be cultivated  in alternate  strips. Some strips may be allowed to lie
benefit.

Which of the above statement(s) is/are correct?

(a) Only 1             (b) Only 2

(c) Both 1 and 2   (d) None of these

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
28.    Which  of  the  following  are  correct about Asian Brown Cloud?

(a) It is a thick layer of pollutants.

(b) It is a shield to restrict the Gamma ultraviolent rays to reach the earth surface.

(c) Both ((a) and ((b) (d) None of these.
29. The Alpine vegetation in eastern Himalayas is found at great altitudes than western Himalayas because:

(a) The eastern  Himalayas  are higher than the western Himalayas.

(b) The   eastern   Himalayas   are   not covered under snow.

(c) The  eastern  Himalayas  closer  to the  equator  than  western Himalayas.

(d) The eastern Himalayan soil is more fertile than that of western Himalayas.

30. Consider the following statements regarding Satyagraha against the Rowlatt Act:

1.   It  was  launched  by  Gandhiji  to oppose  the  Rowlatt  Act,  which
was  passed  to  curtail  the  civil
liberties of Indians in the name of curbing terrorist violence.
2. It  is  initiated  after  Non- Cooperation Movement in Delhi.
3.   During  the  movement,  Gandhiji was deported from Punjab to Bombay by British rule, while he was trying to quiet the turbulent people.
4.  Gandhiji recalled the movement, when he saw that its total atmosphere had become violent.

Which of the statements  given above are correct?

(a) 1, 2 and 3        (b) 1, 3 and 4

(c) 1, 2 and 4        (d) All of the above

31.    Consider  the  following  statements  in reference to Simon Commission:

1.  It was a statutory commission constituted  to  recommend whether   India   was   ready   for further   Constitutional   progress and on which lines.
2. It  was  constituted  by  the government of Labour party in Britain, which wanted to solve the issue of India as soon as possible.
3.   It was opposed by both moderates and  extremist  nationalists  of India.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
Which of the statements  given above are correct?

(a) 1 and 2 only    (b) 2 and 3 only

(c) 1 and 3 only    (d) 1, 2 and 3

32.    Consider   the   following   statements about temples at Pattadkal:

1.   They     are     built     under     the patronage  of  Chalukyas  of Badami.
2.   There are 10 temples in which 4 are in southern style.
3.   Papanatha temple is the northern style.
4.   Virupaksha temple is in southern style.

Which of the statements  given above are correct?

(a) 1, 2 and 3        (b) 1, 3 and 4

(c) 1, 2 and 4        (d) All of the above

33.    Consider   the   following   statements about Harsha's reign are correct:

1. The   period   witnessed   the ascendency of Varmasharma dharma.
2.   The     decline     of     trade     and commerce affected handicrafts production and agriculture.
3.   The position  of women improved during this period relative to the Gupta period.
4.   The economy became increasingly more feudal and self-sufficient.

Which of the statements  given above are correct?

(a) 1, 2 and 3        (b) 1, 3 and 4

(c) 1, 2 and 4        (d) All of the above

34.    Why the wetlands of Southwest India are one of the best carbon sinks in the country?
(a) Due  to  the  abundance   of  wood fossils  along  with  dissolved carbons.
(b) Wetlands  of  South  India  are  less polluted.
(c) According  to  their  geological  age they are young and hence their carbon capturing capacity is very high.
(d) Some   species   of   planktons   are found  in  these  regions  only  and they help carbon capturing and its storage.
35.    Consider   the   following   statements about different zones of deep lake ecosystem are correct:
1. The littoral zone is the most productive zone.
2.   The profundal zone is known for

average photosynthetic activity.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
Code:

(a) Only 1             (b) Only 2

(c) Both 1 and 2   (d) None of these
39.    Quit  India  Movement  was  the  most radical and last movement  in India's
struggle  for  independence.  Which  of

36.  Nor-Westers form a typical climate feature of which season in India?
(a) Pre-monsoon summer season

(b) Summer monsoon season

(c) Winter season

(d) Retreating monsoon season

37.    Consider the following statements and select correct answer from the code given below:
1. The  Warm  and  Cold  ocean currents meet and provide favorable conditions for growth of phytoplanktons  thus  forming major fishing grounds.
2.   The coasts are free from ice.

3.   British   Columbia   is   a   dented coast with calm waters.
Code:

(a) 1 and 2 only    (b) 2 and 3 only

(c) 1 and 3 only    (d) 1, 2 and 3

38.  In  India  the  primitive  form  of cultivation is called by different names in different regions. Choose the correct match in the following:
1.      Madhya Pradesh  - Bewar or Dahiya

2.      Andhra Pradesh   -Podu or Penda

3.      Orissa                  - Kuruwa

4.      Jharkhand           - Pama Dabi or

Koman or Bringa

Select the correct answer:

(a) 1 and 2 only    (b) 2 and 3 only

(c) 3 and 4 only    (d) 1, 2 and 3 only

the following statements are incorrect with regard to this movement?
(a) Usha   Mehta   ran   the   Congress

Radio

(b) Chittu    Pande    ran    a    parallel government  in  eastern  Uttar Pradesh
(c) Satish       Samanta       established national   government   known   as Jaitya  Sarkar  in  Midnapore district.
(d) Nana  Patil  headed  a  rebellion  in central United Province.
40.    In India performing arts, a rasa is an emotion inspired in an audience by a performer.    Consider the following statements in this regard:
1.   Rasa are created by bhavas: the gestures and facial expressions of the actors.
2.   Expressing Rasa in classical India dance form is referred to as Rasa- Abhinaya.
3. The     Melattur     style     of Bharatanatyam dance was developed largely out of the devadasi traditions.
Which of the statement is given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 and 2 only    (b) 2 and 3 only

(c)   1 and 3 only  (d) 1, 2 and 3 only

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
41. Consider the following statements regarding  ancient  inscriptions  found in India:
1. The  earlier  inscriptions  were written in the pali language.
2.   The Sanskrit was adopted as an epigraphic medium after the Prakrit.
3.   During 9th  and 10th  century use of regional language in the inscriptions was initiated.
Which of the statement is given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 and 2 only    (b) 2 and 3 only

(c) 1 and 3 only    (d) 1, 2 and 3

42.    Public Safety Bill, 1928 was defeated by  Swarajists  by  series  of adjournment motions. In retaliation, government   arrested   many   leaders and famous  Meerut Conspiracy  Case was started. For what purpose the Public  Safety  Bill was  introduced  by government at first place?
(a) Bill  was  aimed  at  to  curb  the activities  of  socialist  and communist ideas.
(b) It   was   aimed   to   increase   the representation of non-official members of central legislative assembly.
(c) Bill  was  aimed  at  to  curb  the activities  of nationalist  newspaper specially sprucing up in vernacular languages.
(d) It was aimed at bringing draconian laws against extremists where sentence  could  be  imparted without proper trail.
43. Consider the following statements regarding the Central Vigilance Commission of India:
1.   The  chairman  and  members  of CVC  are  appointed  by  the resident on the recommendations of a three member committee consisting  of  the  Prime  Minister as  its  head,  Central  Home Minister and Leader of opposition in Lok Sabha.
2.   The chairman members hold the office  for a term  of six  years  or until  they  attain  the  age  of  62 years whichever is earlier.
3.   It  has  all  the  powers  of  a  civil court.

Which of the statements  given above are correct?
(a) 1 and 2 only    (b) 2 and 3 only

(c) 1 and 3 only    (d)  1, 2 and 3

44.    Which among the following statements regarding quorum in a state legislative assembly of India are correct?

1.  It is the minimum number of members  in  the  assembly required   to  be  present   in  the house before it can transact any
business.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
2.   It is ten members or one-tenth of the total number of the house (including the presiding officer) whichever is greater.

3.  If there is no quorum during a meeting of the house, it is duty of the presiding officer either to adjourn the house or to suspend the  meeting  until  there  is quorum.

Which of the statements  given above are correct?
(a) 1 and 2 only    (b) 2 and 3 only

(c) 1 and 3 only    (d) 1, 2 and 3

45.    Which among the following statements regarding  the  removal  process  of  a judge of a High Court in India is/are correct?
1.   A removal motion signed by 100 members  (in case of Lok Sabha) or 50 members (in case of Rajya Sabha) is to be given to the Speaker/Chairman.
2.   The   Speaker/Chairman   has   to admit  the  motion,  any  one  of them can't refuse it.
3.   If the motion is admitted then the Speaker/Chairman  is  to constitute  a  10  member committee to investigate the charges.

Which of the statements  given above are correct?
(a) 1 only              (b) 2 and 3 only

(c) 1 and 3 only    (d)  1, 2 and 3

46. Consider the following statements regarding the property of union and states:
1.   All   lands,   minerals   and   other things of value underlying the ocean within the territorial waters of India are vested in both Union and the states jointly.
2. Only the state government is competent to compulsory acquire or  requisite  property  by  making law  but  it  is  obligatory  for  the state government to pay the compensation.
Which of the statement is given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 only              (b) 2 only

(c)  Both 1 and 2  (d) Neither 1 nor 2

47.    Which   of   the   Fundamental   Rights given  under  part-III  of  the Constitution of India are not self- executory   and   available   not   only against the state but also against private individuals?
1.   Equality   in   access   of   public places
2.   Prohibition of untouchability.

3.   Prohibition    of    acceptance    of foreign title.
4. Freedom    of   speech    and expression.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
5. Prohibition of Employment of children in Hazardous Employment.
Correct code:

(a) 1, 2 and 3 only

(b) 3, 4 and 5 only

(c) 2, 3, 4 and 5 only

(d) 1, 2, 3 and 5 only

48.    Consider   the   following   statements regarding the Prime Minister of India:
1.   He  is  the  chairman  of  National

Integration Council.

2.   He   is   political    head   of   the services.
3.   He is the crisis manager in chief at the political level during emergencies.
Which of the statement is given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 only              (b) 1 and 2 only

(c)   2 and 3 only  (d) 1, 2 and 3 only

49.    Which among the following statements is not correct?
1.   Equality  before  law  deals  with juridic equality while equal protection  of deals with Equality in broader perspective of equal treatment and positive discrimination.
2.   Equality before law is mentioned in  Article  14,  while  equal protection of law is mentioned in Article 123 of the Indian Constitution.
3.   Both   'equality   before   law'  and

'equal  protection  of law' are one and the same thing.
4.   Equal protection of law deals with negative discrimination.
(a) 1, 2 and 3 only (b) 1, 3 and 4 only (c) 2, 3 and 4 only (d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
50.    Consider the following statements:

1. Indian  Constitution  explicitly mentions  "misconduct"  as  a reason to remove a Judge of a Supreme Court.
2. Indian  Constitution  explicitly mentions "misbehavior/ incapacity" as a reason to remove persons,  with  special qualifications, appointed by President or the Governor to serve the Union or State respectively.
Which of the statement is given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 only              (b) 2 only

(c)  Both 1 and 2  (d) Neither 1 nor 2

51.    Which   of  the  following   would   not require an amendment to the Constitution?
1.   Increasing the emoluments of the

President of India.

2.   Extending  the  jurisdiction  of  a High  Court  to  any  Union Territory.
3.   Adoption   of   language   as   the

official language of the state.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
4.   Delimitation of constituencies  for the Lok Sabha elections.
Choose the correct code from below? (a) 1, 2 and 3 only
(b) 1, 3 and 4 only

(c)   2 and 3 and 4only

(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4

52.    The     Preamble     of     the     Indian

Constitution describes:

1.   The     source     power     of     the

Constitution.

2.   The nature of the Indian state.

3.   The objectives of the Constitution.

4.   Constitutional    development    of

India.

Which of the given above are correct: (a) 1 and 2 only
(b) 1, 2 and 3 only (c) 2, 3 and 4 only (d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
53.    Which of the following is correct about

"hedging"?

1. This is an act of reducing uncertainity about future price movements

2.  It may be done in commodity, security and currency

3.   This  may  be  done  by  forward sales or purchases

Select  your  answer  using  the  codes given below?

(a) Only 1             (b) 1 and 2

(c) 2 and 3            (d) 1, 2 and 3
54.    Consider the following about wild life related legislation:
1.   The Wildlife Protection Act, 1972, provide for 6 schedules, in which the last one is for the protection of the plants.
2.   India is a signatory of Convention of Biological Diversity (CBD) and in order to realize the objective of CBD,  in  2002  the  Biodiversity Act, 2002 was enacted.

(a) Only 1             (b) Only 2

(c) Both 1 and 2   (d) None of these

55.    Consider   the   following   statements regarding environmental pollution:

1.   Nitrogen  Oxide(NO)  and  Sulphur
Dioxide(SO₂)  are  responsible  for
acid rain.

2.   Gas   heaters,   coal   mines   and heating devices are the source of Carbon Monoxide.

3.   CFC  causes  Ozone  depletion  in the Mesosphere.

Select the correct answer:

(a) Only 1             (b) Only 1 and 3

(c) Only 1 and 2   (d) All of the above

56.    Consider the following statements:

1.   Alpine Convertible Bond (ACB) is a   bond   issued   by   the   Indian

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
companies to the West European

Investors.

2.   The ACBs are a kind of Foreign Currency  Convertible  Bond (FCCB).

Select  your  answer  using  the  codes given below?

(a) Only 1             (b) Only 2

(c) Both 1 and 2   (d) Neither 1 nor 2

57.    Consider the following statements and select correct answer from the code given below:
1.  The rate of disintegration of a radioactive     element     increases with increase in time.
2.  The rate of disintegration of a radioactive  element  at  given instant of time is inversely proportional to the number of atoms of the radioactive elements present in it.
(a) Only 1             (b) Only 2

(c) Both 1 and 2   (d) None of these

58.    Which  of the following  statements  is incorrect?
(a) Carbogene  is  a  mixture  of  60%

oxygen and 40% carbon dioxide

(b) Carbon monoxide prevents red cell from absorbing oxygen
(c) Carboxy    haemoglobin    is    more stable than oxyhaemoglobin.
(d) None of these
59.    Consider   the   following   statements regarding "Nuclear Reactor":
1.   In a nuclear reactor, Moderator is used to slow down neutrons emitted in a nuclear fission reaction.
2.   In a breeder reactor, moderators are used and molten sodium is used as coolant.
3.   Excess   amount   of   energy   is released during nuclear fission.
Choose correct answer:

(a) 1 and 2            (b) 2 and 3

(c) 1 and 3            (d) All of the above

60.    Consider   the   following   statements about "derivatives":

1.   Derivatives   are   instruments   of raising capital.

2.   They  may  have  fixed  assets  as their collaterals.

(a) Only 1             (b) Only 2

(c) Both 1 and 2   (d) Neither 1 nor 2

61.    Consider the following classification of

Biodiversity:

1.   Gamma diversity    - between community diversity
2.   Beta diversity- within community diversity
3.   Alpha diversity - overall

Biodiversity
Which    among    the    above    is/are correctly matched?

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
(a) Only 1             (b) 1 and 2 only

(c) 1, 2 and 3        (d) None of these

62.    Which       among       the       following

Multilateral  Environment  Agreements
Code:

(a) Only 1             (b) Only 2

(c) Both 1 and 2   (d) None of these

Code:
(MEAs)  is  not  correctly  paired  with respective issue it deals with?

1.   Stockholm Convention     - banning     the     production     of Persistent     Organic     Pollutants known for their toxicity.
2.   Rotterdam Convention     -      the conservation of migratory species
3.   Montreal Protocol, 1987   -  ozone depleting substance.
4.   Bonn convention, 1979    -    prior informed consent procedure for certain hazardous chemicals and pesticides.

(a) 1 and 2 only    (b) 2 and 3 only

(c) 2 and 4 only    (d) 1 and 4 only

64.     Consider the following statements:

1.   In a situation of a fiscal drag, tax receipts of the government increases.

2.   There  is  a  general  downturn  in the total demand in the economy due to fiscal drag.

(a) Only 1             (b) Only 2

(c) 1 and 2            (d) Neither 1 nor 2

65.  Countries   with   competing   and conflicting interest pursuing their best strategies in full knowledge  of others strategies,  none has any incentive  to change their strategy, once the level of equilibrium is reached.
Which   of  the   following   ideas   best

describes the situation?

63.    Which  of  the  following  criteria  have not to be satisfied in order to qualify as  a  'biodiversity  hot  spot'  on  the world hot spots map?

1.   The region must contain at least

5% or 15,000 species of vascular plants as endemic species.
2.   The  region  has  to  lose  at  least

70% of its primary vegetation.
(a) Null hypothesis

(b) Numeraire Equilibrium

(c) Lucas equilibrium

(d) Nash Equilibrium

66.    Consider the following statement:

1.   "Liquidity   trap"   is   a   situation when people prefer to hold money rather than invest it.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
2. 'Liquidity  preference'  is  the situation when people prefer to invest money rather than hold it.

Select  correct  statement(s)  using  the codes given below?

(a) Only 1             (b) Only 2

(c) Both 1 and 2   (d) Neither 1 nor 2

67.    Consider the following statement:

1.   GST is a tax collected  based  on the VAT method

2.   GST is a multi point tax

3.   GST eliminates cascading effect of taxes

4.   VAT is a state level tax

Select  correct  statements  using  the codes given below?

(a) 1, 3, 4              (b) 2, 3, 4

(c) 1, 2, 3              (d) All the above

68.    Which of the following is/are an act of

"fiscal consolidation"?

1. Giving    priority    to    plan expenditure and containing non plan expenditure

2.   Decreasing subsidies either direct or indirect

3.   Increasing salaries of Government employees
4.   Reduce   allocation   for   schemes like PMGSY, JNNURM, Bharat Nirman etc.

Select  correct  statements  using  the codes given below?

(a) 1, 2, 4              (b) 1, 2

(c) 1, 3, 4              (d) 1, 2, 3

69.    Consider the following statements:

1.   White label ATMs are owned and operated by a third party.

2.   They serve customers of all banks

3.   'Indicash' of TATAs is an example of Brown label ATM

(a) 1 and 3            (b) 1 and 2

(c) 2 and 3            (d) 1, 2 and 3

70.    Consider the following statements:

1. P-notes  are  one  of  offshore derivative instruments.

2.   They are issued by SEBI.

3.   P-note holder does not enjoy any voting rights in relation to shares reflected by the P-Note.

4.   They facilitate safe investments of black money in Indian capital market.

(a) 1, 2, 3              (b) 1, 2, 4

(c) 1, 2, 4              (d) All the above

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
71.    Consider   the   following   statements about World Bank Group:

1.   India  is  a  founder  member  of ICSID (International Centre for Settlement  of  Investment Disputes)

2. IFC lends money to private companies of member nations

3.   IDA is known  as soft window  of WB,  due  to  near  zero  interest rates  and  longer  repayment period

(a) 1, 3                  (b) 2, 3

(c) 1, 2                  (d) 1, 2 and 3

72.    Which  of  the  following  do  not  come under the 'Sovereign Debt' of India?

1.   External   debt   outstanding   on account of loans received by the Government  of  India  under  the
'external assistance' programme and Civilian Component of Rupee debt.

2. Other      Government      debt comprising borrowings from IMF, defence debt component of Rupee debt as well as foreign  currency defence debt.

3.   FII   investment   in   Government

Securities.

(a) 1 and 2       (b) 2 and 3
(c) 1, 2 and 3    (d) None of the above

73.  The Coastal Regulation Zone, 2011 prohibits which of the following:
1.   Landing    or    manufacture     oil storage  or disposal of hazardous substance except storage of petroleum products.
2.  Established new industries and expansion except department of atomic energy etc.

Which of the statements  given above are correct?

(a) Only 1             (b) Only 2

(c) 1 and 2            (d) neither 1 nor 2

74. Consider the following statements regarding Human Blood:
1.   Blood   is   a   liquid   connective tissue.
2.   Plasma and blood corpuscles are two main constituents of blood.
3.   Blood corpuscles are divided into three parts like RBC, WBC and blood platelets.
4.   Life span of RBC is 20-80 days.

Choose the correct answer:

(a) 1 and 2            (b) 2 and 3

(c) 1, 2 and 4        (d) 1, 2 and 3

75.    According to Kepler's law of planetary motion,  the square  of time period  of revolution is proportional to:
(a) The  cube  of  their  mean  distance from the Sun.
(b) The mean distance from the Sun.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
(c) The square  of their distance  from the sun.
(d) None of these.

76.    Consider   the   following   statements about  the geological  structure  of the Earth:
1.   Lithosphere forms the 3/10 of the total surface area of the earth.
2.   The   inner   core   of   the   earth contains the solid iron and nickel.
3. The upper mantle is called Asthenosphere and carries the ocean and continents on their backs.
(a) 1and 3             (b) 1 and 2 only

(c) 2 and 3 only    (d) All of above

77.    Consider the following statements:

1.   The  number  of  plant  species  is less   in  the   tropical   deciduous forest biome than the tropical evergreen rainforest biome.
2.   There  is less competition  among the  plants  of  the  tropical evergreen  rainforest  biome  than the plants of the deciduous forest biome for getting sunlight.

Which of the statements given above are correct?
(a) 1 only              (b) 2  only

(c) Both 1 and 2   (d)  Neither 1 nor 2

78.    Consider the following statements?

1.   Swami    Dayanand's    slogan    of

'Back  to  Vedas  was  a  call  for
revival of vedic learning and vedic purity of religion and not revival of vedic times.

2.  Raja Ram Mohan Roy was the initiator of public agitation on politically issues in India.

3. Swami Vivekananda abhorred materialism and preached ascetic way of life for attaining  spiritual transcendence.

Which of the statements  given above are correct?
(a) 1 and 3 only    (b) 2 only

(c) 1 and 2 only    (d)  1, 2 and 3

79.  The Mughal  regime  in India  is significant   in   many   ways;   in   this regard consider the following statements:

1.  It protected India from external invasion for nearly 200 years.
2.   India could take a great share in the trans-Asian trade.
3.   Gunpowder was used for the first time in India.

Which of the statements  given above are correct?
(a) 1 and 3 only    (b) 2and 3 only

(c) 1 and 2 only    (d) 1, 2 and 3

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
80.    Consider   the   following   statements about corals:
1.   They   are   generally   limited   to tropical belts.
2.   They need shallow waters.

3.   The water which is distributed by currents and waves is good for them.
4.   The  algae  Zooxanthalle  provides good oxygen to corals.
Which of the statements  given above are correct?
(a) 1, 2 and 3 only (b) 2, 3 and 4 only (c) 1, 3 and 4 only (d)  1, 2, 3 and 4
81.    Which of the following factor(s) is/are responsible  for  location  of  Jute Industry on Hooghly Basin?
1.  Proximity of the Jute producing areas.
2. Inexpensive  water  transport, supported  by a good  network  of railways,  roadways  and waterways.
3.   Cheap  labor  from  West  Bengal and adjoining states of Bihar, Odisha and Uttar Pradesh.
4.   Availability   of   a   large   urban center such as Kolkata.

Which of the statements  given above are correct?
(a) 1 and 2 only    (b) 2 and 3 only

(c) 3 and 4 only    (d)  1, 2, 3 and 4
82.  The  fishermen  in  coastal  areas generally prefer to go for deep sea fishing in mid-night  and then return in noon because:
(a)  The  water  of  the  ocean  drops  in mid-night and creates favourable conditions for fishing.
(b) The turbines of big vessels in noon time create whirlpools which damages the small fishes and thus reducing the catch.
(c) The   fisherman   is   able   to   sail further in the ocean with the help of land breeze and sea-breeze returning to the home.
(d) During night high-tide yields their catch,  while  at noon  the catch  is low.
83.    Which of the following are associated with diabetes mellitus, a common disease in adults?
1.   Lower insulin level in blood.

2.   Higher insulin level in blood.

3.   Lower sugar levels in blood.

4.   Higher sugar levels in blood.

Codes:

(a) 1 and 3            (b) 1 and 4 (c) 2 and 3            (d) 2 and 4
84.  Which   one   of   the   following antimicrobial drugs is suitable for treatment of both tuberculosis and leprosy?
(a) Rifampicin       (b) Streptomycin

(c) P-aminosalicylic Acid

(d) Terramycin

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
85.   Consider the following statements and select correct answer from the code given below:
1.   Fatty acids should be part of the balance human diet.
2.   The   cell   of   the   human   body cannot  synthesize  with  fatty acids.
Code:

(a) Only 1             (b) Only 2

(c) Both 1 and 2   (d) None of these

86. Consider the following statements regarding   the   Attorney   General   of India:
1.   The Attorney General is appointed by president  he can be removed from his office in the like manner by the parliament as the Judges of the Supreme Court of India.
2.   Since he is not a member of the parliament  has neither  the right to speak nor the right to vote in any House of Parliament.
3. Since  he  represents  the government, he is not allowed to take up private practice.
4.   He is not paid the salary.

Which of the statements  given above are correct?
(a) 1 and 2 only    (b) 2 and 3 only

(c) 1, 2 and 3 only (d) 4 only
87.  In March 1942, the Cripps Mission proposals were rejected by the Congress. Which among the following is a reason for their rejection?
1.   The  British  were  not  willing  to agree to the formation of a truly national government.
2.   The British  tried to promote  the interests of the princes.
3.   The British accepted the demand for the formation of a Constituent Assembly.
4.   In the Constituent  Assembly  the Indian  states  would  be represented  by  the  nominees  of the Princes.
Select  the  correct  answer  from  the codes given below:
(a) 1, 2 and 3 only  (b) 2 and 4 only

(c) 3 and 4 only      (d) 1, 2 and 4 only

88.    Consider the following statements:

1.   Maulana     Abul     Kalam     Azad became the President at the Congress session in 1940.
2. The 1940 Congress session demanded    complete independence and decided to launch the Civil Disobedience Movement.
Which of the statements  given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 only              (b) 2 only

(c) Both 1 and 2   (d) Neither 1 nor 2

89.    Which among  the following  members of selection committee for the selection of the National Human Right Commission of India?
1.   Prime Minister

2.   Speaker of the Lok Sabha

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
3.   Chief Justice

4.   Leader  of  the  opposition  in  Lok

Sabha

5.   Minister   of  Social   Justice   and

Empowerment

6.   Union Home Minister

Which of the statements  given above are correct?
(a) 1, 2, 4 and 6 only

(b) 1, 2, 3 and 4 only

(c) 1, 3, 4, 5 and 6 only

(d) 1, 3, 4 and 6 only

90. Consider the following statements regarding  the  Governor  of an  Indian State:
1.   He can nominate a member to the state legislative assembly from Anglo-Indian Community.
2.   He can make advances out of the contingency  fund of the state  to meet any unforeseen expenditure.
3.   He is the chief spokesman of the state government.

Which of the statements  given above are correct:
(a) 1 and 2 only    (b) 2 and 3 only

(c) 1 and 3 only    (d) 1, 2 and 3

91.    Consider the following statements:

1.   Harappan   seals   were   made   of

Steatite.
2.  Seals are mostly in square or rectangular shape.
3.   Humpless bull is most frequently depicted animal on seals.
4.   The common was in possession of the seals.

Which of the statements  given above are correct?

(a) 1, 2 and 3        (b) 1, 3 and 4

(c) 1, 2 and 4        (d) All of the above

92.    Consider   the   following   statements about the Rig Vedic society:

1.   There was no purdah system.

2.   Women often performed sati.

3.   Girls   were   married   only   after puberty.
4.   Girls sometimes had on their own chosen their husbands.

Which of the statements  given above are correct?

(a) 1, 2 and 3        (b) 1, 3 and 4

(c) 1, 2 and 4        (d) All of the above

93. Consider the following statements regarding  the Council of Ministers  of the Union:
1. The   Council   of   Ministers comprises Ministers who are members of Cabinet, Ministers of State (independent charge), Ministers of State and Deputy Ministers.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
2.   It is duty of the Prime Minister to communicate to the president all decisions  of Council of Ministers and information relating them.
3.   The questions  whether and if so what advice was tendered by Ministers to the president can be inquired into only in the Supreme court of India.
Which of the statement is given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 and 2 only    (b) 2 and 3 only

(c)   1 and 3 only  (d) 1, 2 and 3

94.    Consider   the   following   statements regarding Vice President of India:
1.   A   person,   to   be   eligible   for election as Vice President, should be qualified for election as a member of either house of Parliament.
2.   When president is absent due to illness,   death,   resignation   etc., the Vice President discharges the functions of both the chairman of the  Rajya  Sabha  and  the president of India.
3.   When he discharges the functions of the President, he does not get the salary and allowance payable to the chairman of the Rajya Sabha.
4.   A petition challenging the election of the Vice President is heard by a five-judge  bench  of the  supreme
court of India.
Which of the statement is given above is/are correct?
(a) 1, 2 and 3 only (b) 2, 3 and 4 only (c) 3 and 4 only
(d) 1, 2 and 4 only

95.    Consider   the   following   statements regarding passive Euthanasia:
1.   The  Supreme  Court  has allowed passive Euthanasia in exceptional cases.
2.  In its latest report on ‛passive Euthanasia', the law panel has recommended  that a  ‛competent' adult patient who can take an informed decision, can refuse invasive   medical   treatment   by way of artificial life sustaining measures.
3.   According  to  the  suggestions  of the law panel  if patients  cannot take a decision on their own, then the decision of the doctors or relatives to withhold or withdraw the   medical   treatment   will   be final.
Which of the statement is given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 only              (b) 1 and 2 only

(c)   2 and 3 only  (d) 1, 2 and 3 only

96.    Consider   the   following   statements regarding Algae bloom:
1.   It occurs in fresh water only.

2.   It occurs in marine environment.

3.   It is green in color.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
4.   Its    concentration    may    reach millions of cells per milliliter.
Select the correct answer:

(a) 1, 2 and 3 only (b) 2, 3 and 4 only (c) 1, 3 and 4 only (d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
97. The Siberian crane (Leucogeranus leucogeranus),  an  endangered migratory  bird is a regular  visitor  of which of the following National Park or Bird Sanctuaries?
(a) Nawabganj Bird Sanctuaries

(b) Vedanthangal Bird Sanctuaries

(c) Keoladeo National Park

(d) None of these

98.    Consider the following Tiger Reserves of India:
1.      Kalakad-               - Tamil Nadu

Mumdanturai

2.      Dudhwa               - Uttarakhand

3.      Pench                   - Madhya Pradesh

4.      Kanha                  - Maharashtra

Which of the above Tiger Reserve are correctly  paired  with  their  respective to their location?
(a) 1 and 3            (b) 1 and 4 (c) 1, 2 and 3        (d) 3 and 4

99.    Consider   the   following   statements about Samkhya philosophy:
1.   It was founded by Kapila.

2.   It believed in dualism.

3. It  considers  matter  to  be illusionary.
4. Initially Samkhya system was atheistic, but later it became theistic.

Which of the statements  given above are correct?

(a) 1, 2 and 3        (b) 1, 3 and 4

(c) 1, 2 and 4        (d) All of the above

100.  Consider the following statements:

1.   Bhagavatism  was marked  bhakti and Ahimsa
2.   Vishnu was not mentioned in Rig

Veda.

3. Bhagavatism        overshadowed Mahayana Buddhism by Gupta times.
4.   Gupta king as Samudragupta and Chandragupta II patronized Vaishnavism.

Which of the statements  given above are correct?

(a) 1, 2 and 3        (b) 1, 3 and 4

(c) 1, 2 and 4        (d) All of the abovew w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
