

1.     Ans: D

Exp:  The definition  of planet set  in Prague in
2006     by     the International     Astronomical Union (IAU)  states  that,  in  the Solar  System, a planet is a celestial body which:

1.       Is in orbit around the Sun,
2.       Has sufficient mass to assume hydrostatic equilibrium (a nearly round shape), and
3.       Has "cleared  the neighbourhood"  around
its orbit.

In continuum  mechanics,  a fluid is  said  to  be in hydrostatic               equilibrium or hydrostatic balance when  it  is  at  rest,  or  when  the  flow velocity at each point is constant over time. This occurs when external  forces such as gravity are balanced   by   a pressure   gradient   force.[1] For instance, the pressure-gradient force prevents gravity from collapsing Earth's atmosphere into a thin, dense shell, whereas gravity prevents the pressure gradient force from diffusing the atmosphere into space.

Pluto meets only two of these criteria, losing out on the third. In all the billions of years it has lived there,  it has not managed  to clear its neighborhood. It is dwarf planet.
2.    Ans: C
Exp: Foundation of Working Committee of 15 members  of the Indian National  Congress.  This was first proposed by B.G.Tilak, but congress rejected  the proposal(during  that time congress was influenced by moderates). All India Kisan Sabha was founded in 1936, though there were many regional Kisan Sabhas.
All India Kisan Sabha formation catalyzed by growing leftiest and socialist influence in congress as well as country.
3.    Ans: D
4.    Ans: D
Exp: Cold currents:
Cold ocean currents which bring cold water are usually found in west coast of continent in the low and middle latitudes (in both hemispheres). Cold ocean currents  are found in east coast of higher latitudes in northern hemisphere.

Warm currents:
Warm ocean currents  which bring warm ocean water are usually in east coast of the continent in the  low  and  middle  latitudes  (in  both hemispheres).
Warm ocean currents found in west coast of the continent in high latitudes in north hemisphere.
5.    Ans: C
Exp: Delhi-Mumbai Industrial Corridor is a mega infra-structure project of USD 90 billion with the financial  & technical  aids from Japan, covering an  overall  length  of  1483  KMs  between  the political capital and the business capital of India, i.e. Delhi and Mumbai.
Finally Government    of   India has    announced
establishing  of the Multi-modal  High Axle Load Dedicated Freight Corridor (DF(C) between Delhi and Mumbai, covering an overall length of 1483 km and  passing  through  the six States  - U.P, NCR  of  Delhi,  Haryana, Rajasthan, Gujarat and Maharashtra, with end terminals at Dadri in the National Capital Region of Delhi and Jawaharlal Nehru Port near Mumbai. Distribution  of length of the corridor indicates that Rajasthan (39) and Gujarat (38%) together constitute 77% of the total length of the alignment of freight corridor.
6.    Ans: A
Exp: The governments decided that the university would be established in India.
7.    Ans: B
Exp: Mahavira preached not to acquire property and preached not to covet the property of others.
8.    Ans: A
Exp: The Indian capitalist class grew with largely an independent capital base and it was not a sub- ordinate  or junior  partner  of British  capital.  It advocated  for comprehensive  land  reforms  and co-operatization of production, finance and marketing, in India (Bombay plan).
9.    Ans: B
Exp: The advice tendered by it cannot be inquired into any court of law
10.  Ans: D
Exp: Article 87 mentions The President address to  a  joint-session  of  the  Parliament  after  the general election to the Lok Sabha.
11.  Ans: A
Exp: There is no specific provision in the rules for moving a Censure motion- it is governed by rules applicable to motions in general and can be admitted as No-Day-yet-Named Motion.
12.  Ans: B
Exp: 14 private bills passed till now.
13.  Ans: A
Exp: Western Coastal plains of India are an example of submerged coastal plain, due to this submergence,  it is a narrow  belt  and provides natural conditions  for the development  of ports and harbours.  The rivers flowing through these coastal plains do not form any delta. As compared to the Western Coastal plains, the eastern Coastal plains  is  broader  and  is  an  example  of  an emergent coast. There are well developed  deltas here, formed by the rivers flowing eastwards  to the Bay of Bengal.
14.  Ans: A
Exp: Vitamins are essential for human body for metabolic  activities.  It  is  not  sufficiently synthesized  by  our  body.  We  require  vitamins from external sources. It is classified for their biological  and chemical  activities,  not for structural activities. It is stored in liver.
15.  Ans: A
Exp: Chlorophyll is a green color pigment universally found in trees and plants responsible for take/capturing solar energy of photosynthesis. It  contain  magnesium  protein  not  iron  and  it occur in two forms: Chlorophyl-a and Chlorophyl- b.
16.  Ans: D
Exp: One of the fundamental properties of a stem cell is that it does not have any tissue specific structure that allows it to perform specialized functions. However unspecialized  stem cells can give  rise  to  specialized  cells,  including  heart muscle cells, blood cells or nerve cells when unspecialized  stem cells give rise to specialized cell, this is called differentiation.
17.  Ans: A
Exp: Biosimilars  are approved  new versions  of innovator biologic drugs that are developed after the innovator's  patent  expires.  Unlike  generics, biosimilars are not exact replicas of biologic drugs with the original biologic purification process not available  to  biosimilar  makers,  biosimilar  can never be made in exactly the same manner as the original biological drug.
18.  Ans: B
Exp: Vulnerable species are within biological communities, some species are important in determining the ability of large number of other species to persist in the community. Such species are called key stone species.
Allopatric  species  are  species  having  exclusive
areas of geographical distribution.
Sympatric species are species having overlapping area of geographical distribution.
19.  Ans: A
Exp: Thermal pollution is the degradation of the water quantity by any process that changes ambient water temperature. A common cause of the thermal  pollution  is the use of water  as a coolant,   storm   water   by   power   plants   and industrial  manufactures,  when water used as a coolant is returned to the natural environment at a higher temperature.

20.     Ans:  C
Exp: GIM will be implemented by Gram Sabhas with the technical  and management  support  of the forest personnel. Now money will directly go to the Gram Sabhas and not through forest departments of state governments. Its mission is
also to enhance the annual CO₂ sequestration of
50-60 million tonnes by 2020. Added is to be 5
million  hectares  of  forest  and  non-forest  land under  green  cover  and  improve  the  quality  of forest cover by an another 5 million hectares.

21.     Ans: A

Exp: Photochemical  Smog is an air pollutant, which   is  created   by  the  reaction   between sunlight and pollution like hydro carbons, nitrogen dioxide and other volatile organic created from fossil fuel combustion.
22.  Ans: B
Exp: Deposits are to be accepted from men and women but the major focus of loan advances will be towards  women.  Similarly  the staff of bank comprises  both  men  and women  though  focus would like to have these banks offices staffed by women.
23.  Ans: C
Exp:   shares   are   basically   ownership   of   a company. By purchasing a share one just buys ownership  of  a  company  and  not  any  actual goods or services.

24.  Ans: D
Exp:  Black  money  in  the  economy  is unaccounted money. It is the money generated in illegal  activities  or legal activities  for which  tax has not been paid. This amounts to not reporting the production of goods and services in the economy and hence it conceals the real level of GDP.
Household  services  by a woman  and voluntary
and charitable work are examples of non- monetized services. Which because of human relations have been unpaid.
Pollution of water body is a tricky one. It can't be calculated simply because in GDP calculations value of final goods and services in an economy

are summed  up.  Here  the value  of services  of environment is not yet unanimously calculated. A concept of green GDP is forthcoming  but it has not yet been implemented.
25.  Ans: A
Exp: Characteristics of Indian soils
1)       Formed     under     varied     geographical conditions   and   differ   widely   in   their physical properties, chemical composition and fertility levels.
2)       Most soils are old and mature. Peninsular soils are much older.
3)       Indian  soils  largely  deficient  in nitrogen,
mineral  salts,  humus  and other  organic materials
4)       Plains and valleys have thich layers of soils while hills and plateaus have thin layers.
5)       Some soils like alluvial and black soils are
fertile and other like laterite,  desert  and alkaline soils lack in fertility.
6)       Our soils  are cultivated  for hundreds  of years and have lost their fertility, urgent need for giving scientific treatment.
7)       Indian  climate  characterized  by seasonal rainfall,   and   our  soils   need   irrigation during dry season
8)       Our soils suffer from soil erosion and other allied problems.
Black soils:
           They are also called regur and black cotton soils
           Formed  due  to  the  solidification  of  lava spread  over  large  areas  during  volcanic
activity in Deccan.
           These soils occur where rainfall is between
50 to 80 cm and number  of rainy days range from 30 to 50. This is, therefore, a soil group of the dry and hot regions of the peninsula.(Maharashtra, MP, parts of Karnataka, AP, Gujarath, TN)
           This is very retentive of moisture, it swells greatly and becomes sticky when wet.
           In dry season, moisture  evaporates  , the soil shrinks and is seemed with broad and deep cracks.
           Self-ploughing character.
           Extraordinary fertility.
           Potash is variable and phosphate, nitrogen and humus are low
           Cotton,  wheat,  jowar,  linseed,  Virginia, tobacco,  castor,  sunflower   and  millets.
Rice and sugarcane are equally important where irrigation is available
Red soils:
           Formed   due  to  weathering   of  ancient crystalline and metamorphic rocks.
           The  red  color  is  due  to  wide  diffusion rather   than   high   percentage   of   iron content.
         TN,  parts  of  Karnataka,  south-east Maharashtra, east of AP and MP, Chattisgarh, Orissa and Jharkhand.
           Poor   in   lime,   magnesia,   phosphates, nitrogen and humus, but are fairly rich in potash.
           Cotton,    wheat,    rice,    pulses,    millets, oilseeds, tobacco, potatoes and fruits.
Laterite sols:
           Formed under high temperature and high rainfall   with   alternate   wet   and   sdry periods.
           "It  is  end  product  of  wethering   given sufficiently long time". "it is probably the end product of decomposition found in regions of heavy rainfall"
           Found  in  summits   of  Western  Ghats, Eastern Ghats, Rajmahal Hills, Vindhyas, Satpura and Malwa plateau.
           Due to intense leaching lack fertility.
           Provide valuable building material
Saline and alkaline soils:
           Found in AP and Karnataka.
           There are many undecomposed  rock and mineral fragments which on weathering liberate sodium, magnesium and calcium salts and sulphuric acid.
           The  salts  are  transferred   by  capillary action from sub-soils. This makes them unfertile and render unfit for agriculture.
26.  Ans: D
Exp: Soil erosion can be minimized by changing agricultural practices some of them are
1.       Crop rotation:  different  crop is cultivated on a piece of land each year. This helps us to  conserve  the  soil  fertility  as  different crops make different demands on the soil.
Wheat-barley-legumes.
Grass, forage crops and many legumes are erosion resisting.
2.       Strip cropping:    crops may be cultivated in alternate strips. Some strips may be allowed   to   lie   fallow   while   in   others different  crops  may  be sown.e.g-  grains, legumus, small tree crops.
Various crops ripen at different times of the year and harvested at intervals.
The tall growing crops act as wind breaks
and strip which are parallel act as contour help in water absorption.
3.       Use of early maturing  varieties:  they put less pressure on soil
4.       Contour ploughing: is ploughing is done at
right angles to the hill slopes, following the natural contours of the hill, the ridges and furrows breaks the flow of water down the hill. They prevent excessive soil loss as gullies are less likely to develop and also

reduce run-off so that plants receive more water.
5.       Terracing and Contour Bunding is one of
oldest  soil  conservation  strategy  and  is very effective. Hill slope is cut into number of terraces having horizontal top and steep slopes on the back and front. This involves construction of banks along the contours. Terracing divides the hill slopes into numerous small slopes, check the flow of water, promote absorption of water by soil and  saves  soil  from  erosion.  Retaining walls of terraces control the flow of water and help in reducing soil erosion.
6.       Ploughing the land in right direction.

27.     Ans:  B

Exp: Interaction between the two organisms, in which  one  organism  kills  and  feeds  on  the second organisms, is called predation.

Parasitism, is the relation between two organisms,  where  one  receives  benefit  at the cost of other.

28.     Ans: A

Exp:  Asian  Brown  Cloud  is  a  layer  of  air pollution that recurrently covers parts of South Asia, namely the Northern Indian Ocean, India and Pakistan. The cloud appears as a giant brown stain hanging  in the air over much of South  Asia and the Indian  Ocean  every  year between January and March, possibly also during earlier and later months.
29.  Ans:

30.     Ans: B

Exp: Rowlatt Act passed in 1919, after World War, to mitigate the growing unease among people and iron hand of British  shown.  After war they failed to convince moderates by constitutional  means (Montague  - Chemlsford reforms). It was first all-India movement launched by Gandhiji.

31.     Ans: C

Exp: GOI act 1919 authorised to constitute a committee  to  review  the  act  after  10  years. Simon commission was constituted by Government  of Conservative  Party  in Britain, which  was  afraid  of  to  be  defeated  against Labour party in imminent elections and it did not want to leave the issues of India in inexperienced hands of Labor party.
It was opposed by all parties. Nehru report followed later.

32.     Ans: B

Exp: The Deccan or Vesara style of temple of Chalukyas are constructed in two phases. First at  Aihole  and  Badami  and  second  at Pattadakal.

At Pattadakkal, 4 are in northern style and 10 are   in   southern    style.(papanatha-northern stlye   and   virupeksha   and   sangameshwara temple –southern style)

Aihole - ladh khan temple, Durga temple, Hacimaligudi, Jain temple at Maguti, Melagatti Sivalaya.

33.     Ans: C

Exp: The  position  of women  further  suffered during this period relative to the Gupta period. The institution  of 'Swayamvara'  declined  and there is no instance of its practice in the contemporary literature. Remarriage of widows not permitted.  the evil system  of dowry quiet common. Some sources also refer to practice of
'sati' by higher varna.
34.  Ans: A
Exp: saltwater marshes provided the most bang for the buck. Wetlands are great at storing carbon dioxide  because  of  their  near-constant   water cover, which prevents oxygen from entering the muddy soil; this effectively keeps bacterial decomposition,  a process which releases a lot of CO2  (this is one of the reasons  why permafrost thawing is so worrisome), to a minimum.
35.  Ans: A
Exp: The profundal zone of a lake is a deep zone where it is too dark for photosynthesis  to occur, so there is no scope for even an average photosynthetic activity.
36.  Ans: A
Exp: Nor'westers or the Kalbaishakhi  is a local thunderstorm                  which                 occurs in India and Bangladesh.   Kalbaishakhi   occurs, with   increasing   frequency,   from   March   till monsoon establishes      over North-East      India. Sometimes   it   might   be   progressive derechos. During  this  time Odisha, West  Bengal,   Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Bangladesh and North-Eastern   states  of  India  are  affected  by violent thunderstorms.  They  cause  considerable damage to life and property and are known as Kalbaisakhi or the calamity of Baishakhi, the month of April–May in India. Kalbaishakhi is accompanied  by strong  squalls  and  sometimes by hail.             On             extremely             rare

occasions, tornados may  also  accompany  them too. Flying through these winds can be extremely dangerous.    Circumnavigating    or   penetrating them may be disastrous  and pilots avoid them. However, the rainfall in these storms is beneficial for      the tea cultivated.      in Assam and      for the jute and rice cultivated in West Bengal.
37.  Ans: D
38.  Ans: A
Exp: Primitive  subsistence  farming  is practiced on small patches of land with the help of primitive tools. This type of farming depends on monsoon, natural fertility of the soil and suitability of other environmental conditions to the crops grown. Madhya Pradesh              - Bewar or Dahiya Andhra Pradesh               -Podu or Penda
Orissa   -                Pama Dabi or Koman or
Bringa Jharkhand                       - Kuruwa Western Ghats - Kumari
South-east Rajasthan - valre or Waltre
North-east region             - Jhumming
39.  Ans: D
Exp: Nana Patil popularly known as Krantisinha, founded the revolutionary  'Prati-sarkar'  in Satar district of west Maharashtra.
40.  Ans: B
Exp: Denotes an essential mental state and is the dominant emotional theme of a work of art or the primary feeling that is evoked in the person that views, reads or hears such a work the concept of rasa is fundamental to many forms of Indian art including dance, music, musical theatre, cinema and   literature,   the   treatment,   interpretation, usage and actual performance of a particular rasa differs greatly between different styles and schools of A,  and  the  huge  regional  differences   even within one style.
41.  Ans: B
Exp: The earliest inscriptions found on the seals of Harappa are still not been deciphered.
42.  Ans: A

43.     Ans: C

Exp: The chairmen  and the members  of CVC hold the office for a term of four years or until they  attain  the age of 65 years  whichever  is earlier.
44.  Ans: D
45.  Ans: A
Exp: It is within the power of Speaker/Chairman to  accept  or  reject  the  motion  regarding  the removal of judges. if the motion is admitted then the  Speaker/Chairman   is  to  constitute   a  3 member committee to investigate into the charges
46.  Ans: D
Exp: according to Article 297 of the Constitution, All  lands,  minerals  and  other  things  of  value
underlying the ocean within the territorial waters of India are vested in Union only. Both union and state   government   competent   to   compulsory acquire or requisite property by making law (entry
42   list   III).   In   addition   the   constitutional
obligation  to pay compensation  has been abolished by the 44th Amendment of the Constitution.
47.  Ans: D
Exp: Fundamental  rights given under Part-III of the Constitution of India are not only against the state but also against private individuals:
Article 15(2)-equality in access of public places
Article-17 prohibition of untouchability.
Article-18  (3)&(4)-  prohibition  of  acceptance  of titles
Artcle-23 prohibition of traffic in human beings Article-24 prohibition of employments of children in hazardous industries.
These are not self-executory, enforceable by a law
made to give effect to.
48.  Ans: D
Exp: All are true.
49.  Ans: C
Exp: Both of them mentioned in Article 14.
Equal protection of law deals with positive discrimination.
50.  Ans: D
Exp: Indian Constitution explicitly mentions "misbehavior/incapacity"  as a reason to remove Judge  of a Supreme  Court  or a High court  or member of Public Service Commission….etc
Indian      Constitution       explicitly      mentions
"misconduct" as a reason to remove persons, with special qualifications,  appointed  by President  or the Governor to serve the Union or State respectively.
51.  Ans: D
Exp: Refer Article 368
52.  Ans: B
Exp: The Preamble of the Indian Constitution describes:
The   source   power   of   the   Constitution:   the
preamble  states  that  Constitution   derives  its power from the people of India.
The nature of the Indian state: India to be Sovereign,  Socialist,  Secular, Democratic, Republic
The objectives of the Constitution: to provide justice, liberty, equality and to promote fraternity among citizens.
It is silent on Constitutional development.
53.  Ans: D

54.     Ans:  C

Exp: India is one of the first few countries to have enacted such legislation. The act is to be implemented       through       a       three-tiered

institutional structure, National Biodiversity Authority   (NBA),   State   Biodiversity    Board (SBB)  and Biodiversity  Management Committees (BMCs).

55.     Ans: A

Exp:    Nitrogen     Oxide(NO)     and    Sulphur
Dioxide(SO₂) are responsible for acid rain.
Gas  heaters,  coal  mines  and  heating  devices
and paddy lands are the source of Methane.

Ozone layer is in Stratosphere.
56.  Ans: B
Exp: Alpine convertible bond (ACB) is a bond issued by the Indian companies exclusively to the Swiss investors.
Foreign   CURRENCY convertible   bonds (FCCBs) are a special category of bonds. FCCBs are issued in  currencies  different  from  the  issuing company's   domestic   CURRENCY.   Corporates issue    FCCBs    to    raise    MONEY in    foreign currencies.  These  bonds  retain  all  features  of a convertible  bond, making them very attractive to both the investors and the issuers.
57.  Ans: D
Exp: The rate of disintegration  of a radioactive element decreases with increase in time. The rate of disintegration of a radioactive element at given instant  of time  is inversely  proportional  to the number of atoms of the radioactive elements present at the moment.
58.  Ans: A
Exp: If a person inhaled CO and his condition deteriorates,  life can be saved  by blood transfusion,  by injecting  methylene  blue  or  by making the person inhale carbogen. Carbogen is a mixture of 95% oxygen and 5% carbon dioxide.
59.  Ans: C
Exp: In a nuclear fission reaction heavy nucleus is divided into simple nuclei. In the process huge amount of energy is released. It is called Nuclear Energy.
In a breeder reactor, no moderators are used and
molten sodium is used as coolant. The heat generated in breeder reactor is several times more than conventional reactor.
60.  Ans: C
Exp:   An  arrangement  or  product  (such  as  a future,  option,  or warrant)  whose value derives from and is dependent on the value of an underlying asset, such as a commodity, currency, or security.
61.  Ans: D

Exp:     Within-habitat      diversity     or alpha- diversity: refers   to   a   group   of   organisms interacting    and   competing    for   the   same
resources or sharing the same environment, measured as a mean diversity of species within a given area.

Between-habitat            diversity            or beta- diversity: refers to the response of organisms to spatial    heterogeneity.     High    beta-diversity implies     low    similarity     between     species composition  of different habitats. It is usually expressed in terms of similarity index between communities (or species turnover rate) between different  habitats  in  same  geographical  area (often expressed as some kind of gradient). Geographical diversity or gamma-diversity.

62.     Ans: C

Exp: Stockholm Convention           -banning   the production of Persistent Organic Pollutants known for their toxicity.

Rotterdam Convention        -    prior     informed consent procedure for certain hazardous chemicals and pesticides.

Montreal Protocol,1987       -    ozone    depleting substance.

Bonn Convention, 1979      - the conservation of migratory species.

63.     Ans:  C
Exp: The term biodiversity hotspot specifically refers to 25 biologically rich areas around the world that have lost at least 70 percent of their original habitat.
The  remaining  natural  habitat  in  these biodiversity hotspots amounts to just 1.4 percent of the land surface  of the planet)  yet supports nearly 60 percent of the world's plant, bird, mammal, reptile, and amphibian species.
64.  Ans: C
Exp:  Fiscal drag is an economics term referring to a situation  where  a government's  net  fiscal position (equal to its spending less any taxation) does not meet the net savings goals of the private economy. This can result in deflationary pressure attributed to either lack of state spending or to excess taxation.
One cause of fiscal drag is the consequence  of expanding  economies  with progressive  taxation. In general, individuals are forced into higher tax brackets  as their income rises. The greater  tax burden can lead to less consumer spending. For the individuals pushed into a higher tax bracket, the proportion  of income as tax has increased, resulting in fiscal drag.
65.  Ans: D

Exp:  A liquidity trap is a situation, described in Keynesian economics, in which injections of cash into the private banking system by a central bank fail to decrease  interest  rates  and hence  make monetary policy ineffective.
66.  Ans: D
67.  Ans: D
68.  Ans: B
Exp:   Fiscal Consolidation refers to the policies undertaken  by Governments  (national and sub- national levels) to reduce their deficits and accumulation of debt stock, so mostly the consumption   expenditure,   that   is   non   plan revenue expenditure is the one that suffers.
69.  Ans: D
70.  Ans: B
Exp:  Participatory Notes commonly known as P- Notes or PNs are instruments issued by registered foreign institutional investors (FII) to overseas investors, who wish to invest in the Indian stock markets without registering themselves with the market regulator, the Securities and Exchange Board of India.
They   are   mostly   known   for   round   tripping activity.
71.  Ans: B
72.  Ans: D
73.  Ans: C
Exp: The Coastal Regulation Zone, 2011 was notified to endure livelihood security to the fisher communities  and other local communities  living in coastal areas. So, the above options are prerequisite for that.
74.  Ans: D
Exp : Blood is a liquid connective tissue. It is a basic   solution   whose   PH  value  is  7.4.  two elements are found in the human blood.- plasma and Blood corpuscles.
Life span of RBC is 20-120 days. Its death occurs in the liver, so liver is called graveyard of RBC. Blood  Corpuscles  contain-  RBC,  WBC,  Blood platelets and Blood corpuscles.
75.  Ans: A
Exp: Kepler's formulated the three basic laws of planetary motion:
1.       Every  planet  moves  in an elliptical  orbit with the sun being at one of its foci.
2.       The radius vector drawn from the sun to
the  planets  sweeps  out  equal  areas  in equal intervals of time.
3.       The square of time period of revolution is proportional to the cube of their mean distance from the Sun.

76.  Ans: D
Exp:  Asthenosphere  (plastic)is  the  molten material  inside  the  earth.  Its  thickness  varies from 150 to 200 km. it is part of upper mantle. The lithosphere is upper part of earth crust.
77.  Ans: A
Exp: Since the density of the plants is lower in the tropical deciduous forest biome than the tropical  evergreen  rain  forest  biome  and hence there is comparatively less competition among plants for getting sunlight.

78.     Ans: C

Exp: Swami Vivekananda was never of view which endorsed ascetic way of life. In fact, he emphasized that person's first responsibility is towards his family.

79.     Ans: C

Exp: gunpowder  has  been  started  before  the arrival of Mughals.
80.  Ans: D
81.  Ans: D
Exp: Availability of a large urban center such as Kolkata  provides  easy access to banking, insurance and port facilities for export of jute goods.
82.  Ans: C
83.  Ans: B
Exp:      diabetes   mellitus   is   caused   due   to deficiency of insulin harmone, secreted by pancreas. Insulin helps in maintaining a constant blood sugar level. Diabetes mellitus is associated with lower insulin level in blood and Higher sugar levels in blood.
84.  Ans: A
Exp: leprosy is caused by Mycobacterium leprae, while TB is caused by bacteria streptococcus  or staphylococcus.
Rifampicin is suitable for treatment of both.
85.  Ans: A
Exp:   A balance  diet is one which contain  the correct proportion and quality of virus nutrients such as fats, carbohydrates, protiens etc.. to maintain health. The body cells of all mammals including  man can synthesize  the various  fatty acids  except  linolenic  acid  and  kinolenic  acid which can be obtained only from food.
86.  Ans: C
Exp: The Attorney  General is appointed  by the President and he holds office during the pleasure of the President. Though he is not a member of Parliament he has the right to speak in both the Houses of Parliament  or any committee thereof, but he has no right to vote. The Attorney General represents the government but is allowed to take up private practice provided the other party is not the state. He is not paid the salary but a retainer to be determined by the President. The Attorney General gets a retainer equivalent to the salary of a judge of a Supreme Court.
87.  Ans: D

88.  Ans: C                    89.          Ans: A

Exp:   Following   are   the   members   of   the selection  committee  for selection  of the chairmen of the National Human Rights Commission of India:

1)       Prime Minister
2)       Speaker of the Lok Sabha
3)       Deputy chairmen of the Rajya Sabha
4)       Leader of the opposition in Lok Sabha
5)       Leader of the opposition in Rajya Sabha
6)       Union Home Minister
90.  Ans: A
Exp: The chief Minister is the chief spokesman of the concerned state.

91.     Ans: A

Exp:  Harappan  seals  were  made  of  Steatite. Size varies  from ½ inch to 2-½   inches.  The two main  shapes  are the square  type with  a carved animal and inscription on it, and a rectangular with an inscription only. Humpless bull  is  most  frequently  depicted  animal  on seals. The purpose of the seals was probably to mark ownership of property, hence every important citizen have possessed one. they are greatest artistic creation. cylindrical seals from Mesopotamia, circular botto shaped seal are found. Harappan seals are found in various foreign lands.

92.     Ans: B

Exp:  Rig   Vedic   society   was   a   patriarchal society and patrilinear society with patrilocal norms. The birth of daughter was not desired, but once they born they were treated with kindness  and  consideration.  Their  education was not neglected and some of them composed hymns  and rose to rank of seers.  Girls  were married  long after puberty.  Considerable freedom  in  selection  of  husband.  Monogamy was the rule though polygamy permitted. Polyandry   was  also  evident   as  is  seen  in maruts marriage  with Rodasi. The practice of Niyoga   existed.   Women   had   a  position   of honour in the household. The wife participated in religious offerings of the husband. There is no evidence of seclusion of women as is seen by  women's   participation   in  Vidhatha   and Sabha.
93.  Ans: A
Exp:  According  to  Article  74(2)  of  the Constitution,  the  questions  whether  and  if  so what  advice  was  tendered  by  Ministers  to the
president shall not be inquired into any court of law.
94.  Ans: C
Exp:  As  per  Article  66  of  the  Constitution,  a person,   to   be   eligible   for   election   as   Vice President,  should  be qualified  for election  as a member of council of states. As per article 64 of the   Constitution   Vice   President   act   as   the President or discharge functions of President and shall not perform the duties of the chairman of the Rajya Sabha
95.  Ans: B
Exp: law  panel  has  suggested  patients  cannot take a decision on their own, then the decision of the doctors or relatives to withhold or withdraw the medical treatment will not be final. The relatives, next friend, or the doctor concerned or hospital   management   will   have   to   get   the clearance from the high court for withdrawing or withholding the life sustaining treatment.
96.  Ans: B
Exp: Algae bloom is a rapid increase or accumulation   in  the  population   of  algae   in aquatic  system.  It  occurs  in  fresh  as  well  as marine  water.  It is green  in color.  Its concentration may reach millions of cells per milliliter.
Its color also depends on algae species.
97.  Ans: C
Exp: Keoladeo  National  Park, visiting  migratory bird includes water birds. Siberian crane visit in winter season Keoladeo National Park in Bharathpur, Rajasthan is a famous avifauna sanctuary that pays nest to thousands  of birds especially during winter.
It is also declared world heritage site. The sanctuary is one of the richest bird areas in the world. It is known for nesting of its resident birds and  visiting   migratory   birds  including   water birds.
98.  Ans: A
Exp: Kalakad-Mumdanturai - Tamil Nadu Dudhwa                      -Uttar Pradesh Pench                      - Madhya Pradesh Kanha                      - Madhya Pradesh

99.     Ans: C

Exp:  According   to  Kapila,   matter  was  not illusory, but is real. Souls are not considered as emanations from the worldly soul but as infinite multitude  of individual  souls. Initially Samkhya system was atheistic, but later it became theistic (under the influence of yoga).

100.   Ans: B

