

1.      Which among the following statements implies that enough safeguards for Ordinances  from  being  used arbitrarily  have been provided  in the Constitution?
1.   Ordinance  making powers of the President is not a parallel power of legislation.
2.   The  Ordinance  making  power  of the  President  can be questioned on the ground of being malafide.
(a) Only 1             (b) Only 2

(c) Both 1 & 2       (d)None of the above

2.      Which among the following is wrongly matched?
(a)  Tundra - sedges

(b)  Taiga - pine

(c)  Boreal - oak, maple

(d)  Savannah  -  fire  resisting  thorny shrubs
3.      The term Ginning is used in reference to
(a) Extraction of Oil from lentil seeds (b) Cleansing of crude petroleum jelly (c) Separation  of  Cotton  fibers  from
seeds

(d) Distillation of an alcoholic drink

4.      Consider the following statements:
1.   The   Parliament   by   Law   may provide  for  the  abolition  or creation  of  Legislative  Council  if the Legislative Assembly of that state passes a resolution  to that effect by a simple majority of members present and voting.
2. The    Tamilnadu    Legislative Assembly  for the third time adopted a resolution to revive the Legislative Council that was abolished in 1986.
Identify the correct statements

(a) 1 only              (b) 2 only

(c) Both1 & 2        (d) None

5.      Consider the following statements:

A.   A  citizen  from  china  who  is  in India can be regarded as minority and accorded protection under Article 30.
B. A citizen from china has a fundamental right to practice his religion in India.
(a) Only B is false (b) Only A is false

(c) Both are false  (d) Both are true

6.    Consider    the    following    statements regarding Jainism:
A.   Mahavir did not believe that God

created this world.

B.   Jainism helped in development of languages in the country.
C.   Ellora   in   Maharashtra    is   an example of Jain architecture.
D.   The statue  of Bahubali  is called as Dilwara statue
(a) B, C, D are correct (b) A, C, D are correct (c) A, B, D are correct (d) A, B, C are correct
7.      Consider   the   following   relating   to special status of J&K in Indian Constitution.
1. Parliament  could legislate  on subjects  contained  in the  Union List  but  had  no  jurisdiction  in case of concurrent list under 7th schedule of the constitution.
2.   Residuary     powers    rest    with Jammu & Kashmir, unlike other states  where  they  rest  with centre.
3.   The Union can declare emergency in the state only in case of war or External  Aggression  not  in  the case of financial emergency.
Choose  the correct answer using the codes below:
(a) 1 and 2 only    (b) 2 and 3 only

(c) 1 and 3 only    (d) All of the above

8.      The Doctrine of Colourable legislation is mandated on the maxim that 'when anything is prohibited indirectly, it is also prohibited directly'. In this regard
identify the correct statement.
(a) The doctrine of colorable legislation is not applicable to subordinate Legislation.
(b) It   is   called   upon   only   if   the constitutional transgression is patent, manifest or direct
(c) It  is  based   on   the   doctrine   of separation of power.
(d) Both b & c

9.    Which of the following statements correctly  explains  the  cause  of  the
'Blood Rain' ?

(a) Presence   of   nitrates   in   the atmosphere
(b)  Red colour in the rain was caused by the presence of spores of a European species of green microalgae.
(c) This was due to a mechanism employed by natural cloud seeding having rich sources of iron oxides which in turn produced red effect
(d) This  was  an  exceptional   and extravagant  dispersal  of spores  of red algae.
10.    Consider   the   following   statements about National Agriculture Market (NAM):
A.  NAM  envisages  to  replace Agriculture Produce Marketing Committees (APMC)
B.    NAM    will    create    an    online platform at national level to trade in agriculture commodities.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
C. Small farmers Agri Business consortium is the lead agency for NAM platform
(a) All are true

(b) B and C are true (c) A and B are true (d) A and C are true
11.    Which of the following is an indication of contamination  of water with faecal matter?
A.   Presence of coli form bacteria

B.   High Biological oxygen demand C.   High chemical oxygen demand D.   Eutrophication
(a) Only C is true (b) Only A is true (c) B, C, D are true (d) All are true
12.    Warren Hastings can be considered as the father of administrative reforms in India. Which of the following is correct about him?
1.   Warren   Hastings   started   dual system in India where company acquired real powers while the responsibility for administration rested on shoulder of Nawab of Bengal.
2.  During his period, the company appointed  its own officers  called Collectors to manage revenue affairs.
3. During     Warren     Hastings, Supreme   Court   was   setup   at
Calcutta   competent   to   try   all

'British Subjects'. Select the correct code:
(a) Only 1 & 2       (b) Only 2 & 3

(c) Only 1 & 3       (d) All of the above

13.    What do you understand by the term "Laws in force" in accordance with Article 13 of the Constitution?
(a) It  includes  only  the  laws  enacted by the Parliament or State Legislatures.
(b) It includes all laws in force in the territory of India before or after the commencement   of  the Constitution.
(c) It  includes   any  laws  passed  or made by a legislature or other competent authority in the territory of India before the commencement of the Constitution and not previously repealed.
(d) Both (a) & (c)

14.    Consider the following statements:

A.   Goa  will  host  Delphic  games  in

2016

B.   Delphic   games   are  also   called

Olympics of Arts

(a) Only A is true

(b) Only B is true

(c) Both statements are true

(d) Both statements are false

15.    The Supreme Court Project Committee on restatement of Indian Law in association  with Indian Law Institute
took  up  the  task  of  restatement  of

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
Indian Law on three important areas. Which   among   the  following   is  not under consideration?
(a) Legislative principles

(b) Contempt of Court

(c) Judicial Review

(d) Public Interest Litigation (PIL)

16.    Consider the following statements:

1.   Chalcolithic   Age   in   India   was marked by the use of copper and stone
2.   Microlith  is  the  tool  marked  in

Paleolithic age

3. The earliest known Agrarian settlement in the Indian subcontinent    comes   from   the west of the Indus system.
Which  of  the  above  statements  are correct?
(a) Only 1 & 2 (b) Only 1 & 3 (c) Only 2 & 3
(d) None of the above

17.    Consider the following statements:

A.  Chief Election Commissioner is primus inter parus in the Election Commission.
B. To          remove          Election Commissioners from office, recommendation from CEC is mandatory.
C.   To    continue    President's    rule beyond one year, Election Commission  should  declare  that
elections  are not possible  in the
state            under            present circumstances.
D. ECI    advices    speaker    on disqualification of Members of Parliament.
(a) B, C, D is correct (b) A, C, D are correct (c) A, B, D are correct (d) A, B, C are correct
18.    Identify the incorrectly matched pair: (a) Beri beri – Deficiency of B1
(b) Scurvy – Bleeding gums

(c) Vitamin A - Pulses

(d)  Proteins –Store houses

19. Consider the following statements regarding the Right to Liberty (Fundamental Right) granted in the Constitution of India?
(a) No person shall be deprived of his life or Personal Liberty.
(b) No  Person  shall  be  punished  or prosecuted  for  the  same  offence more than once.
(c) The  State  shall  provide  free  and compulsory  education  to  all children   of   the   age   of   six   to fourteen years in such manner as the state may, by law determine.
(d) No Person  accused  of any offence shall be compelled to be a witness of himself.
20.    What is Theravali in Jainism?

(a) It  contains  rules  for  the  ascetics namely   the   rules   for  the   rainy
season.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
(b) The  second  section  of  the  Jain Kalpasutra containing a list of schools (gana) and their heads etc
(c) The code of conduct prescribed for the monks
(d) None of the above

21.    Which of the following regional powers of India had a western trained military power under their rule?
A.   Mysore

B.   Travancore C.   Hyderabad D.   Arcot
(a) A, C are true    (b) C, D are true

(c) A, B are true    (d) All are true

22.    Identify the type of climate based on following characteristics:
A. Western  margins  are under permanent influence of Westerlies all around the year
B.   Winters are abnormally mild C.   Very high oceanic influence (a) Mediterranean climate
(b) North   West   European   maritime climate
(c) Siberian climate

(d) None of the above

23.    Consider   the   following   statements about the Mansab system during the Mughal period:
1.   The mansab system indicated the status  of its holder  (mansabdar)
&  it  also  fixed  his  pay  and  the

number of troops with horses and
equipment  to  be  maintained  by him.
2. The  Mughal  mansab  system included all public services like military, civil and financial including the judiciary.
(a) Only 1 (b) Only 2
(c)  Both 1 & 2

(d) Neither 1 nor 2.

24. Consider the following statements regarding Lapse rate
A.   It is greater  in summer  than  in winter
B.   It is greater during day than night

C.   It  is  greater   on  elevated   high lands than on level plains
(a) Only A is false (b) Only B is false (c) Only C is false (d) All are true
25.    A     over     grown     cumulus     cloud extending for a tremendous vertical height from the base of 2000ft to over
30,000 ft, it is often called as thunder cloud,  which  type  of  cloud  matches the description given
(a) Nimbostratus

(b) Cumulus

(c) Strato cumulus

(d) Cumulonimbus

26.    Consider the following statements:
1.  Temperature of surface water is comparatively     higher    in    the

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
northern hemisphere than in the southern hemisphere.
2.  The isotherms in the southern hemisphere  are  not  regular  and do not follow the latitudes  while they (isotherms)  are regular  and follow  the  latitudes  in  the northern hemisphere.
Which  of  the  statements  given  above is/are correct?
(a) 1 only                  (b) 2 only

(c) Both 1 and 2       (d) Neither 1 and 2

27.    Consider the following statements:

1.   There are nine orogenic phases.

2.   Alps,  Himalayas,  Ural  belong  to one orogenic phase
(a) Only 2 is false (b) Only 1 is false

(c) Both are false  (d) Both are true

28.    Which    among    the    following    are wrongly matched?
A.   Laccoliths:   An   igneous   mound with  a  dome  shaped  upper surface fed by pipe like conduit from below.
B. Lapolith: lens shaped mass of igneous rock occupying crest of anticline
C.   Phacolith:  huge mass of igneous rock
D. Batholiths:     saucer    shaped structure, a variety of igneous intrusion
(a) Only C is true   (b) Only A is true

(c) B, C, D are true (d) All are true
29.  The     President     can     exercise discretionary  powers  in the  following cases:
1.    The President can send back the advice given by the Council of Ministers and ask them to reconsider the decision.
2.    The President has veto power by which he can withhold or refuse to give assent to the bills.
(a)  Only 1             (b) Only 2 (c) Both 1 & 2        (d) None
30.    Consider   the   following   statements about later vedic period:
1.   The   society   had   been   rigidly divided into four main caste divisions.
2.   Women were highly respected and participated in all religious and political activities independently.
3.   Prajapati, the creator or Brahma occupied the supreme position in the religion.
Which   of   the   following   statements is/are incorrect?
(a) Only 1 & 2 (b) Only 2
(c) Only 3

(d) None of the above

31.    Which of the following are legacies of medieval saints both Hindu and Muslim?
A.   They   focused   on   rituals   and

practices to placate god.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
B. They concentrated on religious revival
C.   They  promoted  communal  good will
(a) Only A is false (b) Only B is false (c) Only C is false (d) All are true
32.    Consider the following statements and answer based on the codes given: Statement 1: Revolutionary terrorism was a by-product of the process of the growth   of   militant   Nationalism   in India.
Statement  2:  Their  programs included organizing military conspiracies  with expectation  of help from the enemies of Britain.
Statement 3: They were most successful  with full mass support  in Bengal
Which of the above statements is/are incorrect?
(a) Only 1             (b) Only 2 & 3

(c) Only 3            (d) None of the above

33.    To withstand  the effects  of changing climate, what types of adaptations countries  like  India  should emphasize?
1.   Investing  in  genetically  modified rice   crop   to   withstand   higher heat.
2.   Reducing consumption of meat
Select the correct answer using the codes given below:
(a) 1 only              (b) 2 only

(c) Both 1 and 2   (d) None

34. Consider the following statements regarding Indian renaissance:
A.   Revivalists are those who tried to bring assimilation between east and west.
B.   Vivekananda is a revivalist.

C. The  first  stage  of  Indian Renaissance focused on imitating west in all aspects.
(a) Only A is false (b) Only B is false (c) Only C is false (d) All are false
35.  Identify   the   correct   statements regarding snapping turtles.
1.   There is a surge in population of snapping turtles
2.   The  turtles  are  eating  up  fish, bird and weed stocks
3.   They act as invasive species (a) 1 and 2 only    (b) 2 and 3 only (c) 1 and 3 only    (d) 1, 2 and 3
36.    If   India    becomes    a    member    of Shanghai Cooperation Organization, which  of  the  following  benefits  will India Accrue?
(a) India  will  have  access  to  Russia through central Asian routes of China
(b) India    can   effectively    solve    its bilateral  issues  with  members  of SCO

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
(c) India  will  automatically  become  a member of FTA of central Asia
(d) All the above

37.    What do you understand by shoals?

(a) They  are  tropical  montane  forests found is South India
(b) They are tropical deciduous forests found in central India
(c) They are type of mangrove species found  in  coastal  areas  of  South India
(d) They are temperate forests found in hilly regions of south India
38.    Consider the following statements:

A.  Land Boundary Agreement with Bangladesh has settled both land and maritime boundary issues permanently.
B.   Bangladesh  has  gained  land  in the Land boundary agreement
C.   India   share   longest   boundary with Bangladesh
(a) Only C is false (b) Only B is false (c) Only A is false (d) All are false
39.    Consider  the  following  regarding  Jet

Streams

1.   The  major  jet  streams  on  the earth are westerly winds
2. Jet streams are caused by a combination  of  the  earth's rotation on its axis and atmospheric    heating   by   solar
radiation.
3.   The weakest  jet streams  are the polar jets.
Which of the statements  given above is/are correct?
(a) 1 and 2 only

(b) 2 only

(c) 1 and 3 only

(d) 1, 2 and 3

40.    In the context of coal reserves in India, consider the following statements:
1.   Coal  India  occurs  in  Gondwana and tertiary deposits
2.   Majority of coal deposits in India are of anthracite type
3.   India  is  self  sufficient  in  coking coal
Which of the statements  given above is/are incorrect?
(a) 1 and  2           (b) 1 only

(c) 2 and 3 only    (d) 1, 2 and 3

41.    Which  of  the  following   plants  can purify and reduce  the amount  of air pollutants in and around our home?
1.   African tulip

2.   Pacific rosewood

3.   Blue blossom

4.   Yellow flame

Select  the  correct  answer  using  the codes given below:
(a) 1  and 3 only

(b) 3 and 4 only

(c) 1, 3 and 4 only

(d) 1, 2, and 4 only
42.  Identify the incorrect statement with reference to 'Hung Parliament'.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
(a) The  situation  is  normal  in  many legislatures with proportional representation such as Germany.
(b) The  Seventh  Lok  Sabha  elections held in 1977 for the first time invoked the concept of Hung parliament in India.
(c) Even the lengthiest constitution in the   world   remains   silent   about hung parliament.
(d) In a Parliamentary  system,   hung Parliament  occurs  when  no  party has a clear cut majority.
43.    Which   state   has   launched   Mhara Gaon- Jagmag Gaon, a new electricity scheme?
(a) Rajasthan        (b) Haryana

(c) Gujarat            (d) Madhya Pradesh

44.    Arrange the following later Mughals in the chronological order
A.   Jahandar shah

B.   Farrukhsiyar

C.   Shah Alam Ali

D.   Muhammad shah

E.   Ahmad shah

(a) AEBDC            (b) ABDEC (c) BAEDC            (d) BDAEC
45.    Which  of  the  following  animals  are found in India?
1.   White tiger

2.   Blue sheep

3.   Red Panda

4.   Musk deer
Select  the  correct  answer  using  the codes given below:
(a) 2 and 4 only

(b) 2, 3 and 4 only (c) 1, 2 and 4 only (d) 1, 2, 3 and 4
46.  Which of the following is wrongly matched?
(a) Operation Rahat- Yemen

(b) Operation Maitri- Nepal

(c) Project  Mausam-  counter  to  silk road project
(d) Bharath Mala- road connectivity to ports
47.    Consider the following statements:

1.   Chalcolithic   Age   in   India   was marked by the use of copper and stone.
2.   Microlith  is  the  tool  marked  in

Paleolithic age.

3. The earliest known Agrarian settlement in the Indian subcontinent    comes   from   the west of the Indus system.
Which  of  the  above  statements  are correct?
(a) Only 1 & 2 (b) Only 1 & 3 (c) Only 2 & 3
(d) None of the above

48. Consider the following statements regarding  Indus  Valley  and  identify the correct statements:
1.   The  earliest  traces  of civilization in the Indian subcontinent are to be found in places along or close
to the Indus river.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
2. The   Indus   valley   people domesticated animals and harvested various crops
3.  They had also merchant class engaged in extensive trading
4.   The Indus valley people developed agriculture  on a large  scale  and also practiced canal irrigation.
(a) 1 and 2 only    (b) 1 and 3 (c) 1, 2, 3              (d) 1, 2, 4
49.    What do you understand  by primary production?
(a) The  total  mass  of  all  food  crops produced  in a country  during  the year.
(b) Amount  of  biomass  produced  per unit  area  over  a  time  period  by plants during photosynthesis.
(c) The  amount  of  oxygen  produced per unit area over a time period by plants during photosynthesis.
(d) The   monetary   value   of   all   the economic  activities  in the primary sector.
50.    Which  of  the  following  are  wrongly matched?
A.   Meenakshi sundaram- Bharathanatyam
B.   Raja Reddy- Kuchipudi

C.   Sonal Man Singh- Odishi

D.   Brij Maharaj- Kathak

(a) A, B are true (b) B, C are true (c) C, D are true
(d) None of the above
51.    Consider the following statements:

1. Attorney General and Solicitor General may resign by writing to each other.
2.   Deputy Speaker and Speaker may resign by writing to each other.
Which  among  the  above  statements is/are correct?
(a) Only 1             (b) Only 2

(c) Both 1 & 2       (d) Neither 1 nor 2

52. Consider the following statements regarding Indian Council of Cultural Relations (ICCR)
A.   ICCR  is a corporate  body  under

Ministry of External Affairs.

B.   ICCR works under PMO and has a departmental  status  under union government.
(a) Only B is false (b) Only A is false (c) Both are false (d) Both are true
53.    Which  among  the  following  is  called

"Dextrocardia"?

(a) Mental retardation

(b) Heart located in the right side

(c) A small hole in the heart

(d) Accumulation of water in heart

54.    Who among the following take part in election of President but not his impeachment?
(a) Legislative Councils

(b) Rajya Sabha

(c) Legislative Assembly

(d) All of the above

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
55.    Identify the incorrect statement about the socio religious reform movements? (a) Religious    reformation    was    the major and exclusive concern of the
socio religious reform movements

(b) They were a defender of the basic and universal principles of all religions.
(c) The   evolution   of   an   alternative cultural ideological system and the regeneration  of  traditional institution  emerged  as  twin concerns of these movements.
(d) The  newly  educated  middle  class were inspired by the humanistic ideals of social equality and equal worth of all individuals.
56.    Consider the following statements:

1. The thermocline layer is characterized by rapid increase in temperature with depth.
2.  In  the  high  latitude,  the temperature change with depth is gradual.
3. The oceans in the northern hemisphere record relatively high average temperature than in southern hemisphere.
Which  of  the  statements  given above are correct?
(a) 1 and 2 only    (b) 1 and 3 only

(c) 2 and 3 only    (d) All the above

57.    Which of the following are reasons of continental shelf formation?
(a) Rise in sea level (b) Wave erosion
(c) Deposition       (d) All of the above

58.  Some political groups in India had declared  an  "Anti  compromising stand"   against   British   during   the
1940,  which  groups  are  part  of this stand?
(a) Congress

(b) Hindu Mahasabha

(c) Forward Bloc

(d) Muslim League

59.    Consider the following statements:
1.   In equatorial regions, the year is divided       into       four       main seasons.
2.   In Mediterranean region, summer receives more rainfall.
3.   In  China  type  climate,  rainfall occurs throughout the year.
4.   Tropical highlands exhibit vertical zonation of different climates.
Which    of    these    statements    are correct?
(a) 1, 2, 3 and 4    (b) 1,2and3 (c) 1,2 and4           (d) 3 and 4
60.    The  President  in  order  to  remove  a

Governor shall seek advice from

(a) Council of Ministers

(b) Prime Minister

(c) Chief  Minister   of  the  concerned state
(d) None of them

61.    Why do many trees shed leaves under certain conditions?
1.   Leaves are expensive organs for a tree to build and maintain

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
2.   During     winters,     it    becomes difficult  for the  tree  to maintain its water balance
3.   Shedding  leaves  helps  trees  to meet their nutritional demands as these  leaves  provide  food  to  the tree in the form of manures
Select  the  correct  answer  using  the codes given below:
(a) 1 and 2 only    (b) 2 and 3 only

(c) 1 and 3 only    (d) 1, 2 and 3

62.    Ground Level Ozone is caused due to? (a) Carbon dioxide
(b) Oxides of nitrogen

(c) Sulphur dioxide

(d) All the above

63.    Lysosomes,    which   are   known   as suicide bags, are produced by
(a) Mitochondria

(b) Golgi body

(c) Bone marrow

(d) Peroxisome

64.    Consider   the  following   achievement about  the  Swarajist  activity  in councils:
1.  They outvoted the Government several times even on matters relating to budgetary grants.
2.   They   supported    the   peasants cause in Bengal and also got support among Muslim members who were pro-peasant.
3. Vithalbhai  Patel  was  elected speaker   of   Central   Legislative
Assembly.
4.   A  noteworthy   achievement   was the  defeat  of  the  Public  Safety Bill.
(a) 1, 2, 3 are true (b) 1, 3, 4 are true

(c) 2, 3, 4 are true (d) All are true

65.    Battle of Panipat in 1761 is considered as empty victory for Ahmed Shah Abdali. The reason being
(a) There  was  nothing  to  take  away from  mughals  as  he  already drained Delhi.
(b) Abdali   was  forced  to  retreat   to

Afghanistan due to an army revolt. (c) Abdali just wanted to show who is
overlord of Delhi. (d) All of the above
66. Which  of  the  following   are characteristics  of  China  type  of climate?
A.   Warm dry summer and cool moist winter
B.   Occurrence of typhoons

C.   No seasonal reversal of winds

D.   Peak  rainfall  during  months  of

June and July (a) B and D are true (b) A and C are true (c) A and B are true (d) B and C are true
67.    Which   among   the   following   is/are ideal conditions for Corals?
1.   Shallow waters

2.   Subtropical       and       temperate regions.
3.   Absence of cold currents

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
4.   Continuous flow of water

(a) Only 1 is false (b) Only 2 is false

(c) Only 3is false   (d) Only 4 is false

68.    Consider   the   following   statements regarding Harappan Seals:
(a) They were usually made of steatite and occasionally of agate chert, copper, faience
(b) Some of the seals have been found in Gold and ivory
(c) The  figures  include  unicorn,  bull, lion, tiger elephant, bison etc
(d) Every seal has been engraved in a pictographic  script.
69.    Kaveri river is considered a perennial river because
(a) Its water is from a glacier

(b)   It   gets   rainfall   from   both   the monsoonal wind systems
(c) Its waters never dry up due to low temperature
(d) It has a wide catchment area

70.    The    world's    first    ever    electronic diamond exchange is being set up in
(a) France             (b) Singapore

(c) South Africa    (d) USA

71.    The   ministerial   council   formed   by

Shivaji is popularly known as

(a) Nyaya Pradhan (b) Ashta diggajas (c) Ashta Siddhi
(d) Ashta Pradhan

72.    Which   of   the   following   are   River landforms of middle course?
1.   Flood plain
2.   Levee

3.   Meander

4.   Gorge

Choose the correct option from below

(a) 1 and 2 are correct

(b) 1, 2 and 3 are correct

(c) All are correct

(d) None are correct

73.  It is said that the British Indian Association had gradually lost its anti- British edge in the early 1880s. What was the main reason behind this?
(a) It had increasingly  identified  itself with the interests of the zamindars.
(b) It   had   become   reactionary   and moribund.
(c) It was being increasingly associated with the British Government.
(d) All of the above.

74.    Statement  : 1 (S1): Carbon  capture and Storage is known as Carbon Sequestration.
Statement : 2(S2) : Carbon sequestration is carried out by
'Carbon sinks'. Oceans, forests are natural sinks.
Choose your answer from following options:
(a) Both are true

(b) S1 is true, S2 is false. (c) S1 is false, S2 is true (d) Both are false.
75.    Consider the following statements:
1.   Amrita Bazar Patrika was initially published in English language.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
2.   The   founding   session   of   the National Congress in 1885 was presided over by Surendranath Banerjee.
Which  of  the  above  statements  are true?
(a) Only 1             (b) Only 2 (c) Both                (d) None
76.   Consider the following regarding 'Solar

Pond':

1. It is the one of the method of harnessing alternate source of energy that is solar energy.
2.  The   phenomena   of  warming   of ocean is used to get the energy.
3. The first Solar Pond in Asia is established in Bhuj district of Gujarat.
Which of the above are TRUE?

(a) 1 only              (b) 1 and 2 only

(c) 2 only              (d) All the above

77.  Which     among     the     following committees have equal number of members?
A.   Estimates committee

B.   Public accounts committee

C.   Committee  on welfare of SC and

STs

D.   Committee  on  Empowerment  of

Women

(a) All are correct

(b) A, C, D are correct (c) A, B, D are correct (d) A, B, C are correct
78. Which of the following are the characteristics of Tropical Cyclones?
1.   They  do  not  have  fronts.  (Cold and warm air fronts)
2.   They have fronts.

3.   They occur in autumn season

4.   They  give  torrential  rainfall  and they are destructive in nature.
Choose the option which is TRUE? (a) 3 and 4 only
(b) 2, 3 and 4 only (c) 1, 3 and 4 only (d) 2 and 4 only
79.    Which of the following statements are true  with  respect  to  private placement?

1.   This is one among three ways in which a company raises capital in the primary market through issuing shares

2.   Company   directly  negotiates   to the investors, which may be financial institutions as well as individuals

3.   This   is  completely   opposite   to public issue in its process

(a) 1 and 3            (b) 2 and 3

(c) 1 and 3            (d) 1, 2 and 3

80.    Select the incorrect statement related to WTO?

1.   It provides most favoured nation (MFN) treatment to all member countries for each other

2.   Member     economics     are    not allowed  to  impose  anti-dumping
or counter veiling duties

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
3.   Treating   a   product   of   foreign origin  for  custom  imposition  by the member countries is not allowed in normal case

(a) Only 1             (b) 1 and 3 (c) Only 2             (d) 2 and 3
81.    Which of the following will be a part of external debt of India?

1.   NRO deposits

2.   NRE deposits

3.   FCNR (B) deposits

(a) 2 and 3            (b) 1 and 3

(c) 1 and 3            (d) 1, 2 and 3

82.  Which  of the following  may be considered correct about Zero-based Budgeting?

(a)   Fresh evaluation of every item of expenditure from the very beginning of each financial year

(b) When total expenditure of the government  is  kept  equal  to  its total receipts

(c)   When the fiscal deficit is kept at zero percent of the gross domestic product

(d)  When the Government has zero revenue and primary deficits

83.  Select    the    correct    statements regarding Marginal standing facility(MSF):

(a) MSF rate is equal to Reverse Repo
Rate

(b) Banks   can   borrow   money   from central bank over and above what is normally  available  through  LAF
window
(c) A    temporary     arrangement     to Siphon out the extra liquidity from the banks operating in India

(d) This   functions   just   opposite   to
Liquidity adjustment facility (LAF)

84.    Select      the      correct      statement
/statements  about 'predatory  pricing'
using the code given below:

1.   Fixing of exceptionally high prices by the companies for their goods

2.   Such    pricing    policy    has    an express purpose of harming rivals of exploiting the consumer

(a) Only 1             (b) Only 2

(c) 1 and 3          (d) None of the above

85.    What does a 'J-curve effect' mean in the area of foreign exchange management?

(a)   A deficit in BOP is followed after devaluation  before  posting surplus

(b) Though      foreign      exchange earnings  of  an  economy  in primary  articles  are  lower,  they are consistent

(c)  An increase in capital account surplus due to devaluation

(d)   Increase in rate of inflation due to the impact of devaluation

86.    If     RBI     decides     to     adopt     an
'expansionary  monetary  policy' which of the following it would do?

(a)   Increase    MSF    and    decrease
Reverse Repo Rate

(b)   Decrease MSF rate and decrease
Reverse Repo Rate

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
(c)   Increase  Bank rate and increase
Repo rate

(d)   Increase CRR and SLR

87.    Index 'Residex' is associated with

(a) Share prices

(b) Mutual fund prices

(c) Inflation

(d) Land prices

88.    "Global   Competitiveness   Report"   is released by

(a) WTO (b) IMF
(c) World Economic forum

(d) UNIDO

89.    Consider the following statements:

1. Demand pull inflation is a consequence  of  expansionary fiscal policy

2. Increase  in  inflation  reduces savings

3.   Core  inflation  does  not  include food and fuel sectors

4.   Increase  inflation  leads  decrease in imports

(a) 1, 2, 3              (b) 2, 3, 4

(c) 1, 3, 4              (d) All the above

90.    Which  of  the  following  statement(s)
is/are true?

1.   Short term capital gains tax rate is more than long term capital gains tax rate

2.   Advalorem Duty is an indirect tax
3. Laffer   curve   depicts   the relationship between tax rate and tax revenue

4.   Gift tax is a direct tax

(a) 1, 3, 4              (b) 1, 2, 3

(c) 2, 3, 4              (d) All the above

91.    The Attorney General of India can take part in the proceedings of the which of the following?
1.   Lok Sabha

2.   Rajya Sabha

3.   Joint sitting

4.   Cabinet meeting Choose the correct option (a) 1 only
(b) 1 and 2 only

(c) 1, 2 and 3 only

(d) All

92.    The salaries of which of the following are charged on the Consolidated Fund of India?
1.   Judges of Supreme court

2.   Chairmen of UPSC

3.   CAG

4.   Pension of judges of High courts

Choose the correct option: (a) 1 only
(b) 1 and 3 only

(c) 1, 3 and 4 only

(d) All are correct

93.    Consider    the    following    regarding

Special officer for linguistic minority:
1. It is a Constitutional body established             on             the

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
recommendation        of        state reorganization commission.
2.   There  is no specific  qualification mentioned in the constitution.
3.   He holds the office for 6 years or

65 years whichever is earlier.

4.   The    commissioner    has    Head

Quarters at Delhi.

Choose the TRUE statements from the above?
(a) 1 and 2 only (b) 1 and 3 only (c) 1 and 4 only (d) All are true.
94.    The   68th     World   Health   Assembly report   defines   unhealthy   food   as those:
1.   Which are high in saturated fats

2.   Which have trans fatty acids

3.   Which have free sugars or salts

4.   Energy dense and nutrient poor Choose the TRUE statements from the above?
(a) 1 and 2 only

(b) 1, 2 and 4 only

(c) All are true

(d) None

95.    Arrange  following  plans  in  order  of their year of formation:
1.   Visveshvaraya Plan

2.   Bombay plan

3.   Congress Plan

4.   NITI ayog

5.   Planning commission

6.   NDC
Choose from following options: (a) 1 – 3 – 2 – 5 – 6 - 4
(b) 3 – 2 – 1 – 5 – 6 - 4 (c) 1 – 2 – 3 – 5 – 6 - 4 (d) 1 - 2 – 3 – 6 – 5 - 4
96.    Consider    the    following    regarding

Central Vigilance Commission:

1.   It  is  a  multi  member  statutory body.
2. Members  are  appointed  by President of India on the recommendation  of  Prime minister, Union minister of Home, CJI  of  SC,  Opposition   in  Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha.
3. Members  are  appointed  by President of India on the recommendation  of  Prime minister, Union minister of home and opposition in Lok Sabha.
Choose the TRUE statement?

(a) 1 only              (b) 1 and 2 only

(c) 1 only 3 only    (d) None

97.  The 'Red Data Book' published by International  Union  for  Conservation of Nature (IUCN) contains list of
1.   Endemic     plant     and     animal species present in the biodiversity hotspot
2.   Threatened    plant   and   animal species
3.   Protected sites for conservation of Nature  and natural resources  in various countries.
Select the correct answer?

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
(a) Only 2             (b) Only 3

(c) 1 and 3 only    (d) 2 and 3 only

98.    There was no regular tax from land in the early Vedic period, because
(a) The    people    were    not    settled permanently in one locality
(b) The  expenditure   from  Kings   for welfare was low
(c) The  king  was  not  considered  as proprietor of land.
(d) The people were not accustomed to pay the land tax.
99.    Consider the following statements:

1. WC Bannerjee was a notable absentee in the first session of Congress in 1885.
2.  WC Bannerjee Founded Indian national association in 1876.
3.  Dadabhai Naoroji was the first president of the Indian National Congress. He was the person who gave it a name of Congress from Union.
Which  of  the  above  statements  are

TRUE?

(a) 1 and 2 only

(b) 2 and 3 only

(c) All of the above.

(d) None of the above.

100. "If the religion did not sanction the reforms  then  the  religion  itself  must be changed". Who gave this popular statement?
(a) Narayana Guru

(b) Mahatma Gandhi

(c) Gopal Hari Deshmukh

(d) Raja Ram Mohanroyw w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
Place for Rough Work

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
