

1.     Ans: C
Exp: The ordinance  making  powers  of the president under Article 123 is to not to be deemed as parallel legislation and to be used only in exceptional circumstances.  The  SC  judgment  in  "Cooper  Case" (1970) implies that Ordinances made by the President are  questionable   and  could  be  challenged  on  the ground that immediate action is not required.
2.     Ans: C
Exp: Taiga regions are also called boreal forests with dominant vegetation of pine, firs, spruce. While beech, oak, maple and cherry are part of temperate deciduous forest
3.     Ans: C
Exp: A process that separates cotton fibers from their seeds. The fibers are processed into clothing or other cotton goods.
4.     Ans: B
Exp: The legislative assembly of the state need to pass a resolution to that effect by a majority of not less than two-third of the members of the Assembly present and voting.
5.     Ans: B
Exp:   Articles  15,  16,  19,  29,  30 are  applicable  to citizens of India, so article 30 in statement  1 is not correct
6.     Ans: D
Exp: Mahavir did not believe in supreme existence, or creative spirit, he regarded all objects animate or inanimate  contains  degree  of consciousness,  so  the emphasis on ahimsa. Dilwara temples are present on mount  Abu,  while  the  Bahubali  statue  is called  as Gometeshwara statue.
7.     Ans: B
Exp: Till 1963, Parliament could legislate on subjects contained in the Union List, and had no jurisdiction in case of concurrent list under 7th schedule of the Constitution.  But now  the  Parliament  has  power  to legislate on some of the subjects of Concurrent list.
8.     Ans: B
Exp:  The doctrine  of colorable  legislation is the  idea that when the legislature wants to do something that it cannot do within the constraints of the constitution, it colours the law with a substitute purpose which will still allow it to accomplish  its original goal. It based upon the idea of separation of power.
9.     Ans: B
10.   Ans: B
Exp: Cabinet committee on economic affairs has approved  creation  NAM,  which  will create  an online platform for trade of agri commodities, any buyer can log  in and  buy  the  produce  from  mandis,  this  will

create a national market, and it will co-exist along with APMC. SFAC is designated as lead agency to create the online platform.
11.   Ans: B
Exp: Presence of coli form bacteria in water is a direct indication  of faecal  contamination,  while  High  BOD indicates use of oxygen by biological organisms, while COD  means  oxygen  used  for  chemical  combustion, both are indicators of pollution. Eutrophication means addition of pollutants to water bodies.
12.   Ans: B
Exp: Dual system was started by Clive and not Warren
Hastings. Warren Hastings put an end to dual system
13.   Ans: C
14.   Ans: C
Exp: Delphic games are called Olympics of arts held every 4 years, 2016 games will be held in Goa with the theme of Celebrating Arts and cultures
15.   Ans: C
Exp: The SC committee on Restatement of Indian Law under the Chairmanship  of Justice  R. V. Ravindran took up the areas of Legislative principles, Contempt of Court and PIL.
16.   Ans: B
Exp: For statement  2, it is Mesolithic  Age which  is marked by microliths (very small tools) Chalcolithic cultures extended from the Chotanagpur Plateau to the upper Gangetic basin.
17.   Ans: D
Exp: CEC is first among equals, ECI advices president or governors  on disqualification,  while speaker is on his own while acting on disqualification based on tenth schedule
18.   Ans: D
Exp:  Proteins  are  helpful  in body  building  whereas
Fats act as the store houses of energy.
19.   Ans: A
Exp: Article 21 - Protection of Life And Personal Liberty states that No person shall be deprived of his life or personal  liberty  except  according  to  procedure established by law which effectively implies that  right is not absolute and is subject to the law enacted by the state.
20.   Ans: B
Exp:  The  kalpasutra  has  three  sections.  The  first section contains the jinacharita. "The biographies the Jainas" The second section consists of the Theravali i.e the list of pontiffs and also the name of the schools (gana) their branches (shaka) and names of head of the school.
21.   Ans: C
Exp: Travancore  under  martanda  verma  have developed  an  army  which  is  trained  with  help  of western   powers   this   is  one   of  the   reason   why Travancore  expelled  Dutch,  while  Mysore  had  help from France, under both Hyder Ali and Tipu Sultan.
22.   Ans: B
Exp: The cool temperate western margin climate is also called British type of climate and due to its high influence of ocean on temperature and precipitation it's also called North West European maritime climate.
23.   Ans: B
Exp: Under the systems, mansabs (ranks) in terms of numbers  were  assigned  to nobles  and  commanders who were also placed in important administrative position.  The  Mughal  mansab  system  included  all public services except judiciary.
24.   Ans: D
Exp: The rate of decrease of temperature with the increase  in altitude  is called  lapse  rate,  this rate is greater  in summers,  days and highlands  than their counter parts.
25.   Ans: D
Exp: Cumulonimbus  cloud  brings  conventional  rain associated  with thunder and lightning so it is called thunder cloud and has a great vertical height.
26.   Ans: A
27.   Ans: A
Exp: Three most recent orogenic phases include
1. Caledonian: Mt. of Scandinavia, Scotland
2. Hercynian: Ural, pennies, Appalachians
3. Alpine: Alps, Himalayas, Andes, and Rockies
28.   Ans: B
Exp: Phacolith is lens shaped igneous rock, Lopolith is a saucer shard igneous intrusion while batholiths is a huge mass of igneous rock like granite.
29.   Ans: C
30.   Ans: B
Exp: The position of women during later Vedic period declined  compared  to early Vedic  period.  They  were considered  inferior  and  subordinate  to  men.  They could not participate  in political assemblies.  They no longer   accompanied   their   husbands   in   religious Yajnas.
31.   Ans: A
Exp: Medieval saints focused on religious revival but it is not through rituals and practices but by promoting complete surrender to god and preaching God is one, whether of Hindu, Muslim or    Chandala thus emphasizing on communal good will.
32.   Ans: C
Exp: No involvement of masses was envisaged which coupled with the narrow upper castes social base of the movement in Bengal severely limited the scope revolutionary terrorist activity
33.   Ans: C
Exp: Genetically modified crops can withstand higher heat or lower water availability. Eating meat consumes more  water  per gram  protein  as compared  to plant based protein
34.   Ans: A
Exp: Indian Renaissance  in the initial stage tried to disown  Indian  values  and  imitate  the  west,  while second   stage   accepted   everything   from  past   and honored  it,  the  second  stage  is  called  revivalists,
Vivekananda,   Paramahamsa,   Dayananda   saraswati are examples of this stage, while Rammohun Roy, Tagore, Besant tried to bring a compromise  between eastern and western value systems.
35.   Ans: D
Exp: The turtles have been classified  as an Invasive Species and are eating up fish, bird and weed stocks. They   are   creating   a   menace   for   the   ecosystem especially in Japan.
36.   Ans: A
Exp: SCO membership will help India in having increased access to trade transit and energy including counter terrorism cooperation, SCO doesn't discuss bilateral issues, there is no central Asian FTA
37.   Ans: A
Exp: Shoals are temperate forests found in higher reaches of Nilgiris, Annamalai and palani hills.
38.   Ans: C
Exp: Maritime issue settled between two countries through ICJ not agreement, Bangladesh gained land in the agreement.
39.   Ans: A
Exp: The major jet streams are the westerlies flowing from west to east. Polar jets are the strongest.
40.   Ans: C
Exp: Majority of coal deposits in India are bituminous and not anthracite.  India imports coking coal mostly from countries like Australia
41.   Ans: D
42.   Ans: B
Exp: The Ninth Lok Sabha elections held in 1989 invoked the concept of Hung Parliament  for the first time in India. There is no mention of hung parliament in our Indian constitution. (Lengthiest in the world)
43.   Ans:
Exp: Haryana government has launched Mhara Gaon- Jagmag Gaon, a new electricity scheme. "Mhara gaon- jagmag gaon" which is an inclusive voluntary scheme aimed at providing 24-hour power supply to rural domestic consumers in a phased manner.
44.   Ans: B
Exp: Later Mughals in the chronological order include Bahadur Shah I, Jahandar Shah, Farukh Siyar, Muhammad  Shah,  Ahmad  Shah,  Alamgir  II,  Shah Alam II.
45.   Ans: D
46.   Ans: D
Exp: Bharath mala projects aims to build roads in the border areas while sagarmala aims to connect to ports and modernization of ports.
47.   Ans: B
Exp: For statement  2, it is Mesolithic  Age which  is marked by microliths (very small tools) Chalcolithic cultures extended from the Chotanagpur Plateau to the upper Gangetic basin.
48.   Ans: C
Exp: They  did not develop  agriculture  on any large scale, nor did they have technology for that since they were confined to using Bronze  or stone implements. They did not practice canal irrigation and did not have heavy plough
49.   Ans: B
50.   Ans: D

51.   Ans: B
Exp: Attorney General holds the office during the pleasure  of the  President,  while  Solicitor  General  is appointed and removed by central Government.
52.   Ans: A
Exp: ICCR is a corporate body works under MOEA, to promote mutual understanding of cultures between various countries
53.   Ans: B
Exp: Dextrocardia is a condition in which the heart is pointed toward the right side of the chest. Normally, the heart points to the left. The condition is present at birth (congenital). The abdominal and chest organs in babies with dextrocardia  may be abnormal and may not work correctly.
54.   Ans: C
Exp: Legislative Council has no role either in election or impeachment while assembly participates in election but not impeachment,  RS and LS participate in both election and impeachment.
55.   Ans: A
Exp: Religious reformation was the major but not the exclusive concern of these movements. Since social practices was vigorously attached with religion it was not possible  to undertake  any social  action  without coming to grips with it.
56.   Ans: C
Exp: The thermocline  layer is characterized  by rapid decrease  in  temperature   with  depth.  In  the  high latitude the temperature change is gradual with depth. Average temperature  of Northern hemisphere  is 19.4 degrees which is higher than southern hemisphere oceans which is around 16  degrees.
57.   Ans: D
Exp:  Continental   shelf  is  sea  ward  extension   of continent  from  shore  line  to  the  continental  edge around  600ft it is followed  by continental  slope and deep oceanic relief.
58.   Ans: C
Exp:  Socialists,   Forward  Bloc,  Kisansabha, Communists are part of anti-compromising stand.
59.   Ans:D
60.   Ans: D
Exp: The Governor is an agent of the President who holds the office during the pleasure of the President. So, to remove him / her from office, president does not need to seek advice from anybody.
61.   Ans: A
Exp: The process of Shedding leaves help trees to conserve water and energy and this process is called Abscission
62.   Ans: B
Exp:  Ground  level  Ozone  is  created  by  chemical reactions between oxides of Nitrogen (Nox) and Volatile Organic Compounds (VOC) in the presence of sunlight. Emissions   from   industrial   facilities   and   electric utilities,  motor vehicle exhaust,  gasoline vapors, and chemical solvents are some of the major sources of Nox and  VOC.  Breathing  ozone  can  trigger  a  variety  of health problems, particularly for children, the elderly, and people of all ages who have lung diseases such as asthma.  Ground  level  ozone  can  also  have  harmful effects on sensitive vegetation and ecosystems.
63.   Ans: B
Exp: Lysosomes are called suicide sacks. They are produced by the Golgi body. They consist of a single membrane surrounding powerful digestive enzymes. It acts as the "garbage disposal" of the cell by breaking down cell components  that are no longer needed as well as molecules or even bacteria that are ingested by the cell.
64.   Ans: B
Exp:  They  failed  to  support  the  peasants  cause  in Bengal and lost support among Muslim members who were pro-peasant
65.   Ans: B
Exp: Battle of Panipat was empty for Abdali because he did  not  rule  Delhi,  because  of internal  problems  in Afghanistan,  while for Subcontinent  this war proved that mughals and Marathas are losing control.
66.   Ans: A
Exp: China type climate has warm moist summer and dry winters due to oceanic influence, partial seasonal reversal of winds is a characteristic  feature of china type of climate.
67.   Ans: B
Exp: shallow waters, tropical and sub topical regions, absence  of cold  currents,  continuous  flow  of water, clean water are responsible for coral growth. But precious corals of pacific and Red corals of Mediterranean survive in cold and deeper water also.
68.   Ans: C
Exp: The figures in seals included animals like tiger, bison, goat, bull, elephant, buffalo but not Lion.
69.   Ans: B
70.   Ans: B
Exp: The world's first exchange  for physically-settled diamonds  is slated to begin trading in September  in Singapore.  The  Singapore  Diamond  Investment Exchange (SDiX), as it is known, aims to create a new marketplace   for   the   global   diamond   trade.   The exchange  will  provide  investors  an  opportunity   to invest in diamonds with transparent pricing. SDiX will be a first-of-its-kind business-to-consumer (B2C) platform for physically settled diamonds. The exchange is  capable   of  handling   500,000   transactions   per second.
71.   Ans: D
Exp: Ashta Pradhan was a council of eight ministers that  administered  the  Maratha  empire.  The  council was formed in 1674 by founding Emperor Chhatrapati Shivaji.The term Ashta Pradhan literally translates to "the Prime Eight", from the Sanskrit ashta ("eight") and pradhan ("prime"). The body discharged the functions of a modern council of ministers; this is regarded as one of the first successful instances of ministerial delegation in India.
72.   Ans: B
Exp: Gorge (canyon),  Raids, River terrace, Water fall and River capture are landforms of upper course. Flood Plain, Levee, Meander and Ox-bow lake are landforms of middle course. Braider Channel, Delta, estuary, alluvial  deposits  and  rejuvenation  are  landforms  of lower valley.
73.   Ans: A
74.   Ans: A
Exp: Carbon sequestration describes long term storage of CO2  or other forms of Carbon to either mitigate or

defer global warming. Oceans, Forests, soil are natural sinks, while Depleted oil reserves, unmineable  mines are artificial sinks.
75.   Ans:  D
Exp:  Amrita Bazar Patrika was launched in Bengalee. Then after to bypass the clutches of  vernacular press act  it  shifted  to  English.  W.C.  Banerjee  was  the president  at the  1st  session  of  the  Indian  National Congress.
76.   Ans:  A
Exp: A solar pond is simply a pool of saltwater which collects and stores solar thermal energy. The saltwater naturally forms a vertical salinity  gradient also known as a "halocline", in which low-salinity water floats on top of high-salinity water.
77.   Ans: B
Exp: Except PAC all other three committees  have 30 members each, PAC has 22 members, while departmental standing committees have 24 members
78.   Ans: C
Exp: Tropical cyclone is a circular storm that rotates counter-clockwise   in  the  northern  hemisphere  and clock wise in the southern hemisphere.  They do not have fronts.  They drive energy from the latent heat. The clouds are cumulonimbus.  These are known by different names in different regions.
China-   Typhoons,    Japan-   Taifu,   Indian   ocean- Cyclone, Carribean sea- hurricane, Australia- Willi- willies, Phillipines- Baigio
79.   Ans: D
80.   Ans: D
81.   Ans: A
82.   Ans: A
83.   Ans: B
84.   Ans: B
85.   Ans: A
86.   Ans: B
87.   Ans: D
88.   Ans: C
89.   Ans: D
90.   Ans: D
91.   Ans: C
Exp:  AG  is not  a member  of the  cabinet.  There  is separate  Law minister  in the central cabinet to look after the legal matters. AG is a highest law officer in the country. He has the right to be audience in all courts in the territory of India. He has the right to speak and take  part  in the  proceedings  of both  the  houses  of parliament,  joint  sitting  of parliament  and  also  any committee of parliament of which he may be named as a member.
92.   Ans: D
Exp: Salaries  of judges  of High court is charged  on respective   consolidated   fund   of  states,   but   their pension is charged on consolidated fund of India.
93.   Ans: A
Exp: The Special officer for linguistic minority is designated  as Commissioner  for linguistic  minorities.
Constitution does not specify the qualifications, tenure, salaries   and   allowances,   service   conditions   and procedure for his removal. The commissioner  has his head quarters at Allahabad (UP) and 3 regional offices at Belagavi (Karnataka), Chennai (Tamil Nadu) and Kolkata  (West  Bengal)  and  each  regional  offices  is headed by Asst. Commissioner.
94.   Ans: C
Exp: The 68th  session of the World Health assembly took  place  at  Geneva  in  May  2015  approved  the interim report of the commission on ending childhood obesity, recommending  elimination  of unhealthy  food from schools and asking for restrictions on promotion of such food. The report clearly defines unhealthy food as those which are high in saturated fats, trans fatty acids, free sugars and salts or energy dense, nutrient poor foods.
95.   Ans: A
Exp: Vishvesvaraya plan- 1934
Congress plan- 1938
Bombay plan- 1944
Planning commission- 1950
National Development Council- 1952
NITI ayog- 2015
96.   Ans: C
Exp: CVC was established on the recommendations of Santhanam committee on prevention of Corruption. Originally CVC was neither a constitutional body nor a statutory body. In September 2003, the parliament enacted a law conferring statutory status on the CVC.
97.   Ans: A
Exp: IUCN categorizes  species on the basis of threat perspective as Extinct, Extinct in Wild, Critically endangered, Endangered, Vulnerable, Near threatened, least concern, data deficit and not evaluated.
98.   Ans: A
Exp: There was no regular tax from land in the early Vedic Period because, the people were not settled permanently   in  one  locality.  'Bali'  was  a  form  of voluntary contribution to the king.
99.   Ans: D
Exp:  Surendranath  Bannerjea  was  the  founder  of Indian   National   association   in  1876  with  Anand Mohan  Bose.  He  had  already  decided  the  dates  of session  of  1885  Indian  National  Association,  that's why, he was unable to attend the first session of INC. He merged his party with congress considering the common objective of both. W C Bannerjea was the first president of INC in 1885. Dadabhai Naoroji gave the name of Congress  to Indian National  Congress  from Union. He was the second president of Congress.
100. Ans: C
Exp:  Gopal  Hari  Deshmukh   popularly   known  as
'Lokhitavadi' gave that statement.
Narayana Guru Sais 'One religion One Caste and One
God for Mankind'.

