

1.      Match the following

1. Lucknow          A. Nana Saheb

2. Kanpur                B. Maharaja

Kunwar singh

3. Jhansi            C. Laxmi Bai

4. Jagadishpur    D. Begum

Hazrat mahal Choose  the  correct  option  from  the below options.
(a) 1-D, 2-A, 3-C, 4-B (b) 1-A, 2-B, 3-C, 4-D (c) 1-B, 2-A, 3-C, 4-D (d) 1-D, 2-B, 3-C, 4-A
2.      With   reference    to     the   Himalayas, consider the following statements
1.  The northern  most  ranges  known as   Greater   Himalayas  is    also called as Himachal Mountains
2.   Lesser   Himalayas are  known  as

Himadri

3.    The Mount Everest is  located in the Inner Himalayas
Which of the above is/are correct? (a) 1 and 3 Only
(b) 2 and 3 Only

(c) 3 Only

(d) All

3.      Consider   the   following  statements about the Gandhara School of Art
1.   Its  artists made large scale use of spotted red stone.
2.    It was patronised by Kushanas.

3.    It is very  realistic in nature.

4.   Its   main  theme  was  'Mahayana

Buddhism'.

Which of the statements are TRUE. (a) 2 only
(b) 2,3 and 4 only (c) 1,3 and 4 only (d) All of the above
4.      Which of  the following are features  of

Parliamentary Government?

1.    Nominal and real executive

2.    Collective responsibility

3.   Secrecy

4.   Leadership of President

Choose  the   right   option   from  the following options:
(a) 1 and 2 only

(b) 1, 2 and 3 only (c) 1, 2 and 4 only (d) All are true
ASSERTION AND REASON(5-10)

a.      A  and  R  are  True  and  R  is   correct explanation of A.
b.      A  and R  are  True but  R  is   not  the correct explanation of A.
c.      A is  True but R is False.

d.      A is false and R is True.

5.      A: Defence white paper is prepared by Japan, China, Australia, The US, The UK and India.
R:    The  main  purpose  behind  is   to signal to  both adversaries and friends and   to    give     an   overall  sense   of strategic direction.

6.      A:  Presence  of  more aerosols  in  the atmosphere may affect the probability and amount of rainfall.
R:   They can  heat  the  atmosphere  by absorbing radiation from the sun.  In the  context of  the statements above, which of these is true?

7.      A:   The  socialists,   firstly  wanted   to establish the dictatorship of the proletariat  and   ultimately,  a communist   state    or    a    classless society, which  for many  was  nothing more than a utopia.
R:       The     fundamental      difference between  the  socialist  and  the communist   was   that    the   former wanted economic, social and  political change     through     reform,    mainly through  constitutional  method, while the later wanted change through revolution.

8.      A:  Institute  and Homage are the two types of Feudal system.
R:    Institute   where   land   lord   was promised  for  justice  and  protection and  where as  Homage where feudal must be honest to  land lord.

9.      A:  There is  distinction between Indian and  British  Model of   Parliamentary system.
R:   India is   Republic while Britain is not.

10. A: Bioremediation is  the use of microorganisms to degrade the environmental contaminants  into less toxic forms.
R:   The  microorganisms  may  be indigenous to  a contaminated area or isolated  from elsewhere and  brought to  contaminated site.
11.  Which  of    the   following  are recommendations of Wood's dispatch?
1.  Mass     education     is       the responsibility of the government,
2.   A       separate     department     of education      in     every     Indian province should be created.
3.  There    should     be    lesser governmental control universities in the case of higher education.
4. Female education should be encouraged.
Choose the TRUE  statements  from the option given below.
(a) 1 and 2 only    (b) 1, 2 and 3 only

(c) 1, 2 and 4 only (d) All are correct

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
12.    Consider    the    following   regarding

AYUSH

1.    Department of  Indian  systems of Medicine and  Homeopathy  (ISM and H)  is  a branch of  ministry of AYUSH
2.   AYUSH     stands    for   Ayurveda, Yoga, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy.
3.    It   is     proposed    for   developing education and research in Indian traditional medicine.
Which of the above are TRUE?

(a) 2 only                 (b) 2 and 3 only

(c) 1 and 3 only    (d) All are true

13.    Which of the following are the features of  Federal nature  of  Constitution  of India?
1.    Dual Polity

2.    Written constitution

3.   Integrated Judiciary

4.    Division of powers

Choose the right option

(a) 1 and 4 only    (b) 1, 2 and 3 only

(c) 1, 3 and 4 only (d) 1, 2 and 4 only

14.    Match the following

1. Bondia wildlife A. Odisha sanctuary
2. Kangerghat           B. Asom

National park

3. Orang                   C. Chattisgarh sanctuary
4. Ushakothi            D. Goa

wild  life sanctuary
Options

(a) 1-B,   2-A, 3-E,  4-C (b) 1-D, 2-C, 3-B, 4-A (c) 1-B,  2-C, 3-E, 4-A (d) 1-D, 2-A, 3-B, 4-C
15.    Which of  the following statements are

TRUE?

1.    Rule of  law index 2015  released by the  U.S. based  world justice report.
2.    Rule of  law index 2015  released by World Economic forum.
3.    India   figures   in   the   top   50 countries in the world for an effective criminal justice system.
Options

(a) 1 only                 (b) 2 only

(c) 1 and 3 only    (d) 2 and 3 only

16.    Assertion:  East coast has conducive geography   for  development   of   ports than the western coast.
Reason:  The continental  shelf of  east coast extends upto 500 km into sea.
(a) A and R is true, R explains A

(b) A and R is true, R doesn't explain A (c) A is true R is false
(d) A is false R is true

17.     Which  among  the  following satellites are used in GAGAN?
(a) GSAT-7              (b) GSAT-8 (c) GSAT-5              (d) GSAT-12
18.    Consider    the    following   regarding

'Mission Indradhanush'

E. Tripura

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
1.    It aims to  immunize  all children against seven vaccine preventable diseases.
2.   201 high focus districts in the country  with  50%  of   all unvaccinated   or  partially vaccinated     districts     will       be covered in 1st phase.
3.    The Union health ministry will  be technically supported by WHO, UNICEF, Rotary international etc.
Choose  the NON-TRUE statements. (a) 2 only                 (b) 3 only
(c) 2 and 3 only    (d) None

19.    Consider    the    following   regarding

'Sustainable agriculture'

1.    It is also called as Eco  farming.

2.    It is  aimed at meeting the needs of present generation without compromising the need of  future generation.
3.    It   is    a   balanced  management system of renewable resources including  soil, wildlife, forests, livestock, fish, crops etc.
4.    This type of agriculture also takes social implications into account.
Choose the TRUE  statements  from the below options.
(a) 1 and 2 only    (b) 2 and 3 only

(c) 2, 3 and 4 only (d) All are true.

20.    Consider    the    following   regarding

'Debendranath Tagore'

1.   He  is also known as Maharshi.
2.   'Indian  mirror'  is   a  news paper started by him.
3. 'Tatvabodhini      sabha'      was established by him.
4.  'Goodwill      fraternity'       was established by him.
Choose the correct option. (a) 1 only
(b) 1 and 2 only

(c) 1, 2 and 3 only

(d) All are true.

21.    Which  of    the   following  statements is/are    true    concerning   the Government of India Act 1919?
1.    It   introduced    diarchy   in   the provinces.
2.  It extended  the  principle of communal  representation   to include  minority  communities other than Muslims too.
3.    It introduced for the first time the system of  direct elections in the country.
Choose the  correct answer using the codes below:
(a) 1 and 3 only    (b) 2 and 3 only

(c) 1 and 2 only    (d) All the above.

22.    Consider    the    following   regarding

'National Highway Authority of India

1.   NHAI is a statutory body.

2.    It is  responsible  for development, maintenance and management of National Highways
3.    The Golden Quadrilateral project-

implemented by NHAI.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
Choose the right option

(a) 2 only                 (b) 1 and 3 only

(c) 2 and 3 only    (d) 1, 2 and 3 only

23.  In   addition   to    protein   and carbohydrates, other nutritional substances found in milk may be
1.   Potassium

2.   Cobalt

3.   Iron

4.   Calcium

Select the  correct  answer  using  the codes given below
(a) 1, 2 and 3        (b) 1, 2 and 4 (c) 1, 3 and 4        (d) 2, 3 and 4
24.  What are the differences between resolutions  passed  by United Nations General Assembly (UNGA)  and United Nations Security Council (UNSC)?
1.    The UNGA  resolutions are legally non     binding    upon     member nations,   while  the   UNSC resolutions   are   legally  binding upon all members.
2.    The     UNGA       resolutions     are sponsored by any member, UNSC resolutions are sponsored by only permanent members.
Select the correct answer using codes given below.
(a) 1 only                 (b) 2 only

(c) 1 and 2 only    (d) Neither 1 nor 2

25.     Consider the following statements

A.    A  resolution is  a type of  motion and   specifically  a   substantive
motion
B.    All motions shall be voted on

C.   Resolutions  cannot  be moved by private members
D.   Resolutions when passed  convey the resolve of  the house on a particular issue.
(a) A and B are false (b) A and D are false (c) B and C are false (d) All are true
26.    "An      amendment     made     to       the constitution  is   not  applicable unless extended by a presidential order" this statement is talking about
A.      Scheduled  areas

B.      Tribal areas

C.      Jammu and Kashmir

D.      Union territories

(a) All are true

(b) B and C are true

(c) Only C is true

(d) A, D are true

27.    Which of the following country  has the highest speed super computer?
(a) China               (b) United States

(c) India                (d) Russia

28.  This  soil   is   clayey,  impermeable,  and deep and has a characteristic self ploughing  property  and  retains moisture  for a  long time,  which soil are these lines talking about?
(a) Red and yellow soil

(b) Alluvial soil

(c) Black cotton soil

(d) Laterite soil

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
29.    Arrange    the   following  elements   of earth  crust   in  decreasing  order  by weight
A.    Silicon

B.    Aluminium

C.    Sodium D.   Calcium E.   Iron
(a) BAEDC              (b) BADEC (c) ABCD                   (d) ABEDC
30.     Consider the following statements

A.    Indian National Social Conference (INSC)    held  its  sessions   along with Indian National Congress
B.    Young    Bengal   movement    was started by Rammohan Roy
C.    INSC    was  inaugurated   by  MG Ranade
D.   Young  Bengal movement did not sustain   because   of    alienation from masses
(a) Only A is false  (b) Only B is false

(c) Only C is false  (d) Only D is false

31.     Consider the following statements

A.   Secondary   succession   is    faster than primary succession
B.    If    a   succession   is   forced   by outside forces it  is  called as allergenic succession
C.   Pioneer  community  may  or  may not exist by the time of formation of climax community.
(a) Only A is false  (b) Only B is false

(c) Only C is false  (d) All are true
32.     A. BCIM   economic corridor starts  in kunming in china.
B.  BCIM   economic corridor  will   help china to  bypass malacca straits
(a) Both statements are true (b) Both statements are false (c) Only A is true
(d) Only B is true

33.    Consider the  following about  charter act of 1853
A.   It  introduced   legislative  process for the first time
B.    It introduced  local representation of   the  provinces in  the  central executive council
C. Open competition system was envisaged in this act
(a) All are true      (b) Only A is false

(c) Only B is false  (d) Only C is false

34.     Consider the following statements

A.   There are more cold water corals than tropical coral reefs
B.    Roost reef  of Norway is  the largest cold water coral reef
C.  zooxanthaellae is in commensal relation with polyps
D.   Corals are called alpine forests of oceans
(a) A, B are true    (b) B, C are true

(c) C, D are true   (d) A, D are true

35.    Consider    the    following   regarding

'election' of President of India
1.  It is  held in accordance with proportional representation.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
2.    The        Election        commission conducts the election.
3.  All disputes in connection with election of  President of  India are inquired into and decided by Election Commission.
4.  All disputes in connection with election of  President of  India are inquired into and decided by Supreme Court.
Choose the right option:

(a) 1 and 2 only    (b) 1 and 3 only

(c) 1, 2 and 3 only (d) 1,2 and 4 only

36.     Consider the following statements

1.    The concept of  'Carbon  Credit' is the outcome of Kyoto Protocol.
2.    Under  Kyoto Protocol  developed countries  are  required  to    limit their green house gas emission.
3.    Carbon  credits  and  certificates are awarded to  countries that are successful in reducing emissions of greenhouse gases.
Choose the TRUE  statement

(a) 1 only

(b) 1 and 2 only

(c) All are true

(d) None of the above is true

37.    The     consequences      of       National emergency are
(a) Effect on the centre-state relations (b) Effect  on  the  life  of  the Lok sabha and state assembly
(c) Effect on the fundamental rights

(d) All of the above.
38.    Consider the  following regarding NITI (National Institute for Transforming India) aayog
1.    It   is    a   Think   tank   of    Policy making.
2.  It is  to  facilitate cooperative federalism.
3.    It   has    Regional   council   and

Governing council.

4.    It is  based  on Top down socialist planning including the CMs of all states  and LGs of UTs
Which are TRUE  statements. (a) 1 and 2 only
(b) 1, 2 and 3 only (c) 1, 2 and 4 only (d) All are true
39.    Match the following

1. U-shaped valley         A. Limestone landforms
2. Dolines                      B. Glacial landforms
3. Hanging valley           C. Marine landforms
4. V-shaped valley          D. Riverine landforms
Options

(a) 1-D, 2-C, 3-A, 4-B (b) 1-A, 2-B, 3-C, 4-D (c) 1-B, 2-A, 3-C, 4-D (d) 1-D, 2-A, 3-C, 4-B
40.    Which of   the  following commissions made recommendations which are related to  centre-state relations?
1.   Sarkaria commission

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
2.    Rajamannar committee

3.    Mandal Commission

4.    Punchhi commission Choose the right option. (a) 1 and 2 only
(b) 1, 2 and 3 only (c) 1, 2 and 4 only (d) All are correct.
41.     Consider the following statements

A.  Gilgit-Baltistan are part of Pak occupied kashmir
B.   The head of POK  is  designated as prime minister
C.   China    Pak    economic   corridor passes through Pak occupied kashmir
D.   Gwadar port is  one of the ends of china Pak economic corridor
(a) All are true      (b) B, C, D are true

(c) C, D are true   (d) All are false

42.    Consider the following

1.    They are broad headed people.

2.    They are  the  earliest to   come  to

India.

3.    The Jarawas,  Onges, Sentinelese and Great Andamanese  are some of the example of tribes belonging to  this race.
Which  Race  is   the  above statements are mentioning.
(a) Negroids           (b) Mongoloids

(c) Dravidians

(d) Austrics or pro-austroloids
43.    Which  of    the   following are   mega- diverse countries of the world?
1.   Indonesia

2.   Kenya

3.   South Africa

4.   India

Choose  the   right   option   from  the below.
(a) 1 and 2 only    (b) 2 and 4 only

(c) 1 and 4 only    (d) All are correct

44.    Which of   the  following fundamental right protects the collective freedom of religion?
(a) Article 25           (b) Article 26

(c) Article 19           (d) Both  A and B

45.     Consider the following statements

1.    Raja Rammohan Roy   considered Muslim    lawyers    to    be    more honest  than  their Hindu counterparts
2.  Vidyasagar did not discriminate against  Muslims  in  his humanitarian activities
3.   To  Bankim, dharma  rather  than religious  belonging  was  the criterion   for  determining superiority.
Which of the above is/are incorrect? (a) 1 and 2 Only   (b) 2 and 3 Only (c) 1 and 3 Only   (d) None
46.    Which  of    the   following  statements about scheme PAHAL are correct:
1.    It    is      direct    benefit    transfer scheme for LPG consumers only.
2.    Under this  scheme a  person  is entitled to  receive cash subsidy in

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
his   account    with   or   without having Aadhar number.
3.  This     scheme     is       being implemented  by  ministry  of consumer affairs,  food and public distribution.
Select the correct answer using below options.
(a) 2 only                 (b) 1 and 2 only

(c) 2 and 3 only    (d) 1, 2 and 3 only

47.    Consider   the   following  statements about the partition of Bengal
1.    The  two    new  provinces  created out of  United  Bengal  were  West Bengal and Assam.
2.    The  people greatly resented  the partition   of    Bengal   in   1905, because  it    was  an  attempt  of divide the people of Bengal on communal lines.
3.    It   was   carried    out    on   16th

October, 1905.

Which  of   the  above statements   are correct?
(a) 1 and 2 only    (b) 2 and 3 only

(c) 1 and 3 only    (d) All of these.

48.     Consider the following statements:

1.    The constitution of India does not define backward classes.
2.    Providing for quotas  to   socially, economically and  educationally backward classes is  mentioned in the DPSP outside of Part IV of the constitution.
Which of these is/are true?
(a) Only 1                (b) Only 2 (c) Both                    (d) None
49.    With  reference   to   "Antyodaya   Anna Yojana"  (AAY),  consider the  following statements
1.    It includes all the BPL families

2.    The  States/UTs  are  required  to bear  the  distribution cost, including  margin  to   dealers and retailers  as  well    as  the transportation cost
3.    Recently Annapurna  scheme was merged into AAY
Which of  the above statements  is/are correct?
(a) 1 and 2 Only   (b) 2 Only

(c) 2 and 3 Only   (d) All

50.    Consider    the    following   regarding

AMRUT

1.     Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation is  called Amrut project.
2.    It is  an attempt at transforming the    urban    infrastructure burdened with ever growing population.
3.   It will  focus on ensuring basic infrastructure services such as water supply, sewerage, transport etc for 500 recognised cities.
Choose the TRUE  statements. (a) 1 only                 (b) 2 only
(c) 1 and 3 only    (d) All are correct.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
51.     Consider the following statements

1.    Dayanand    Saraswati    gave   a utopian   explanation   for chaturvarna  and  sought to maintain it on the basis of virtue
2.    Narayan Guru  gave the  slogan -

„no  religion, no caste and no god for mankind.‟
Which of the above is/are correct? (a) 1 Only                (b) 2 Only
(c) Both                    (d) None

52.     Which among the following contribute to  the Mechanism of weather in winter season in India?
A.   Distribution  of pressure in central and western Asia
B.    Westerly jet streams

C.    Western cyclone disturbance

(a) Only A is false  (b) Only B is false

(c) Only C is false  (d)  All are true

53.     Consider the following statements

A.   The rain  of  south  west monsoon displays  a  declining trend  from west to east over the west coast
B.   Over  the   northern    plains   the declining trend continues from south east over to  North West.
C.   Over  the   peninsular   India   the decline  is    from  north   east   to south west.
(a) Only A is false  (b) Only B is false

(c) Only C is false  (d) All are true

54.     Consider the following statements
A.   The tropical forests of  Nilgiris are called Sholas
B. The southern  slopes of  Himalayas carry  thicker  vegetation because of   higher  precipitation than  the drier north facing slopes
C.   There  are  two    Ramsar  sites  in

India

(a) Only A is true  (b) Only B is true

(c) Only C is true  (d) All are false

55.    Which   among    the    following   are endangered species?
(a) Loin tailed macaque

(b) Niligiris thar

(c) Sea cow

(d) All of the above

56.    Which  of   the  following are  wrongly matched?
A.   Khond uprising:  Bir  singh

B.   Santhal    Rebellion:  Siddhu   and khanu
C.   Munda Uprising: Birsa munda

D.  Koya  Rebellion:  Alluri  sita   rama raju
(a) A and B are true (b) B and C are true (c) C and D are true (d) A and D are true
57.    The   purpose   of    the   inclusion   of Directive Principles  of  State Policy in the Indian constitution is to  establish (a) Political democracy
(b) Social  democracy

(c) Gandhian democracy

(d) Social and economic democracy
58.    Montagu  Declaration  led  to    second split in congress and this time it's  the

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
moderates  who walked out  and  they established  a  new party  what is   the name of the party
(a) Justice League

(b) National liberal league (c) Congress socialist party (d) None of the above
59.     Consider the following statements

A.   Executive   powers   over   matters present  in  concurrent  list  rest with the centre unless specifically mentioned  in law to be provided for states
B.    A    law     enacted   by   parliament during president's rule on the subject   in   the   state   list   will remain  in effect up  till  6 months after the withdrawal of emergency
(a) Both statements are true (b) Both statements are false (c) Only A is true
(d) Only B is true

60.    Consider   the   following  statements about  The Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ)
1.    It  is    a   broad  trough  of    high pressure in equatorial latitudes.
2.    This is  where the northeast  and the  southeast  trade  winds converge.
3.    This convergence zone lies more or less parallel to  the Equator but moves north  or  south  with  the apparent movement of the sun.
Which of  the  statements  given above is/are incorrect?
(a) 1 Only                (b) 2 and 3 Only

(c) 1 and 3 Only   (d) None

61.    With    reference     to     Warli    revolt, consider  the following statements
1.    Godavari   Parulekar    was    the prominent leader of the revolt
2.    Warlis were primitive tribe  living in Central India.
Which of  the above statements  is/are correct?
(a) 1 Only                (b) 2 Only

(c) Both                    (d) None

62.    Which of  the following states  are part of central zonal council
A.    Madhya Pradesh

B.    Chattisgarh

C.    Jharkhand

D.   Himachal Pradesh

(a) Only A is true

(b) A and B are true (c) A, B, C are true (d) All are true
63.    Which one  among  the  following are not   one  of   the   Lytton's  repressive policies
A.   Reduction   of   appearing  age  in

Indian civil  services B.    Vernacular press act C.    Arms act
D.    Abolition    of     import   duty    on manufactured cotton goods
(a) All are true

(b) All are false

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
(c) A and D are true

(d) B and C are true

64.    Which   among    the    following   are wrongly matched?
A. Aerobic    nitrifying     bacteria- Azatobacter
B. Anaerobic  nitrifying  bacteria- clostridium
C.   Denitrifying bacteria- anabaena

D.   Ammonia to  nitrites- nitrobacteria

(a) A, B is true      (b) A, C are true

(c) C, D are true   (d) B, D are true

65.     Consider the following statements

A.    Density  of  outer  core  is   greater than inner core
B.   The main components  of core are iron and magnesium
C.    Lithosphere  is   another  name  of crust
D.   Mantle is denser than crust

(a) All are false       (b) Only D is true

(c) A, B are false    (d) A, C, D are true

66.    Which  of   the  following are  wrongly matched
(a)  Bhotias-   nomadic   group   of Himachal and Uttaranchal Himalayas
(b) Lepcha   tribes-  North-eastern nomads practising shifting cultivation
(c)    Meiteis-     majority     Tribes     of manipur
(d)   Mishmi-       tribes        practicing

jhumming
67.    Commercialisation of  agriculture is  a predominant characteristic feature of British rule in India, which among the following statements is/are true
A.   Commercialisation   of   agriculture was   introduced   into   India   by British
B.    Production   of   cash  crops  is   an only feature of commercialisation
C.    Commercialisation  of   agriculture has led to  capitalist farming
(a) All are false       (b) Only A is false

(c) Only B is false  (d) Only C is false

68.    Identify the correctly matched ones

A.  Antecedent rivers- subhanashri, sutlej, kosi
B.    Kosi- sorrow of Bihar

C.   Sabarmati,    Mahi-   drains    into

Arabian sea

D.   Godavari-      largest      river     of peninsular India
(a) All are true      (b) B, C, D are true

(c) C, D are true   (d) All are false

69.    Which city  has been chosen as City  of Music  by  UNESCO  under   Creative Cities of Network?
(a) Thanjavore      (b) Vellore

(c) Varanasi             (d) Vizianagaram

70.  Which  of    the   following  are recommendations  of   Simon Commission?
(a) Abolition  of  diarchy at the central

level

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
(b) Responsible        government        at provinces
(c) Upper house at central level

(d) All of the above

71.    Dobson unit is a measurement of

(a) The   thickness  of   the  ozone in a column of  air from the  ground  to the top of the atmosphere
(b) The     concentration      of       ozone molecules in a litre of air
(c) The   intensity    of    breakdown   of ozone into oxygen and free  radicals
(d) None of the above

72.    Which   of    the    following  biosphere reserve in India is  not a part of  the World Network of  Biosphere Reserves, based  on the  UNESCO Man and  the Biosphere (MAB) Programme list?
(a) Lakshadweep Islands

(b) Panna

(c) Panchmarhi (d) Andaman Islands

73.    A:  The reservation  of 33% of seats for women in Parliament and Parliament does not require constitutional amendment.
R:  Political parties contesting elections can allocate 33% of seats they contest to  women candidates  without any constitutional amendment.
(a) A and R  are True and R  is  correct explanation of A.
(b) A and R  are True but R  is  not the correct explanation of A.
(c) A is  True but R is False.

(d) A is false and R is True.
74.    Which    of      the     following    gases contribute  more  towards  global warming?
(a) CO2                    (b) Methane

(c) CFCs and NO2 (d) CO

75.    Arrange the following parts of digestive system in a correct order
A.    Oesophagus

B.    Pharynx

C.    Ileum

D.   Duodenum

(a) ABDC                   (b) BACD (c) ABCD                   (d) BADC
76.     Article 5 of  Washington Treaty makes the basis of which of the following organizations?
(a) World Bank

(b) United Nations

(c) NATO

(d) International Monetary Fund

77.    Aeroponics  is  a technique of  growing plants without        ?
(a) Water               (b) Fertilizer

(c) Soil                        (d) Air

78.    In a radioactive decay of a nucleus, an electron  is    also  emitted,   This  may happen due to  the fact that:
(a) Electrons  are   present  inside  a nucleus
(b) An electron is  created at the time of conversion of a neutron into proton
(c) An electron  is  created at the time of conversion   of    a   proton  into  a neutron

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
(d) Electrons  need  to   be  emitted  for conservation of momentum
79.    Which  among  the   following is    the objective of  the recently launched "Surakshit Khadya Abhiyan?"
(a) Building a culture of Cleanliness in the  Country
(b) Highlight     the     importance     of

Personal  Hygiene

(c) Create   awareness   and   capacity building on Safe  and Hygienic food for all.
(d) Create  awareness   among  Health workers the  importance of  clinical Hygiene.
80.     Consider the following statements and identify the correct statement(s)
1.   India Imports around 800-1000 tonnes of gold  per year.
2.    The  union   Budget  proposes  to launch  a  Gold Monetisation scheme  which  will   replace  both the present Gold deposit and gold metal loan schemes.
3.     An Indian Gold coin carrying the Sarnath  pillar will   be  developed so   as to   reduce the  demand for imported coins.
4.    Sovereign Gold Bonds carrying a fixed rate of  interest will  be introduced.
(a) 1 and 2 only    (b) 1 and 3 only

(c) 1,2 and 3         (d) 1,2 and 4

81.    Which   among    the    following   are

CORRECTLY matched?
1.    Gulf Cooperation Council – Saudi

Arabia & Kuwait

2.    Southern     Common    Market    – Brazil & Uruguay
3.   Southern African  Customs Union

– South Africa & Swaziland

4.     Asia  Pacific  Trade   Agreement   – Japan & Singapore
(a) 1 & 2 Only        (b) 2 & 3 Only

(c) 1, 2 & 3 Only    (d) All the above

82.     An increase in natural  gas prices in India as  suggested by the  Rangrajan formula  can  directly affect  which  of the following sectors:
1.   Manufacturing

2.   Agriculture

3.   Power

4.    Mining    and     Exploration    of

Natural Gas

5.   Services

Select the  correct  answer  using  the codes given below
(a) 3 and 4            (b) 1, 2 and 5

(c) 2, 3 and 4        (d) 1, 2, 3 and 4

83.    Under Section 10(26)  of  the  Income Tax    Act,   which    of    the   following category of  people are exempted from income tax?
(a) Members  of  the  Scheduled Tribes in Chhattisgarh
(b) Members  of  the  Scheduled Tribes and    the   Scheduled   Castes   in Special Category States
(c) Members  from  the   Economically

Backward Class in All States

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
(d) Members  of  the  Scheduled Tribes in States of Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura**
84.    Which of   following statement   is/are true about Base Effect?
(a) It is  Change in numbers  of  items for  which   price   quotations    are taken
(b) It measures Impact of fuel  items on inflation
(c) It is  related to  Impact of the rise in price level  in the previous year over the   rise   in   price  levels  in   the current year
(d) It is  related Problems which arises due to  miscalculation
85.    Which one of the following statements with  regard  to   the  Union Budget  of India for the  year 2015-2016  is  NOT correct?
(a) India     Financial     Code    to      be introduced soon in the Parliament
(b) Allocation in defence sector is  kept unchanged at around 5 % of GDP
(c) A  Student  Financial Aid  Authority will be instituted
(d) No  change in the rate of  personal income tax.
86.    Assertion       (A):       India's      natural resources are unevenly distributed in the country
Reason(R):   Coal  resources   are abundant in Northern and North-East region and hydro resources are mainly
concentrated    in    Bihar/Jharkhand, Odisha and West Bengal
(a) A  &   R   are  correct;  R   is   correct explanation for A
(b) A  &  R  are correct; But, R  is  not- correct explanation for A
(c) A is Correct; But not R (d) R is Correct; But not A
87.    Which of the following are correct with regard to  currency swap?
1.    It helps in increasing liquidity

2.    They are  considered to   be loans provided   by   one    country    to another
3.    They are risk free

4.   India is  yet to  have any currency swap arrangements with other countries.
Select the  correct  answer  using  the below codes
(a) 1 Only

(b) 1 and 2

(c) 1, 2 and 3

(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4

88.    Which one of the following statements with  regard  to    the  Sansad  Adarsh Gram Yojana is NOT correct?
(a) It was launched  in the  year 2014 on the birth anniversary of Lal Babadur Shastri
(b) Members   of   the   Parliament  will adopt    villages   to     create   model villages
(c) District   Magistrates   will    act   as

coordinators

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
(d) A Rajya Sabha MP  has to  choose a Gram Panchayat in the State from which he or she was elected
89.    Which one of the following statements with  regard  to   the   'Make  in   India' initiative of the Government of India is NOT correct?
(a) In   order   to     guide   the   foreign investors, a body named 'Invest India' has been created
(b) The Government has identified key sectors with potential to  attract investment
(c) The initiative also aims  to  identify selected   domestic   companies having   leadership   in   innovation and  new  technology  for  turning them into global champion.
(d) The       programme        is         being implemented by the Ministry of Finances

90.    What can  be the  direct and  indirect benefits of financial inclusion?
1.   Increase in domestic savings base

2.    Higher  economic  growth  for the nation
3.    Reduction in local-money lending practices
4.    Discouraging investment in Ponzi schemes, non-productive assets etc.
5.    Better public service delivery
Select the  correct  answer  using  the codes given below
(a) 1 and 3

(b) 1, 2, 3 and 4 (c) 4 and 5
(d) All of the above

91.    Border Roads  Organization (BRO)   is under  the  administrative  control  of the:
(a) Ministry of Defence

(b) Ministry  of   Road  Transport   and

Highways

(c) Prime Minister's Office

(d) Indian Army

92.    Consider   the   following  statements about Goods and Services Tax (GST):
1.   It will  replace most of  the direct and  indirect tax presently levied in the country.
2.   It       will         be       administered concurrently  by the  Central  and state governments.
3.    The   GST     is     an   origin-based regime,    against    the    current regime    which    is     destination- based. Choose the correct option using the codes below:
(a) Only 1                (b) Only 2

(c) 2 and 3            (d) All the above

93.     Which  among  the  following is   not a document related to the Union Budget (a) Micro        Economic       Framework
statement

(b) Macro       Economic       Framework

Statement

(c) Key to  Budget

(d) Fiscal policy Strategy Statement.

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
94.    Insider trading can be harmful to  the domestic economy. Why?
(a) It hurts  the economic growth of  a nation, increases inflation and Current account deficit (CAD)
(b)  It results  in crash  of  the security markets which are so  vital for channeling savings in the domestic economy
(c)   It  distorts   the  level-playing field between  investors   in   the   stock market and makes the markets susceptible to  heavy speculation
(d) Speculation by individual investors is    illegal  and   hurts   the   retail investors
95.    Which    among    the     following   is incorrect regarding Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima yojana.
(a) It    covers    both     Natural      and

Accidental Death

(b) Any person between the Age  group

18-40 can apply

(c) The premium payable is  Rs 330 per year
(d) It is a social security scheme

96.    With       reference          to          Finance commissions in India, consider the following statements
1.   Because  of   their  constitutional nature,   their   recommendations are binding of the government
2.    Finance commissions are seen as

institutional      mechanism      for
transferring   resources   from  the

Centre to  states.

3.    The  14th   Finance   Commission has been asked to  take the base of  population figures as  of  1971 in all cases where population is  a factor for determination  of devolution  of   taxes  and  duties and grants-in-aid
4.    The recommendations of  Finance Commission applies only to  the Union government
Which of  the above statements  is/are correct?
(a) 1, 2 and 4 Only

(b) 1 and 2 Only

(c) 2, 3 and 4 Only

(d) All

97.    What do you understand  by transfer pricing?
(a) The   tax   that  both  resident  and nonresident  Indians   need  to   pay while transferring the  shares  of  a company  they  own in  some  other nation to  that in India.
(b) It   is    a   tax  that   is    levied   on retrospective deals made in the transfer  of   a  company  from  one nation to  the other.
(c) Transfer  pricing  is   the  setting  of the  price  for  goods  and  services sold between controlled (or related) legal entities within an enterprise
(d) None of the above

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
98.    Intervention      by      the      monetary authority  of   a  country  against exogenous  or  sometimes  external shocks such as an increase in foreign exchange inflow is known as
(a) Revaluation

(b) Sterilization

(c) Open Market operation

(d) None of the above

99.    What do you understand  by Economic

Growth?

(a) It   refers    to     increase   in   Gross

Domestic Product (GDP)

(b) It refers to  the long and sustained rise in real Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
(c) It    is     characterized   by    fall    in

unemployment rate
(d) Rise in GDP  on monetary term

100.  Consider the following statement

1.    The  proposed  Indian   Financial code  is   a  recommendation of FSLRC
2.    Setting up of  Independent  public debt management  agency is  also one of the recommendations
3.    External debt  of  Government  of India is  managed  by ministry  of finance where as internal debt is managed by RBI
(a) Only 1 correct (b) 1 and 2 correct (c) 1, 3 correct
(d) 1, 2, 3 correctw w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
Place for Rough Work

w w w . a n a l o g e d u c a t i o n . i n                                                                     i a s . a n a l o g @ g m a i l . c o m
