

1.        Ans: A
Exp: Revolt Centre-Leaders Meerut- Soldiers of Bengal army Delhi-Bakht khan
Lucknow-Begum Hazrat mahal
Kanpur-Nana Saheb
Jhansi-Laxmi Bai
Bareily-Khan Bahadur  Khan Jagadishpur-Maharaja Kunwar singh Faizabad-Maulvi Ahmad-ul-lah
Patna-Maulvi Pir ali
2.         Ans: C
Exp: The Himalaya consists of three parallel ranges in its longitudinal extent. A number of valleys lie between these ranges. The northern most range is known as the Great or Inner Himalayas or the Himadri. The range lying to the south of  the Himadri forms the most rugged mountain system and is known as Himachal or lesser Himalaya. The lower are known as Shivalik.
3.         Ans: A
Exp: The  principle patrons of Gandhara  school of art were    the  Shakas  and  the  Kushanas.   The   themes depicted were  Indian and almost exclusively Buddhist. Grey  sandstone  was used in Gandhara school of  art. The  images are very  expressive.
4.         Ans: B
Exp: The  features of parliamentary government are
-             Nominal and real executive
-             Majority party rule
-             Collective responsibility
-             Political homogeneity
-             Double membership
-             Leadership of Prime Minister
-             Dissolution of the lower  house
-             Secrecy

5.         Ans: D
Exp: Defence White paper is a policy   statement prior to  legislation. And India do  not publish defence white paper.  It  has  Service doctrines  in  place  of  defence white paper.
6.         Ans: A
Exp: Even though scientific  studies are still  going  on the  effect of  aerosol on the rainfall pattern,  but  one thing is sure  that  it affects  the  rainfall patter.  The exact  transport   mechanism  of   aerosols   is   being studies to  establish better patterns. However, aerosols heat the atmosphere and that gives them the ability to affect the rainfall.
7.         Ans: D
Exp: The  communists firstly wanted to establish dictatorship  of  the  working class  not  the  socialists. The  successful Bolshevik Revolution (1917) of  Russia had great influence on Indian  educated youths. Many of them had been disillusioned with Gandhian method

and the constitutional politics of  Swarajists and the youth  attracted  towards  socialist ideas  and  formed many socialist and communist organizations.
8.         Ans: A
Exp: After  the  downfall of  Roman Empire the  feudal system took birth in Europe. And later it penetrated to India with different names at different places.
9.         Ans: A
Exp: India is republic while Britain is not. The  British system  is  based  on  sovereignty of  Parliament  while Parliament  is  not  supreme  in  India.  In  Britain  PM must be  a member of the Lower  house but it is not so in  India.  Britain  has  the  legal responsibility  of  the ministers while  India has no  such system.
10.       Ans: B
Exp:  Bioremediation is  a  waste  management technique  that   involves the  use  of   organisms   to remove or neutralize pollutants  from  s contaminated site. Bioremediation is a 'treatment that uses naturally occurring  organisms  to   breakdown  hazardous substances into less toxic  or non toxic  substances'.
11.      Ans: C
Exp: The recommendations of Wood's dispatch (1854) are:
-Mass  education  is  the  responsibility  of  the government.
-Attention should be given for wider extension of education, both English and vernacular.
-A  separate department of  education in every   Indian province should be  established.
-Institutions   for   the  purpose  of   training  teachers should be  established.
-A system of granting aid to  privately-run schools and colleges should be  introduced.
-Female education must be  encouraged.
The recommendation  of lesser governmental control over universities and flexibility to develop their own curriculum was made by  Hunter Educational Commission and not Wood's dispatch.
12.      Ans: B
Exp: Department of ISM and H is established in 1995 is renamed as AYUSH in 2003. It operates under Ministry of Health and Family welfare.
13.       Ans: D
Exp: Federal features of Constitution are:
-             Dual polity
-             Written constitution
-             Division of powers
-             Supremacy of the constitution
-             Rigid  constitution
-             Independent Judiciary
-             Bicameralism
Integrated Judiciary is the feature of unitary system.
14.       Ans: B
15.      Ans: C
Exp:  The data  collected measures  how rule  of  law  is experienced  in  practical,  everyday situation  using  47 indicators across 8 categories- constraints on government powers, absence of corruption, open government, fundamental rights, order and security, regulatory enforcement, civil justice and criminal justice.
16.      Ans: D
Exp:  East   coast  has  fewer  ports because of  emergent nature  of   coast  and  long continental  shelf  it  makes difficult  for ships to enter, while on west coast a part of coast  is  submerged  leading to development of  natural ports.
17.      Ans: B
Exp: GAGAN is used in GPS  aid augmenting of  signals which will  help aeroplanes in better and  cost effective landing, to augment the signals GSAT 8&10 are used in addition GSAT-15 is also panned  which once launched will be linked to GAGAN.
18.       Ans: D
Exp:  All  the  statements  are  true.  Mission Indradhanush  covers  seven  vaccine  preventable diseases  and  they are:  diphtheria,  whooping cough, tetanus,  polio, tuberculosis, measles and hepatitis B. it aims to  immunize all children by  2020. It launched on 'Good governance Day'.
19.       Ans: D
Exp: Sustainable agriculture is also known as organic farming,   eco   farming,   natural   farming   or permaculture.
The       sustainable     agriculture     is     a     balanced management system of renewable resources including soil,   wildlife,  forests,   crops,  fish,   livestock,   plant genetic resources and ecosystems without degradation and  to   provide  food,  livelihood  for  the  present  and future   generations  maintaining  or  improving productivity.
20.      Ans: C
Exp:   Indian    mirror   is   a   news  paper   started   by Debendranath  Tagore in 1862. Banga dutta  is another weekly in four languages- English, Bengali, Persian and Hindi by Raja Ram mohan roy and Debendranath Tagore. Debendranath  Tagore is known as 'Maharshi'. He established  'Tatvabodhini  sabha'  in  1839,  which  was aimed at diffusion of fundamental truth of all shastras of the Hindus, and truth about about Brahma as inculcated in  Vedanta.  Later  in  1842  he  merged it  with that  of Rajaram Mohan Roy's Brahmo samaj.
The  'Goodwill   Fraternity'   was  established  by   Keshab Chandra  Sen'   in  1857,  which  was  a  religious  and devotional association. He also founded 'Sangatan Sabha' another religious association.
21.       Ans: D
22.       Ans: D
Exp: NHAI  was constituted  by  an act of  Parliament, The  National highway Authority of India act, 1988. NHAI is implementing
-             Golden quadrilateral project
-             North-south and East-west corridor etc.
23.       Ans: C
Exp: Milk  it contains proteins, carbohydrates, sugars (lactose),   fats,   sodium,   potassium,   calcium,  iron, vitamin A and D, Magnesium and phosphorus.
24.       Ans: D
Exp: It is correct  to  say that  UNGA  resolutions are legally non binding upon member nations, but saying that UNSC   resolutions  are  legally binding  upon  all members,   is   incorrect.   This   is   because    UNSC resolutions are of 2  kinds taken as per  chapter 6  and chapter 7  of  UN  charter  which corresponds to  non-
binding and  binding resolutions.  It is correct to  say that UNGA resolutions are sponsored by  any member, however  again   it  is  incorrect   to    say  that  UNSC resolutions  are  sponsored  by   only  permanent members.
25.      Ans: C
26.      Ans: C
Exp: An amendment is automatically applicable in entire territory of India except joke  where it has to be  extended by presidential order.
27.      Ans: A
Exp: China has a super computer of 33.6 peat flop while US  has it at 17  peat  flop, India  has  a  tear  flop  super computer.
28.      Ans: C
29.      Ans: D
Exp: Oxygen, silicon, Aluminium, Iron, calcium, sodium, pottasium, and magnesium are the decreasing order of occurrence.
30.      Ans: B
Exp:  Young  Bengal.  Movement was  started   by   Henry Vivian Derezio, it fluttered  away because it had complete faith in everything British which alienated it from masses
31.      Ans: D
Exp:    As conducive environment is already present secondary succession is faster than primary, while succession forced by outside elements is called allergenic, if it includes inside forces it is autogenic.
32.      Ans: A
Exp: BCIM  corridor passes through Kunming,  capital of Yunnan  province in  china  through  Dali and  ends  in Kolkatta  while passing  through  myanmmar  and Bangladesh, this will  help china bypass Malacca strait, which china doubts will create problem to its oil supply in case of conflict with the west.
33.      Ans: D
Exp:     Legislative  member   in   addition   to   executive members were introduced for first time, central executive council was to be  represented by  members of  madras, Bombay and  Bengal members nominated  by  respective governors, open competition was envisaged in 1833 act itself but couldn't be  implemented because of opposition from   court  of   directors,  but  in  1853  it  was  finally introduced.
34.      Ans: A
Exp: zoxanthaella is in symbiotic relation of mutualism, corals are  called tropical rain  forests  of  ocean. Acc  to UNEP  there are more cold  water coral reefs than tropical and subtropical reefs.
35.       Ans: D
Exp:  Election of  president  is conducted  by  Election commission. It is held in accordance with the system of  proportional representation  of  single  transferable vote  and the voting is by secret ballot system.
All doubts and disputes in connection with election of President of India are inquired into and decided by the Supreme Court whose decision is final.
36.       Ans: C
Exp:  Kyoto   protocol is  an  international  agreement between 169  countries.  The   Kyoto   protocol  created legally binding  emission  targets  for  developing countries.
37.       Ans: D
Exp: While  national emergency is proclaimed automatically the whole system becomes unitary so  it effects centre-state relations.
The  lok  sabha can be  extended beyond a normal term of  5  years by  a law of  parliament for one   year at a time.  Articles   358   and   359   explain   the   effect  of

ANALOG  IAS INSTITUTE – The Right Choice of Achievers.                                   P a g e | 2
Emergency on  fundamental  right.   Article  358  deals with suspension  of  FRs guaranteed  under  article 19 where as  article  359  deals  with the  suspension  of other FRs except article 20  and 21.
38.       Ans: B
Exp:  NITI   aayog  is  based  on  indicative  and  core planning,  where as  planning  commission was based on top  down socialist planning.
39.       Ans: C
40.       Ans: C
Exp: Rajamannar committee appointed by Tamil Nadu
Govt in 1969.
Sarkaria  Commission was formed  by  central  govt in
1983 to recommend regarding centre-state relations. Punchhi commission is also set up by  central  govt in
2007 for centre-state relations.
Mandal commission is regarding Backward classes.
41.      Ans: A
Exp:   Economic  corridor  starts   at   gwadar  port   of bolochistan region of pakistan and passes through POK and ens in kashgar province of china. This corridor is $46 billion project with fibre optic line, multi lane roads and industrial corridors, focus on power projects.
42.       Ans: A
Exp: The  negroids are also called as Brachycephalic which means  broad headed.   They   were   the earliest people to come to India from Africa.
They have survived in their original habitats of Andaman and Nicobar.
43.       Ans: D
Exp: There are 17  mega-diversity countries and they are: Brazil, Bolivia, China, Columbia, Democratic Republic   of    Congo,   Ecuador,    Indonesia,    Kenya, Mexico,  Madagascar,    Malaysia,   Peru,   Philippines, South Africa, India,  Venezuela and Zaire. Which collectively constitute   60-70%  of  the  world's biodiversity.
44.      Ans: B
Exp: Article 26  talks about freedom to manage religious affairs  like  establishing institutions managing its affairs, its a collective right while article 25  is an individual right to freedom of conscience, profess, practice and propagate.
45.       Ans: D
Exp:  The   Universalist perspective was not  a  purely philosophic   concern;    it    strongly   influenced    the political and  social outlook of  the time, till  religious particularism gained ground in the second half of the nineteenth   century.  For  instance,  Raja  Rammohan Roy   considered  Muslim  lawyers  to  be   more  honest than their Hindu counterparts and Vidyasagar did  not discriminate against Muslims in his humanitarian activities.  Even  to  Bankim,  who   is  credited  with  a Hindu   outlook,   dharma    rather    than    religious belonging     was     the     criterion      for     determining superiority.
46.       Ans: B
Exp: The  PAHAL is the direct benefit transfer  scheme for   LPG    consumers   only.  This  scheme   is   being operated  by   the  ministry of  Petroleum and  Natural gas.  Under  this  scheme  earlier  (in   2013)   Aadhar number was made mandatory. But in November, 2014
Government launched  a  reviewed scheme,  in  which cash subsidy is transferred  to  bank accounts even a person does not have aadhar number.
47.       Ans: B
Exp:  The   two   new   provinces created  out  of  united Bengal were  'Bengal'  and 'Odisha'.  'Bengal'  comprises of Western Bengal and province of Bihar. Odisha comprises of East Bengal and Assam.
48.       Ans: A
Exp: The  quotas are to  be  provided to  only  SCs and STs which are socially backward. There is no  provision for    quotas    to     economically   and    educationally backward classes
49.       Ans: B
50.      Ans: D
Exp: The previous urban  development program named after Jawaharlal Nehru (JNNURM) is renamed as AMRUT. Smart  city and  AMRUT  launched for  improving  urban amenities. Implementation will be  linked to promotion of urban infrastructure such as e-governance, setting up of professional municipal cadre, improvement in assessment of municipal taxes, credit rating of urban local bodies and citizen centric urban planning.
51.       Ans: A
Exp: Dayanand gave a utopian explanation for chaturvarna  (four-fold  varna division of Hindu society) and sought to maintain it on the basis of  virtue. „He deserves to  be  a Brahman who  has acquired the best knowledge and character,  and an ignorant person is fit to  be  classed as a shudra,‟  he  argued. Jyotiba  Phule and Narayana Guru were  two  unrelenting critics of the caste  system and  its  consequences. A  conversation between Gandhiji and  Narayana Guru  is significant. Gandhiji, in an obvious reference to  Chaturvarna  and the inherent differences  in quality between man and man, observed that all leaves of the same tree are not identical in shape and texture. To this Narayana Guru pointed out that the difference  is only  superficial,  but not in essence: the juice of  all leaves of  a particular tree would be  the same in content. It was he  who  gave the call —  „one   religion, one   caste and one God   for mankind‟ which one  of his disciples, Sahadaran Ayyapan,  changed into „no  religion, no caste and no God  for mankind.‟
52.      Ans: D
Exp: surface pressure, winds from central and West Asia, westerly jet streams,  westerb disturbances  contribute to winter.  While easterly  jet  stream  maritime  tropical  air mass from  southern  hemisphere contribute to summer season.
53.      Ans: C
Exp: Over the peninsular India the decline is same as that of northern plains i.e. south east towards North West.
54.      Ans: B
Exp: The temperate  forests of niligiris, anamalai,  palani hills are called sholas, there are around 26 ramsar sites in India.
55.      Ans: D
Exp: While A and B are part of Niligiris Biosphere reserve, while sea cow is part of gulf of mannar biosphere reserve.
56.      Ans: B
Exp: Khond uprising  was led  by  chakra Bisoiwhile koya rebellion by  tomma sora, Bir singh led  the first phase of santhal rebellion, Rampa rebellin was by Alluri
57.       Ans: D
Exp:  DPSP   establish  social and  economic democracy. Fundamental rights establish political democracy. There is no such term as Gandhian democracy.
58.      Ans: B
59.      Ans: B
Exp: Though law on concurrent list subject is enacted by parliament the executive power rests with the state unless explicitly mentioned in law. A law enacted by  parliament during national emergency will  remain  in effect uphill 6 months after the withdrawal while in presidents rule it will remain  in effect perpetually unless repealed, amended, by the state legislature.

ANALOG  IAS INSTITUTE – The Right Choice of Achievers.                                   P a g e | 3
60.       Ans: A
Exp:  It  is  a   broad   trough   of   LOW   pressure  in equatorial latitudes.  This is where the northeast  and the southeast  trade winds converge. This convergence zone   lies  more  or  less  parallel  to  the  equator  but moves north or south with the apparent movement of the sun.
61.       Ans: A
Exp:  Indian  women participated  whole heartedly  in Warli movement. It is a peasant  movement in western India   in   which   the    women's   activist   Godavari Parulekar played a most prominent role.
62.      Ans: B
63.      Ans: B
Exp:  All  the  above  policies are  examples  of  Lytton's reactionary policies above organizing Delhi durbar during famine and starting war in Afghanistan are also part of it.
64.      Ans: A
Exp: Denitrifying bacteria is pseudomonas; ammonia to nitrites is nitrosamines  while nitrites to nitrates is Nitrobacteria.
65.      Ans: B
Exp: The components  of earth's interior are arranged as increasing order of their densities, so inner core is denser than  outer core. The components of core are nickel and iron; lithosphere is combination of crust and upper layer of mantle.
66.      Ans: B
Exp: Lepcha  tribes are a mixed population present  in Darjeeling  and   Sikkim  Himalayas,   their   population include Nepalis, bengalis and tribes from central India.
67.      Ans: A
Exp: Before the entry of British commercialisation existed in India like  production of cash crops, credit mechanism inform  of  jagat seths,  market in exchange of  cash, the biggest problem in India was commercialisation did  not lead to capitalist  farming,  the holdings remained small and intermediaries flourished than farmers.
68.      Ans: A
Exp: antecedent  rivers mean which have been present earlier but later became part of something. Sutlej, subhanashri, kosi are antecedent rivers.
69.      Ans: C
Exp: Varanasi has been chosen as a part of the 'Cities of Music'  under UNESCO's  cultural  division, the  Creative Cities Network. It has been chosen in the music category under UNESCO's "field  of excellence" plan. The fields of excellence are classified  into categories of literature, film, music,  craft   and  folk   art,  design,  media  arts  and gastronomy.  UNESCO had  added  Music  as  its  fifth cultural  category  in  2006  under  the  Creative  Cities Network. The Italian  city of Bologna and Spain's  Seville were the first to join the list. As a part of this list, all music cities are expected to promote musical creation and activities  along  with  organizing concerts  for  the  same, both at the local level as well at the international level
70.      Ans:
Exp:   Simon   commission   recommended   abolition   of dyarchy at provincial level  and formation  of  responsible governments at provinces, Already upper house was established at central level under 1919 act.
71.       Ans: A
Exp: The   thickness of  the ozone in a column of  air from  the  ground  to   the  top   of   the  atmosphere  is measured in terms of Dobson units (DU).
72.       Ans: B
73.       Ans: D
Exp:   Women's  reservation   bill   would  bring  major changes  in  the  composition of  the  Parliament and
would thus  require a constitutional amendment. But Political parties  are  non-constitutional  bodies.  They can  internally allocate 33%   seats to  women  without the  need  for  any  such  amendment.  However, their party constitution may need to be  amended.
74.       Ans: B
75.      Ans: D
Exp: pharynx, oesophagus, stomach, duodenum, ileum, small intestines and large intestines are the sequence.
76.      Ans:
Exp:  NATO on April 4, 1949, the United States Canada and 10  Western European countries had signed the Washington  Treaty  that  led   to  creation  of  the  North Atlantic  Treaty Organization.  Its  original members  were Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Iceland, Italy, Luxembourg,   the  Netherlands,   Norway,  Portugal,   the United  Kingdom, and  the  United  States.   Article  5   of Washington Treaty is the very heart of it, which mentions that "the members agree that an armed attack against one or more of  them in Europe or North America would be considered an attack against all of  them".  This idea of collective      defense       is     the     basis     of       NATO.
77.      Ans: C
Exp:  Soil  Aeroponics is the process of growing plants in an air or mist environment without the use of soil or an aggregate  medium   (known   as  geoponics).   Aeroponic culture  differs   from   conventional  hydroponics, aquaponics,  and  in-vitro (plant  tissue  culture)  growing. Unlike hydroponics, which uses a liquid nutrient solution as  growing medium and  essential  minerals  to sustain plant growth; or aquaponics which uses water and fish waste,  aeroponics  is   conducted   without  a   growing medium.
78.      Ans: B
Exp: Radioactive decay, in which an electron is ejected from the nucleus to convert a neutron into a proton, is called "Beta emission".
79.      Ans: C
Exp:  Union  Government  has   launched   a   national campaign Surakshit Khadya Abhiyan in a bid  to create awareness  and  capacity building on Safe  and  Hygienic food    for   all.   Under    this   public   campaign   various awareness  programmes will  be   undertaken  across the country. It will include hygiene & sanitation for safe food, informative    sessions   on   cleaning,   walkathons   and awareness by  information  dissemination through media programmes for consumers and street food industries.
80.      Ans: D
Exp:  The govt proposed  in the  Budget to introduce  a monetization scheme which will replace both the present gold   deposit  and  gold   metal  loan  schemes.The   new scheme will allow the depositors of gold to earn interest in their metal accounts.The proposed Indian gold  coin will carry the Ashok chakra on its face.
81.      Ans: C
Exp: The Asia-Pacific Trade Agreement (APTA), previously known  as   the Bangkok  Agreement and   renamed   2
November   2005, was   signed   in   1975.    It   is   the oldest preferential  trade agreement between countries in the Asia-Pacific  region. Its  aim is to promote economic development and  cooperation through  the  adoption of mutually beneficial trade liberalization measures. APTA is open to all members of the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, which serves as the APTA Secretariat. Japan  and Singapore are not members of APTA.
82.      Ans: C
83.      Ans: D

ANALOG  IAS INSTITUTE – The Right Choice of Achievers.                                   P a g e | 4
Exp: The tribals  of  five  North-eastern  states –  Tripura, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland and  Arunachal  Pradesh – are fully exempted  from  tax under Section 10  (26)  of the Income Tax Act, 1961.
84.      Ans: C
85.      Ans: B
Exp: India's defence budget has slipped to 1.74% of  its gross domestic product  (GDP),  compared  to 1.78% last year.
86.      Ans: C
87.      Ans: A
Exp: A currency swap is an exchange that occurs between two individuals or entities  holding set  currencies  for a specified   period   of   time   after   which,  they   will   be exchanged  back.This  can  occur  between  two or  more parties. Upon the maturity of  the exchange, each party returns  to the  other  the  original amount  of  currency traded.
88.      Ans: A
Exp: It was launched  on the  birth  anniversary  of  Jay
Prakash Narayan.
89.      Ans: D
Exp: Frost and Sullivan, USA presented the 2015 Asia – Pacific Economic Development Innovation: Policy  and Program Implementation  Excellence Award  in Manufacturing  to Department  of  Industrial  Policy   and Promotion (DIPP)  for the  Make  in  India  initiative.  That means DIPP under Commerce ministry implementing it.
90. Ans: D
Exp:  Financial  inclusion or  inclusive  financing  is  the delivery of financial services at affordable costs to sections of disadvantaged and low-income segments of society, in contrast  to financial exclusion where those  services are not available or affordable. It directly and indirectly results in all the benefits mentioned above.
91.      Ans: B
Exp:  Ministry  of  road  and  highways is  carrying  out development  and  maintenance   of   national  highways through 3 agencies (1) NHAI (2) PWD (3) BRO.
92.      Ans: B
Exp: It will replace only indirect taxes and is a destination based tax.
93.      Ans: A
94.      Ans: C
95.      Ans: B
Exp: The PMJJY is a   social security scheme  to cover insurance for  both  natural  and artificial  death  upto 2 lakhs.   The  premium   payable   is   Rs  330/Year   and applicable for age group 18-50 years.
96.      Ans: C
97. Ans: C
Exp: Transfer pricing is the setting of the price for goods and  services  sold  between  controlled  (or  related)  legal entities within an enterprise. For example, if a subsidiary company sells goods to a parent  company, the cost of those goods is the transfer price. Legal entities considered under the control of a single corporation include branches and  companies  that   are  wholly or  majority  owned ultimately  by   the  parent  corporation. Transfer  pricing results in the setting of prices among divisions within an enterprise.
98.      Ans: B
99. Ans: B
Exp: Economic growth implies change or an increase in the real output of country. Such changes should not be momentarily.  Such  growth  should  be   maintained  for certain period of time. Increase in GDP  owing to increase in prices cannot be termed as Economic Growth.
100. Ans: D

ANALOG  IAS INSTITUTE – The Right Choice of Achievers.                                   P a g e | 5
