1.  Which of the following were the demands of non-cooperation movement? 
1. Solving khilafat issue
2. The Redressal of Punjab wrongs (Jallianwalabagh massacre)
3. Attainment of swaraj
Select the correct code
1. 1 only
2. 1 and 3 only
3. 1 and 2 only
4. All the above
Answer:4

2. Which of the statements is not correct regarding "August offer" (August 8, 1940)? 
1. An immediate increase in the number of Indians in the viceroy's executive council.
2. Setting up a war advisory council.
3. Setting up the provisional national government.
4. Setting up a representative constitution making body after the war. 
Answer:3
August offer (August 8, 1940) turned down the congress demand for Setting up the provisional national government. But it made alternate proposals envisaging that, an immediate increase in the number of Indians in the viceroy's executive council, setting up a war advisory council, setting up a representative constitution making body after the war.

3. Consider the following statements regarding Government of India Act, 1935.
1. Governor's provinces were given autonomy.
2. The Act restricted powers of the governor to act in his discretion.
3. Ministers held office during the governor's pleasure.
Which of the above statements are correct?
1. 1 and 2 only
2. 1 only
3. 1 and 3 only
4. 2 and 3 only
Answer:3
Governor's provinces were broadly freed from the superintendence, direction and control of Government of India and secretary of state, i.e. provincial autonomy. Province derived their powers and authority directly from the British crown. The Act gave arbitrary powers to governor to act in his discretion in certain matters. Council of ministers was appointed from among the elected members of provincial legislature and responsible to that body.  Ministers held office during the governor's pleasure.

4. After the provincial elections of 1937, Congress ministries in provinces took steps in defending and extending civil liberties. Which one among the following was not such a step?
1. All the restrictions on the press were removed.
2. Ban on the communist party revoked.
3. Confiscated arms were returned and forfeited arms licenses were restored.
4. Police powers were curbed. 
Answer:2
Explanation:
All emergency powers acquired by the provincial governments during 1932, through Public Safety Acts and the like, were repealed; bans on illegal political organizations such as the Hindustan Seva Dal and Youth Leagues and on political books and journals were lifted. Though the ban on the Communist Party remained, since it was imposed by the Central Government and could only be lifted on its orders, the Communists could in effect now function freely and openly in the Congress provinces. All restrictions on the press were removed. Securities taken from newspapers and presses were refunded and pending prosecutions were withdrawn. The blacklisting of newspapers for purposes of government advertising was given up. Confiscated arms were returned and forfeited arms licenses were restored.

5. Which of the following is NOT true regarding "cabinet mission" proposals? 
1. It recommended partition of British India into India and Pakistan.
2. It proposed a weak central government controlling only foreign affairs, defence and communications
3. It recommended a loose three tier confederation
4. Princely states formed third tier of the confederation
5. Under the plan grouping was made compulsory
Select the correct code
a) 2, 3 and 4 only
b) 1, 4 and 5 only
c) 2 and 3 only
d) 3, 4 and 5 only
Answer:2
It did not recommend partition of British India into India and Pakistan. It proposed a weak central government controlling only foreign affairs, defence and communications. It recommended a loose three tier confederation.The existing provincial assemblies grouped into three; Sec A for Hindu majority provinces, Sec B for Muslim majority provinces of North-West region,  Sec C for Muslim majority provinces of North-East region including Assam. Princely states were not specifically provided for in the proposal.  Mission Plan was ambivalent on whether grouping was compulsory or optional. It declared that grouping was optional but sections were compulsory.

6. Which of the following statements are correct? 
Statement I: Annie Besant was the first to setup Home Rule league in India.
Statement II: Tilak's Home Rule league worked in Maharashtra, Karnataka, central provinces and Berar areas only.
1. Statement I only
2. Statement II only
3. Both Statement I and Statement II
4. Neither Statement I nor Statement II
Answer:2
In 1914, Annie Besant decided to build of a movement for Home Rule on the lines of the Irish Home Rule League. For this, she realized it was necessary both to get the sanction of the Congress, as well as the active cooperation of the Extremists.  Annie Besant did not succeed in getting the Congress and theMuslim League to support her decision to set up Home Rule Leagues. She did manage, however, to persuade the Congress to commit itself to a programme of educative propaganda and to a revival of the local level Congress committees. Knowing that theCongress, as constituted at the time, was unlikely to implement this, she had inserted a condition by which, if the Congress did not start this activity by September 1916, she would be free to set up her own League.  Tilak, not bound by any such commitment, and having gained the right of readmission, now took the lead and set up the Home Rule League at the Bombay Provincial Conference held at Belgaum in April 1916. In September 1916, as there were no signs of any Congress activity, Annie Besant announced the formation of her Home Rule League, with George Arundale.  The' two Leagues avoided any friction by demarcating their area of activity; Tilak's League was to work in Maharashtra, (excluding Bombay city), Karnataka, the Central Provinces and Berar, and Annie Besant's League was given charge of the rest of India.

7. Which of the following recommended "universal adult suffrage, equal rights for women, freedom to form unions, and dissociation of the state from religion in any form"?
1. Nehru Report
2. Congress session of 1929
3. C. Rajagopalachari proposals
4. Indian independence Act of 1947
Answer:1

8. Which of the following is/are the feature/s of Quit India movement? 
1. The emergence of "parallel government" in some parts of the country.
2. It saw participation of youth, women, peasants etc.
3. It was anon violent movement.
4. Movement was a spontaneous outburst.
5. There were communal clashes during the movement. 
Select the correct code
1. 3, 4 and 5 only
2. 2, 4 and 5 only
3. 1, 2 and 3 only
4. 1, 2 and 4 only
Answer: 4
Explanation:
How did the use of violence in 1942 square with the Congress policy of non-violence. For one, there were many who refused to use or sanction violent means and confined themselves to the traditional weaponry of the Congress. But many of those, including many staunch Gandhians, who used 'violent means' in 1942 felt that the peculiar circumstances warranted their use.  Many maintained that the cutting of telegraph wires and the blowing up of bridges was all right as long as human life was not taken. Others frankly admitted that they could not square the violence they used, or connived at with their belief in nonviolence, but that they did it all the same. Gandhiji refused to condemn the violence of the people because he saw it as a reaction to the much bigger violence of the state.  While it is true that Muslim mass participation in the Quit India movement was not high, yet it is also true that even Muslim League supporters not act as informers. Also, there was a total absence of any communal clashes, a sure sign that though the movement may not have aroused much support from among the majority of the Muslim masses, it did not arouse their hostility either.

9. Consider the following statements regarding Indian National Army (INA). 
1. The idea of INA was first conceived in Malaya by Mohan Singh.
2.  Indian prisoners of war handed over by the Japanese were recruited into INA.
3. Subhash Chandra Bose reorganized INA in Singapore in 1943. 
Which of the above statements are correct? 
1. 2 only
2. 2 and 3 only
3. 3 only
4. All the above
Answer: 4

10. During "Temple entry movement"
1. Attempts were made for opening the doors of temples for the 'avarnas'.
2. Techniques developed in the course of national struggle were used.
3. It was Gandhian or nationalist in its approach to fight caste oppression. 
Select the correct code
1. 1 only
2. 1 and 2 only
3. 1 and 3 only
4. All the above
Answer: 4

11. Consider the following with reference to Biomass burning and its effect
1. Aerosols have been found to rise and cross the entire range of the Himalayas
2. Dicarboxylic acids present in the aerosols serve as a unique fingerprint in identifying the source of pollution.
3. The direct heat generated by burning biomass is significant, and contributes to cloud evaporation by increasing relative humidity. 
Select the wrong statements
1. 1 and 3
2. Only 3
3. Only 1
4. None
Answer:  2
The direct heat generated by burning biomass is significant, and contributes to cloud evaporation by decreasing relative humidity
http://news.stanford.edu/news/2014/july/biomass-burning-climate-073114.html
http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/energy-and-environment/emissions-from-biomassburning-cross-the-himalayas/article7105899.ece

12. The water pollution level in India is rising and has doubled in recent years. What can be possible reasons for surface water pollution in India? 
1. 70-80% of water pollution by volume is from rivers
2. Gaps in the treatment of sewage water and water treatment plants
3. Septic tanks and pit latrines have become a major contributor to groundwater and surface water pollution
Select the wrong statements
1. 1 and 2
2. 2 and 3
3. Only 1
4. Only 3
Answer:  3
http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/home/environment/pollution/80-of-Indias-surface-watermay-be-polluted-report-by-international-body-says/articleshow/47848532.cms

13.  Consider the following statements
1. Operation Tiger, an Indian initiative due to which the number of Tiger's have recently shown an upward trend.
2. The conventional classification of Tiger's are done based on nine sub-species
Select the correct code
1. Only 1
2. Only 2
3. Both
4. None
Answer:  1
India has Project Tiger not Operation Tiger :D
http://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/environment/flora-fauna/there-are-only-twotiger-sub-species-not-nine-says-new-study/articleshow/47876528.cms
http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/world-s-tigers-should-be-classified-two-species-onlysays-study

14.  Which of the following is the largest Aquifer System of India? 
1. Alluvium Aquifer System
2. Basalt Aquifer System
3. Gneiss Aquifer System
4. Sandstone Aquifer System
Answer:  1

15. Consider the following statements
1. It is a rare species of porpoise
2. It is endemic to the northern part of the Gulf of California.
3. A study released recently warns that their population has drastically fallen down to just 97. 
It is-
1. Vaquita
2. Killer whale
3. Rough-toothed dolphin
4. Gray whaleAnswer:  1, Vaquita
http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/population-world-s-smallest-porpoise-dwindles-97

16. Consider the following
1. It account for over 90% of the global meridional (north-south) water vapor transport
2. It consist of narrow bands of enhanced water vapor transport
3. They also are the major cause of extreme precipitation events which cause severe flooding in many mid-latitude, westerly coastal regions of the world.
Select the term associated with above statements
1. Atmospheric Gases
2. Atmospheric Rivers
3. Atmospheric Circulations
4. Atmospheric Precipitation
Answer:  2
http://www.climatecentral.org/news/global-warming-atmospheric-rivers-18645

17. Environment protection is an inherent part of Indian Constitution. Which of the following implicitly or explicitly mentions about it?
1. Fundamental Duties
2. DPSP
3. Preamble
4. Fundamental rights
5. Article 32
Select the correct codes
1. 1, 4 and 5
2. 1, 2 and 4
3. 2 and 4
4. 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5
Answer:  4
http://pib.nic.in/newsite/efeatures.aspx?relid=105411

18. Flexible mechanisms under Kyoto Protocol includes
1. Carbon Sink
2. Clean Development Mechanism
3. Joint Implementation
4. Emission Trading
Select the correct code
1. 1, 2 and 3
2. 2, 3 and 4
3. 1, 2, 3 and 4
4. 1, 3 and 4
Answer:  3
Carbon Sink is part of CDM
http://www.sinkswatch.org/kyoto.html

19. Consider the following
1. Durban Declaration and Program of Action
2. Cancum Agreement
3. Copenhagen Accord
4. Bali Action Plan
Which of the above includes commitments to reduce greenhouse gas emissions?
1. 1, 2 and 3
2. 2, 3 and 4
3. 2 and 3
4. All
Answer:  3
Cancum and Copenhagen are right Durban Declaration and Programme of Action- The DDPA reasserts the principles of equality and non-discrimination as core human rights, thus transforming victims of discrimination into rights-holders and States into duty bearers.  Bali Action Plan- The Bali Action Plan did not introduce binding commitments to reduce greenhouse gas emissions but included the request for developed countries to contribute to the mitigation of global warming in the context of sustainable development. In addition, the Bali Action Plan envisaged enhanced actions on adaptation, technology development and on the provision financial resources, as well as measures against deforestation.

20. Persistent Organic Pollutant (POPs) are organic compounds that are resistant to environmental degradation through chemical, biological and photolytic processes. Which of the following International measures includes POPs? 
1. Stockholm Convention
2. Aarhus Protocol
3. Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution
Select the correct code
1. Only 1
2. 1 and 2
3. 2 and 3
4. 1, 2 and 3
Answer:  4
The Stockholm Convention was adopted and put into practice by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) on May 22, 2001. The UNEP decided that POP regulation needed to be addressed globally for the future. The purpose statement of the agreement is "to protect human health and the environment from persistent organic pollutants.  The Aarhus Protocol on Persistent Organic Pollutants, a 1998 protocol on persistent organic pollutants (POPs), is an addition to the 1979 Geneva Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution (LRTAP) LRTAP includes POP compounds like Aldrin, Chlordane and hexachlorobenzene etc
