1. The best way to improve crop production in India is to increase the crop intensity ie by increasing gross sown area.
Which is not the hindering factor involved in improving the crop intensity? 
1) Infertile soil.
2) Deficiency in moisture, especially in rain fed region.
3) Insufficient usage of manures and fertilizers.
4) Large tracts of black soil.
Answer: 4
In fact black soil is an added advantage in improving the crop intensity as it requires very less irrigated or rainfall water as it has a very good capability to retain moisture.  The usage of manures and fertilizers per hectare is quite low in India compared to other countries like China, Japan etc.

2. In India El Nino can have comparatively lesser impact on Sugarcane and Urad production.
What are the reasons?
1) Sugarcane is largely grown under irrigated areas.
2) Urad is mainly grown in regions where rainfall variability is very low.
3) Urad is drought resistant crop.
4) Sugarcane although a khariff crop requires very less water. 
Choose the right pair of reasons from the codes below
1) 1, 2.
2) 1, 3.
3) 2, 4.
4) 3, 4.
Answer: 2
More than 90% of the area under sugarcane is under irrigation and thus rainfall failure cannot much impact production provided electricity and water supply is made available for the farmers.  Urad is drought resistant crop thus grown in regions even if the rainfall variability is very high.

3. Ragi, a millet is currently encouraged to include in the diet to supplement nutrients to counter the malnutrition that is haunting the country.
Consider the following statements Ragi.
1) Ragi is rich in iron, calcium, roughphage and is mainly grown in dry regions.
2) Among minor producers Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand are included.
3) It is grown as a major crop in Bengaluru-Mysuru table land from where the country's majority of Ragi production comes from.
Choose the correct statements from the code below.
1) 1, 2 only.
2) 2, 3 only.
3) 1, 3 only.
4) All the above.
Answer: 4
Among minor producers even Jharkhand, Jammu Kashmir are also involved apart from the states mentioned in the 2 nd statement.  Ragi production and consumption is highest in Bengaluru-Mysuru table region. 

4. Tea best grows in Assam, Darjeeling and Jalpaiguri districts of West Bengal. What is/are the uniqueness of this region which suits this crop?
1) It has warm and humid climate.
2) Showers are mainly concentrated in 4-5 months ie June to October in any year.
3) Deep, fertile and well drained soil.
4) Rugged topography of the relief near the Himalayan foot hills.
Choose the correct code.
1) 1, 2, 3 only.
2) 1, 3 only.
3) 1, 3, 4 only.
4) All the above.
Answer: 2
Showers are almost evenly distributed throughout the year with very low dry spell.  Well drained gentle sloped soils are required and rugged topography is not suitable for tea plantations.

5. Indian agriculture is termed to be an Intensive Subsistence Farming type. What are the characteristic that has made Indian agriculture to be categorized into that type?
1) Very high population density.
2) Labour intensive farming.
3) Lower yield of production in terms of per capita labour force.
4) Very small and fragmented land holdings.
5) Usage of farm machinery.
Choose the correct code from the following. 
1) 1, 2, 3 only.
2) 1, 2, 3, 4 only.
3) 2, 3, 4 only.
4) All the above.
Answer: 2
The following are the characteristics of the Intensive Subsistence Farming.  Land holdings are very small due to inheritance law prevalent in the country and high population mounts pressure on the land holdings to be utilized in an intensive way so as to cater the demand for food from huge population.  Farmers work with the help of family labour and use of machinery is limited and most of the agricultural operations are done by manual labour.  Farm yard manure is used to maintain the fertility of the soil.  In this type of agriculture, the yield per unit area is high but per labour productivity is low.

6. Kerala has outpaced every other state in the country in terms of Rubber production. The reasons being
1) It has hot and humid climate with precipitation more than 200cms annually.
2) Very small dry spell during summers for 2-3 months.
3) Well drained red soil with gentle slope and no stagnation of water.
Choose the correct reason/s from the code below. 
1) 1 only.
2) 1, 2 only.
3) 1, 3 only.
4) All the above.
Answer: 2
Kerala largely has laterite soil and not red soil.

7. Sugarcane grown in subtropical region has lower productivity than that is grown in tropical regions.
Consider the following statements about subtropical region ie Northern India which has low productivity in sugarcane production.
1) Frost formations.
2) Floods and water logging.
3) High diurnal temperature.
4) Low humidity.
Choose the correct reason/s from the codes below. 
1) 1, 2 only.
2) 2, 3 only.
3) 3, 4 only.
4) 1, 2, 3 only.
Answer: 1
First two statements are self explanatory.
A higher diurnal temperature and low humidity are required for a better productivity. Thus these two factors are not reducing the productivity.

8. The productivity in the Indian agriculture has stagnated since 1990's although the usage of fertilizers has considerably increased since then.
What is/are the possible reason/s? 
1) Unscientific usage of fertilizers.
2) Agriculture productivity in India has reached a zenith position and any further increase in the productivity cannot come through increase in the usage of fertilizers.
3) Increasing monsoon vagaries because of Climate Change.
4) Both 1 and 3.
Answer: 4
Unscientific usage is the main reason ie unbalanced dosage of nitrogen, phosphorous, potassium. In the ideal condition it should be 4:2:1. But in India it is completely unbalanced .  Based on region the ratio of N:P:K varies in a big way eg: all India it is 8.2:3.2:1, for Punjab it is 61.9:19.3:1, for Haryana it is 61.4:18.7:1. This can have negative impact like decreasing the soil fertility and thus reducing the yield.  Monsoon vagaries definitely has increased with time.

9. What are the factors that have favoured the Wheat production in North West India?
1) Western disturbances.
2) Fertile alluvial soil brought down mainly by Indus and Ganga river system.
3) Semi arid region.
Choose the correct code from the following. 
1) 1, 2 only.
2) 2, 3 only.
3) 1, 3 only.
4) All the above.
Answer: 1
North West India does have semi arid region but that itself is not a foavourable characteristic, it's the Western disturbance that favours Wheat production.

10. Although green revolution brought a great success for our country during later 1960's it also brought in few negatives. What are those negatives? 
1) Inter crop disparity.
2) Inter personal inequalities.
3) Environmental pollution.
4) Regional economic disparity.
5) Unemployment.
6) Self sufficiency in all types of agricultural crop production. 
Choose the correct code from the following.
1) 1, 2, 3 only.
2) 1 , 3, 4, 5 only
3) 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 only.
4) 1, 2, 3, 4, 6 only.
Answer: 3
Inter cropping disparity because it was food grains which got impetus especially wheat and many other crops were neglected eg: pulses.  Largely green revolution favoured large farmers than small and marginal farmers because green revolution needed some initial investments for mechanization, high yielding seeds etc while small and marginal farmers could hardly afford such expenditures.  With unbalanced fertilizers usage it led to soil fertility decline and also crops were grown in such areas where those were not supposed to be grown like rice crop which was started in Haryana and Punjab because of Green revolution.  Green revolution mainly benefitted North West India and coastal areas in Eastern India. Thus agricultural income increased only in those regions where Green revolution was brought and thus increasing regional disparity in terms of economy.  Mechanization was supported and encouraged to get the better benefits of Green revolution thus resulting into unemployment.  Self sufficiency was brought only in food grains like rice wheat etc, and not in every crop.

11. Arrange the following Tiger Reserves from North to South direction
1. Kundermukh
2. Bor
3. Pilibhit
4. Achanakmar
Correct sequence
1. 4-3-2-1
2. 3-4-2-1
3. 1-4-3-2
4. 2-3-4-1
Answer:  2
1. Kundermukh- Karnataka
2. Bor- Maharashtra
3. Pilibhit- UP
4. Achanakmar- Chattisgarh

12. Consider the following statements regarding National Green Tribunal (NGT)
1. NGT can handle cases related to The Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991
2. The Tribunal shall be bound by the procedure laid down under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
3. It is a federal legislation enacted by the Parliament of India, under India's constitutional provision of Article 21
Which of the above is NOT correct? 
1. 1 and 2
2. Only 1
3. 1, 2 and 3
4. Only 2
Answer:  4
The Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid down under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, but shall be guided by principles of natural justice.  The NGT has the power to hear all civil cases relating to environmental issues and questions that are linked to the implementation of laws listed in Schedule I of the NGT Act. These include the following:
1. The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974;
2. The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess Act, 1977;
3. The Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980;
4. The Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981;
5. The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986;
6. The Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991;
7. The Biological Diversity Act, 2002.
This means that any violations pertaining only to these laws, or any order / decision taken by the Government under these laws can be challenged before the NGT. Importantly, the NGT has not been vested with powers to hear any matter relating to the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, the Indian Forest Act, 1927 and various laws enacted by States relating to forests, tree preservation etc. Therefore, specific and substantial issues related to these laws cannot be raised before the NGT. You will have to approach the State High Court or the Supreme Court through a Writ Petition (PIL) or file an Original Suit before an appropriate Civil Judge of the taluk where the project that you intend to challenge is located.

13. Consider the following statements
1. The constitution of National Park in India can only be done by Central Government
2. Abolition of National Park can be done by State Legislation
Select the correct codes
1. Only 1
2. Only 2
3. Both
4. None
Answer:  2
In most countries, only national or federal government can constitute national parks, but in India, state governments have the power to constitute national parks. In fact, national parks can only be constituted or abolished through state legislation, whereas wild sanctuaries are created through an order of a competent authority, who can be the chief conservator of forests or a minister of a state. Thus, it is evident that national parks have greater degree of permanency than a wildlife sanctuary

14. Consider the following
1. Markhor
2. Brown palm civet
3. Yellow Fronted Barbet
4. Ovaria Lurida
Which of the above are ENDEMIC species of INDIA? 
1. 1, 2 and 3
2. 2, 3 and 4
3. 1, 2, 3 and 4
4. 2 and 4
Answer:  4
Yellow Fronted barbet is endemic to Srilanka, not India.

15. Consider the statements about 'Super-Heavy Elements' recently in news
1.  Super-heavy elements are elements beyond atomic number 104.
2. They are artificially created but do exist naturally
3. India is part of development of super heavy element 117
Select the Wrong Statement/s
1. 1 and 2
2. Only 1
3. Only 2
4. Only 3
Answer:  3
They do not exist in nature. 
