1. Consider the statements regarding a particular valley which was in the news recently.
1) It is a part of Gangotri National Park.
2) It is a cold desert and looks like a replica of Tibetan plateau.
3) It is home for Snow Leopard.
Which is that valley? 
1) Nellong valley.
2) Kashmir valley.
3) Alaknanda valley.
4) Bhagirathi valley.
Answer: 1

2. Central Zoo Authority, a body set up in 1992 for the oversight of zoos.
Consider the following statements regarding CZA.
1) It is set up under the Wild Life Protection Act, 1972.
2) It is an affiliated member of World Association of Zoos and Aquarium.
3) It doesn't have the power to regulate the trade of endangered species.
Choose the correct statements from the following code.
1) 1, 2 only.
2) 2, 3 only.
3) 1, 3 only.
4) All the above. 
Answer: 1
It does have the power to regulate the trade of endangered species. Apart from that it also has the power to regulate and approve the exchange of animals between Indian and foreign zoos.

3. The trees found in Western side of Western Ghats and in the Northeast region generally don't shed their leaves i.e they are evergreen.
What are the possible reasons?
1) These regions do not have prolonged dry season.
2) These regions don't have severe winters.
3) These regions have the humidity level beyond 75% almost throughout the year.
Choose the correct reason/s from the codes below. 
1) 1 only.
2) 2 only.
3) 1, 2 only.
4) All the above.
Answer: 4
Prolonged dry season and severe winters do result in shedding of leaves by trees.  Tropical deciduous trees shed their leaves during dry season because of excess evaporation and temperate deciduous trees shed their leaves during severe winters.

4. In Tamil Nadu region, evergreen forests are found despite hot and dry summers with temperature of about 28 degree Celsius.
What is/are the reason/s?
1) Annual rainfall of about 100cms mostly from the North East monsoon winds during October to December.
2) A humidity of more than 75% throughout the year. 
3) Red and yellow soil found in Tamil Nadu region can retain moisture well.
4) Both 1 and 2.
Answer: 4
Humidity is the main reason for trees not shedding their leaves during prolonged dry seasons.  Red and Yellow soils are not good at retaining moisture unlike Black soil which is very good at retaining moisture.

5. Himalayan yew is a plant found in Himachal Pradesh and Arunachal Pradesh, was in news recently.
Consider the following statements regarding the plant.
1) It is a medicinal plant.
2) A chemical compound called ' taxol ' obtained from the plant is used as an effective anti - TB drug.
Choose the incorrect statements from code below. 
1) 1 only.
2) 2 only.
3) Both are true.
4) None of the above.
Answer: 2
A chemical compound called ' taxol ' obtained from the plant is used as an effective anti-cancer drug.

6. Enrich plantation is something in which a single commercially valuable species is extensively planted in a region and other local species are eliminated.
Consider the statements regarding Enrich plantation.
1) Teak monoculture has damaged the natural forest majorly in Northeast India which was earlier introduced by British.
2) Chir, Pine plantations in the Himalayas have replaced the Himalayan Oak and Rhododendron forests.
Choose the correct statements from the code below. 
1) 1 only.
2) 2 only.
3) Both.
4) None of the above.
Answer: 2
Teak monoculture majorly impacted South India.
Source: NCERT.

7. Few forests in India are protected under the name of Sacred Grooves.  Consider the following statements regarding Sacred Grooves.
1)  It is a nature worship which is an age old belief based on the premise that all the creations of the mother Nature have to be protected.
2) It is recognized under Wildlife Protection Act, 1972.
Choose the correct statement/s from the following code. 
1) 1 only.
2) 2 only.
3) Both.
4) None of the above. 
Answer: 3
Prior to 2002 these forest regions were not recognized under any of the existing laws. But in 2002 an amendment was brought in Wildlife Protection Act, 1972 to include Sacred Grooves under the act.
Source: NCERT.

8. Migration is an unavoidable worldwide phenomenon.
Which among the following is/are the not the push factors for rural to urban migration especially in India. 
1) Unemployment.
2) Health and education facilities.
3) Monsoon vagaries.
4) Caste disabilities.
Answer: 2
Human migration is the movement by people from one place to another with the intention of settling temporarily or permanently in the new location. The movement is typically over long distances and from one country to another, but internal migration is also possible. Migration may be individuals, family units or in large groups.  There are 2 factors ie push and pull factor which might be real or perceptional.  Push factors are those that force the individual to move voluntarily, and in many cases, they are forced because the individual risk something if they stay.  Pull factors are those factors in the destination region that attract the individual or group to leave their home. Those factors are known as place utility, which is the desirability of a place that attracts people. Better economic opportunities, more jobs, and the promise of a better life like better health and education facilities often pull people into new locations.

9. Developing countries like India has an adverse sex ratio of less than 1000 while in developed countries it is more than 1000. [Sex ratio: It is the number of females in a country for every 1000 males]
What is/are the possible reason/s with reference to India?
1) Social disadvantages that female face like female foeticide, female infanticide, domestic violence etc.
2) Stopping at one child ie couples restrain themselves from going for second child provided the first child born is male.
Choose the correct code from the following. 
1) 1 only.
2) 2 only.
3) Both.
4) None of the above.
Answer: 3
Close to 10 per cent of Indian households are opting to have only one child as they seek to concentrate their resources to maximize earning opportunities for their offspring in a scramble for jobs. The trend is most pronounced among educated people in metropolitan areas, research by the Delhi-based National Council of Applied Economic Research shows.

10. Which is/are the country/s in the world to use Gross National Happiness to measure the progress of the country?
Consider the countries.
1) India.
2) Bangladesh.
3) Sweden.
4) Bhutan.
Choose the country/s from the code below.
1) 1, 4 only.
2) 2, 4 only. 
3) 3 only.
4) 4 only.
Answer: 4
Bhutan is the only country in the world to officially proclaim the Gross National Happiness (GNH) as the measure of the country's progress. Material progress and technological developments are approached more cautiously taking into consideration the possible harm they might bring to the environment or the other aspects of cultural and spiritual life of the Bhutanese. This simply means material progress cannot come at the cost of happiness. GNH encourages us to think of the spiritual, non-material and qualitative aspects of development.  The four pillars of GNH philosophy are the promotion of
1. Sustainable development
2. Preservation and promotion of cultural values
3. Conservation of the natural environment, and
4. Establishment of good governance.

11. If you are travelling through Eastern Himalayas, which of the following you will encounter?
1. Golden Langur
2. Takin
3. Black Bear
Select the correct code
1. 1 and 2
2. 2 and 3
3. Only 2
4. 1, 2 and 3
Answer:  4

12. Consider the following statements
1. The leaves of these forest falls in autumn season
2. They are found in Temperate Zone
3. These forests in China and Europe are basically man made
What is the name of this forest? 
1. Coniferous Forest
2. Deciduous Forest
3. Tropical Rain Forest
4. None
Answer:  2
A deciduous forest is one where the leaves fall from the trees in autumn. Deciduous means "falling out or off at a certain season". he average temperature is 50 degrees and the average rainfall is 30 to 60 inches per year. These forests are located in the temperate zone above the tropical forests and below the coniferous forests. These forests have their own specific plants, trees, animals, and shrubs. Deciduous forests are found in the eastern part of North America and the middle of Europe. Asia, southwest Russia, Japan, and eastern China also have these forests. All of the deciduous forests in America are second growth. This means all the original trees have been cut and the forests have grown from seeds and seedlings. Both China and Europe have cleared all of their first growth deciduous forests for agriculture. All of the deciduous forests in Europe and China are man-made.

13. Red Sanders has been in news recently because of illegal trade. Consider the following w.r.t it
1. It is endemic to North Eastern Ghats mountain range of South India
2. Its aromatic woods are of high demand in China and Middle East countries
3. It is an endangered species as listen by IUCN
4. It is used in Shipbuilding and manufacturing of the Ayurvedic medicines.
Which of the above are NOT correct? 
1. 1, 2, 3 and 4
2. 2 and 4
3. 1 and 2
4. 1, 2 and 3
Answer:  3
Its wood is not aromatic. It is endemic to Southern Eastern Ghats Mountain range of South India

14. Recently a Destroyer Warship was inducted by Indian Navy named INS Vishakhapatnam Consider the statements w.r.t it
1. It is India's first fully indigenous warship
2. Total Atmosphere Control System will enable the crew to operate the ship in regions of nuclear fallout but provides no defence for biological or chemical fallout.
3. It is based on stealth technology and can launch supersonic missiles also
Select the WRONG statement/s
1. 1 and 2
2. Only 3
3. 1 and 3
4. 2 and 3
Answer:  1
It is indigenous but partly. It will provide defence from nuclear, chemical and biological fallouts.

15. Consider the following statements based on UN report on E-waste
1. The bulk of global e-waste constitutes from mobile phones, calculators, personal computers, printers, and small information technology equipment.
2. The lowest amount of e-waste per inhabitant was generated in South Asian countries
Select the correct code/s
1. Only 1
2. Only 2
3. Both
4. None
Answer:  4
While only 7 per cent of e-waste last year was made up of mobile phones, calculators, personal computers, printers, and small information technology equipment, almost 60 per cent was a mix of large and small equipment used in homes and businesses, such as vacuum cleaners, toasters, electric shavers, video cameras, washing machines, electric stoves, mobile phones, calculators, personal computers, and lamps.  The lowest amount of e-waste per inhabitant was generated in Africa (1.7 kg/inhabitant). The continent generated 1.9 Mt of e-waste in total. 
