1. Which of the following statement/s is/are correct regarding the Governor?
1) The Governor office is an employment under the central government.
2) It is an independent Constitutional office.
3) He is subordinate to central government as he holds the office only during the pleasure of the President of India.
4) He has no fixed term of office and no security of tenure.
Choose the correct code. 
1) 2 only.
2) 2, 3, 4 only.
3) 1, 2 3 only.
4) 2, 4 only.
Answer: 4
The governor is neither directly elected by the people nor indirectly elected by a specially constituted electoral college as is the case with the president. He is appointed by the president by warrant under his hand and seal. In a way, he is a nominee of the Central government. But, as held by the Supreme Court in 1979, the office of governor of a state is not an employment under the Central government. It is an independent constitutional office and is not under the control of or subordinate to the Central government. 

2. Consider a situation-
The Governor has sent a bill for reconsideration using his 'Suspensive Veto' powers. And state legislature has passed the bill again and has sent the bill for the Governor's assent.  Now, what is/are the option/s that Governor can exercise? Choose the correct option.
1) He has to give his assent.
2) He can withhold his assent.
3) He can keep the bill for the President's consideration.
4) Either 1 or 3.
Answer: 1.

3. The Constitution of India envisages the same pattern of government in the states as that at the centre.
What are all the parts that constitute State Executive?
1) The Governor.
2) The Chief Minister.
3) The Council of Ministers.
4) The Advocate General.
5) The Attorney General.
Choose the correct code from the following
1) 1, 2 only.
2) 1, 2, 3 only.
3) 1, 2, 3, 4 only.
4) All the above.
Answer: 3
The Attorney General is part of Union Executive.

4. Supreme Court in the past has given several verdicts, rulings related to the aid and advice given by Council of Ministers to the Governor. Consider the following statements.
1) A council of ministers must always exist to advise the governor, even after the dissolution of the state legislative assembly or resignation of a council of ministers.
2) Except in spheres where the governor is to act in his discretion, the governor has to act on the aid and advice of the council of ministers in the exercise of his powers and functions.
3) Wherever the Constitution requires the satisfaction of the governor, the satisfaction is not the personal satisfaction of the governor but it is the satisfaction of the council of ministers.
Choose the correct statement/s from the following codes. 
1) 1, 2 only.
2) 2, 3 only.
3) 1, 3 only.
4) All the above.
Answer: 4
In 1971, the Supreme Court ruled that a council of ministers must always exist to advise the governor, even after the dissolution of the state legislative assembly or resignation of a council of ministers. Hence, the existing ministry may continue in the office until its successor assumes charge. Again in1974, the Court clarified that except in spheres where the governor is to act in his discretion, the governor has to act on the aid and advice of the council of ministers in the exercise of his powers and functions. He is not required to act personally without the aid and advice of the council of ministers or against the aid and advice of the council of ministers.  Wherever the Constitution requires the satisfaction of the governor, the satisfaction is not the personal satisfaction of the governor but it is the satisfaction of the council of ministers. 

5. Bicameral legislature is a feature of Federal structure. This type of legislature is a mandatory at the Centre while it is not an obligatory on the States to have Bicameral legislatures.
Which of the States doesn't have a Bicameral legislature? 
1) Andhra Pradesh.
2) Uttar Pradesh.
3) Bihar
4) Madhya Pradesh.
Answer: 4
Only the following States have Bicameral Legislature - BIMAKUJ - Bihar, Maharashtra, Andra Pradesh, Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir.

6. Under the Constitution, a person shall be disqualified for being chosen as and for being a member of the legislative assembly or legislative council of a state if he holds any office of profit under the Union or state government. It is governor who disqualifies if a member has become subject to the above disqualification.  Consider the following statements. 
1) Governor can disqualify the member on his own discretion.
2) Governor can disqualify the member only after he obtains the opinion of the President of India.
3) Governor can disqualify the member only after he obtains the opinion of the Election Commission of India.
4) Governor can disqualify the member only after he obtains the opinion of the Supreme Court.
Answer: 3.

7. Who has the powers to disqualify a member of legislature in a State under the 10 schedule? 
1) The Governor.
2) The President of India.
3) Speaker or Chairman
4) Supreme Court.
Answer: 3
The Speaker in case of Legislative Assembly and Chairman in case of Legislative Council

8. Consider the following statements.
1) A minister, who is not the member of either House, cannot participate in the proceedings of any of the House.
2) Advocate General of the state can take part in the proceedings of any of the House despite he being not the member of either of the Houses.
Choose the correct statement/s from the following code. 
1) 1 only.
2) 2 only.
3) Both.
4) None of the above.
Answer: 2
If a person is appointed as a minister who is not a member of either House, he can take part in the proceedings of any of the House. But that minister should become the member of either House before the expiry of six months from the date of appointment to his office, lest he would cease to be a minister. 

9. Consider the statements regarding the Money bill.
1) It can be introduced in either House of State Legislature (if it is bicameral legislature) but on recommendation of the Governor.
2) It is considered to be a Government bill.
3) Legislative Council can at the maximum delay passage of money bill by 14 day.
4) Governor enjoys 'Suspensive Veto' with respect to this bill.
Choose the correct statement/s from the following codes.
1) 1, 2 only.
2) 3 only.
3) 2, 3 only.
4) 2, 3, 4 only.
Answer: 3
The Money bill can be introduced only in the Legislative Assembly and not in the Legislative Council.
Governor has no Suspensive Veto power with respect to the Money bill.

10. Puducherry and Delhi are the only two Union Territories that have Legislatures of their own. Consider the following statements.
1) Puducherry can make laws on any of the subjects in the State List but not in the Concurrent List
2) Delhi can make laws on any of the subjects in the State List or in the Concurrent List (except public order, police and land).
Choose the incorrect statement/s from the following codes below. 
1) 1 only.
2) 2 only.
3) Both.
4) None of the above.
Answer: 1
Puducherry can make laws on any of the subjects in the State List or in the Concurrent List.

11. Consider the statements regarding 'Headline Inflation and Core Inflation'
1. Headline inflation is a measure of total inflation within an economy, excluding commodities such as food and energy prices while core inflation includes food and energy items
2. Core inflation presents a picture of long term inflation while Headline inflation may not present an accurate picture of an economy's inflationary trend.  Which of the above statement is/are NOT correct? 
1. Only 1
2. Only 2
3. Both
4. None
Answer:  1
Headline inflation includes food and energy prices and core inflation excludes them.

12. Minimum Support Prices (MSP) are granted by government so that it doesn't affect the farmers. Consider the following
1.  The maximum number of items for which MSP is given is cereals
2. MSP is determined by Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP) under Ministry of Consumer Affairs
Which of the above is/are Correct? 
1. Only 1
2. Only 2
3. Both
4. None
Answer:  4
Oilseeds (8) - groundnut, rapeseed/mustard, toria, soyabean, sunflower seed, sesamum, safflower seed and nigerseed.
And CAPC comes under Ministry of Agriculture

13. India has gifted a vintage 'Dakota' Aircraft to
1. Pakistan
2. Bangladesh
3. Bhutan
4. Nepal
Answer:  2

14. Consider the following
1. Oxidation
2. Hydration
3. Carbonation
4. Hydrolysis
5. Reduction
Which of the above are parts of chemical weathering? 
1. 1, 3 and 5
2. 2, 4 and 5
3. 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5
4. 1, 3 and 4
Answer:  4
Chemical weathering- Carbonation, Oxidation and Hydrolysis There are different types of chemical weathering, the most important are:
Solution - removal of rock in solution by acidic rainwater. In particular, limestone is weathered by rainwater containing dissolved CO2, (this process is sometimes called carbonation).
Hydrolysis - the breakdown of rock by acidic water to produce clay and soluble salts. 
Oxidation - the breakdown of rock by oxygen and water, often giving iron-rich rocks a rustycoloured weathered surface. 

15. Consider the following regarding Li-ion Batteries
1. Lithium-ion batteries, unlike other rechargeable batteries, have a potentially hazardous pressurised flammable electrolyte.
2. Li-ion batteries contain less toxic metals than other types of batteries which may contain lead or cadmium.
3. The waste of Li-ion Batteries is generally categorized as non-hazardous waste.
Which of the above statement is/are NOT correct? 
1. 1, 2 and 3
2. 2 and 3
3. 1 and 2
4. All correct
Answer:  4
Li-ion batteries are less toxic. There were several incidences of fire in Boeing where these batteries were used. So statement 1 is also correct. Since, they have less toxic ingredients/metals, so their waste is considered as Non-hazardous. 
