1. Consider the following statements regarding "Dual system of Administration" in Bengal.
1. In this system of administration, Nawab of Bengal was mere administrator without powers.
2. "Diwani" functions were exercised by the company.
3. "Nizamat" functions were exercised by the Nawab of Bengal.
Which of the above statements is/are correct? 
1. 1 and 2 only
2. 1 and 3 only
3. 2 and 3 only
4. All the above
Answer: (1)
Explanation:
As the Diwan, the Company directly collected its revenues, while through the right to nominate the deputy subahdar, It controlled the Nizamat.  Nizamat functions are related to military defence, police and administration of criminal justice.  Diwani functions are related to revenue affairs and administration of civil justice. 

2. Which of the following statements regarding Santhal rebellion is/are correct?
1. Santhals main grouse was against money lenders and zamindars only.
2. Though rebellion was suppressed with great brutality, government tried pacification by creation of separate district of SanthalParagana.
3. Slogan of Santhals during the rebellion was "to be the ryots of Her Majesty the Queen and of Her only".
Select the correct code from the below. 
1. 2 and 3 only
2. 2 only
3. 1 and 2 only
4. 1 and 3 only
Answer: (2)
Explanation: 
Santhals made a determined attempt to expel the outsiders - The "dikus" - and proclaimed the complete annihilation of the alien regime.  The slogan was raised by the leaders of Pabna revolt (1878-1883).

3.  Consider the following statements regarding "Ryotwari system".
1. It removed the 'intermediaries' from the system of revenue collection.
2. The settlement was based on the revenue paying capacity of the ryots.
3. Revenue rates were revised every 3 rd year.
4. Ryotwari system primarily introduced in Deccan and Bombay.
Which of the above statements is/are correct? 
1. 2, 3 and 4 only
2. 1, 3 and 4 only
3. 1 and 4 only
4. 1, 2 and 4 only
Answer: (4)
Explanation:
The revenue system that was introduced in the Bombay Deccan came to be known as the ryotwari settlement. Unlike the Bengal system, the revenue was directly settled with the ryot.  The average income from different types of soil was estimated, the revenue-paying capacity of the ryot was assessed and a proportion of it fixed as the share of the state. The lands were resurveyed every 30 years and the revenue rates increased. Therefore the revenue demand was no longer permanent.

4. Which of the following is true regarding 1857 revolt?
1. There was complete unity between Hindus and Muslims.
2. Revolt was spread to all over India.
3. Rebels also attacked the money lenders and the rich.
4. Rebels wanted to restore the pre-British world of eighteenth century.
Select the correct code from the below.
1. 1 and 4 only
2. 1, 3 and 4 only
3. 3 and 4 only
4. 2 and 3 only
Answer: (2)
Explanation:
Much of the strength of 1857 revolt lay in Hindu-Muslim unity. The Hindu and the Muslim rebels and sepoys respected each other's sentiments.  Besides state machineries, rebels also attacked money lenders and rich. They took advantage of revolt to destroy moneylenders account books and record of debts.  Revolt did not spread to south India and most of eastern and western India because these regions had repeatedly rebelled earlier.  Rebels wanted to restore the pre-British world of eighteenth century. This was evident from the fact that rebels directly marched to Delhi from Meerut and appealed to Mughal emperor to accept the leadership of the revolt. 

5.   "Subsidiary Alliance (1798)" was one of the methods used by the British to bring as many India states as possible under their control. Which one of the following is/are correct regarding subsidiary alliance?
1. It provided for permanent stationing of British force within the Princely state.
2. Indian ruler could negotiate with any other Indian ruler without consulting governor general.
3. British took responsibility to protect Indian ruler from external and internal threats.
4. It was introduced by Lord Dalhousie.
Select the correct code from the below.
1. 1 and 3 only
2. 1, 2 and 3 only
3. 2, 3 and 4 only
4. All the above
Answer: (1)
Explanation:
Indian ruler could not negotiate with any other Indian ruler without consulting governor general. It was introduced by Lord Wellesley.

6. Real improvement in transportation in British India came with the advent of railways.  Which of the following statements is NOT true regarding development of railways in India?
1. Nearly entire amount of investment was provided by the British investor.
2. Planning and construction of railways and their management were done by keeping in view of political and economic development of India.
3. Railway rates were fixed in a manner to discriminate against internal movement of goods.
4. Government of India guaranteed fixed return on the capital invested.
Answer: (2)
Planning and construction of railways and their management were not done by keeping in view of political and economic development of India, but that of England.

7. Consider the following statements regarding "permanent settlement".
Statement I:Zamindars were made owners of entire land in their zamindaris.
Statement II:Their right of ownership was non-hereditary and non-transferable.
Which of the above is/are correct?
1. Statement I only
2. Statement II only
3. Both Statement I and Statement II
4. Neither Statement I nor Statement II
Answer: (1)
Their right of ownership was hereditary and transferable.

8. Which of the following Acts incorporated principle of encouraging learned Indians and promoting the knowledge of modern sciences in the country? 
1. Charter Act of 1813
2. Charter Act of 1833
3. Charter Act of 1853
4. Indian councils Act of 1861
Answer: (1)

9. Which of the following is not associated with Lord Dalhousie?
1. Development of Railways
2. Widow remarriage Act
3. Doctrine of Lapse
4. Establishment of universities at Bombay, Calcutta and Madras
Answer: (4)
Explanation:
Universities at Bombay, Calcutta and Madras were established during Lord Canning.

10. Which of the following is not one of the ideas of Raja RammohanRoy?
1. He preached monotheism.
2. He incorporated the best teachings of other religions.
3. His solution to sati or for the living widows was widow remarriage.
4. He laid stress on India's need for western scientific knowledge.
Answer: (3)
His solution to sati or for the living widows was not widow marriage but ascetic widowhood.

11. Which of the following measures will have positive impact on Inflation? 
1 Reduction in unnecessary expenditure of Government
2 Increase in savings of the people
3 Surplus budgets
4 Halt in repayment of public debt
Select the correct codes
1. 1, 2 and 4
2. 2, 3 and 4
3. 1, 3 and 4
4. All
Answer:  4
The government should reduce unnecessary expenditure on non-development activities in
order to curb inflation. This will also put a check on private expenditure which is dependent
upon government demand for goods and services. But it is not easy to cut government
expenditure. Though this measure is always welcome but it becomes difficult to distinguish
between essential and non-essential expenditure. Therefore, this measure should be
supplemented by taxation.
Another measure is to increase savings on the part of the people. This will tend to reduce
disposable income with the people, and hence personal consumption expenditure. But due to
the rising cost of living, people are not in a position to save much voluntarily.
An important measure is to adopt anti-inflationary budgetary policy. For this purpose, the
government should give up deficit financing and instead have surplus budgets. It means
collecting more in revenues and spending less.
At the same time, it should stop repayment of public debt and postpone it to some future date
till inflationary pressures are controlled within the economy. Instead, the government should
borrow more to reduce money supply with the public.