
INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK PRELIMINARY EXAM - 2014


INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST – BONUS TEST GENERAL STUDIES
PAPER-I

Time Allowed: One Hour                                                                    Maximum Marks: 80


INSTRUCTIONS
1.   IMMEDITELY AFTER THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE EXAMINATION, YOU SHOULD
CHECK  THAT  THIS  TEST  BOOKLET  DOES  NOT  HAVE  ANY  UNPRINTED  OR  TORN  OR MISSING PAGES OR ITEMS, ETC. IF SO, GET IT REPLACED BY A COMPLETE TEST BOOKLET.
2.  You have to enter your Roll Number on the Test I Booklet in the Box provided alongside. DO NOT write anything else on the Test Booklet.

4.  This Test Booklet contains 40 items (questions). Each item is printed only in English. Each item comprises four responses (answers). You will select the response which you want to mark on the Answer Sheet. In case you feel that there is more than one correct response, mark the response which you consider the best. In any case, choose ONLY ONE response for each item.
5.  You have to mark all your responses ONLY on the separate Answer Sheet provided. See directions in the
Answer Sheet.
6.  All items carry equal marks.

7.  Before you proceed to mark in the Answer Sheet the response to various items in the Test Booklet, you have to fill in some particulars in the Answer Sheet as per instructions sent to you with your Admission Certificate.

8.  After you have completed filling in all your responses on the Answer Sheet and the examination has concluded, you should hand over to the Invigilator only the Answer Sheet. You are permitted to take away with you the Test Booklet.

9.  Sheets for rough work are appended in the Test Booklet at the end.
10.  Penalty for wrong answers :
THERE WILL BE PENALTY FOR WRONG ANSWERS MARKED BY A CANDIDATE IN THE OBJECTIVE TYPE QUESTION PAPERS.
(i)   There are four alternatives for the answer to every question. For each question for which a wrong answer has been given by the candidate, one-third of the marks assigned to that question will be deducted as penalty.
(ii)   If a candidate gives more than one answer, it will be treated as a wrong answer even if one of the given answers happens to be correct and there will be same penalty as above to that question.
(iii)    If a question is left blank, i.e., no answer is given by the candidate, there will be no penalty for that question.


http://insightsonindia.com


INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST SERIES FOR CIVIL SERVICES PRELIMINARY EXAM 2014





http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                        Page 1

1.  Consider the following statements with reference to urban settlements

1.  Conurbation is  a  large   area  of urban development that resulted  from  the  merging of originally separate towns  or cities.
2. Megalapolis  is the union of conurbations
3.  The city is  the physical form of
the highest and most complex type of associative life
4. In India there are 54 urban agglomerations          with         a
population of 1 million or more as of 2011 against 35 in 2001
5.  According to census 2011, about
40% of India's  population lives in cities and towns

Which  of the statements  given above is/are correct?

a.   1,2 and 5 Only
b.  1,2,3 and 5 Only c.  2,3,4 and 5 Only d.  1,2,3 and 4 Only

2.   Consider the following statements,

1.  It is a state of animal dormancy, similar                 to hibernation, characterized by inactivity and a lowered metabolic rate, that  is entered in response to high temperatures and arid conditions.
2.   Invertebrate     and    vertebrate
animals are known to enter this state to avoid damage from high temperatures   and   the    risk of desiccation.
3.  Even some fish species are slip into dormancy to avoid heat

The above statements  refer to which of the following process?

a.   Hibernation b.  Diapause
c.  Aestivation
d.  None of the above

3. With   reference  to  ecosystem, consider the following statements

1.  Productivity  is  defined as the amount of  biomass  or  organic matter  produced per unit area over  a   time  period by  plants during photosynthesis.
2.   The rate of biomass production in    an   ecosystem   is    called
Primary production
3.  Gross  primary productivity of an ecosystem is  the rate of production of organic matter during photosynthesis.

Which  of the statements  given above is/are incorrect?

a.   1 and 2 b.  1 and 3 c.  2 and 3 d.  None

4. With     reference    to    Bacillus thuringiensis,  consider  the following statements

1. Some strains of this bacteria produce proteins that kill certain insects such as lepidopterans (tobacco budworm,              armyworm),

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                             Page 2
coleopterans (beetles) and dipterans (flies, mosquitoes).
2.    B. thuringiensis  forms  protein crystals  during a  particular phase of  their  growth.  These crystals contain a  toxic insecticidal protein
3.  The  Bt toxin  protein exist  as inactive protoxins  but once an
insect ingest the inactive toxin, it  is  converted into  an active form of toxin due to the alkaline pH  of  the gut  which solubilise the crystals.

Which  of the statements  given above is/are incorrect?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  1 and 3 Only d.  None

5.  Which  of the following pair is/are incorrectly matched?

1. Ports  of   Call:   These  are the ports  which  originally developed as calling points on main sea routes where ships used to anchor for refueling, watering  and taking food items. Later on,  they developed into commercial ports. Aden, Honolulu  and Singapore are good examples.
2.  Packet  Station: These are also known  as  ferry  ports.  These
packet stations  are  exclusively
concerned with the transportation of passengers and mail across water bodies covering short distances. These stations occur in pairs located in
such a  way that they face each other across the water body, e.g. Dover in England and Calais  in France across the English Channel.
3.  Entrepot Ports: These are deep water ports built away from the
actual ports.  These  serve  the parent ports by receiving those ships  which  are unable to approach them  due  to  their large  size. Classic combination, for example, is  Athens  and its
Entreport Piraeus in Greece.
4. Out Ports: These are collection centres  where  the  goods   are
brought  from  different countries for export. Singapore is an out port for Asia. Rotterdam for  Europe, and Copenhagen    for    the    Baltic
region.

Select  the correct  answer using the codes below.

a.   3 and 4 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  1 and 4 Only d.  All

6.  Consider the following statements about biomes


1.   An ecosystem has
many biotopes and   a   biome  is  a major habitat type.
2.   Biotope is   an  area    of   uniform
environmental conditions providing a  living place for a specific                           assemblage of plants and animals.
3.  Pampas  in  Africa   is a  temperate
grassland biome

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                             Page 3
Which  of the statements  given above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  1 Only
d.  All Three

7. With  reference to international waterways, consider the following statements

1.  The Mississippi-Ohio waterway connects the interior part of U.S.A.  with the California Bay in the south
2. The  Rhine  waterway flows through    France        and   the
Netherlands

Which  of the statements  given above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None

8.  With  reference to  specific  places (trophic levels) occupied by organisms in a food chain, consider the following statements


1.  Producers belong to  the  first trophic level
2.   Secondary  consumers belong to the third trophic level
3. Cow      occupies     secondary trophic level
4.  Birds are secondary consumers

Which  of the statements  given above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only
b.  1,2 and 3 Only c.  2,3 and 4 Only d.  All


9.  Consider the following definitions related to processes  in  an ecosystem


1. The    entire   sequence   of communities that successively change in a given area are called sere
2. The    gradual     and   fairly predictable   change   in    the
species composition of a  given
area       is      called     ecological succession.
3.  Changes such  as  composition and structure  of  communities lead finally to a community that is in near equilibrium with the environment  and that is called a climax community.

Which  of the statements  given above is/are incorrect?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  1,2 and 3
c.  2 and 3 Only d.  None

10. Consider the following statements

1.  Light  is   important for  many species in that they use the diurnal and seasonal variations in  light intensity  and duration (photoperiod)  as  cues  for timing their foraging, reproductive and migratory activities.
2.   Many plants are dependent on sunlight      to      meet      their

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                             Page 4
photoperiodic requirement for flowering.
3. The spectral quality of solar radiation is  important for animal life.
4.  Autotrophs require sunlight to survive

Which  of the statements  given above is/are not directly related to the process  of photosynthesis?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  1 and 3 Only
c.  1,2 and 3 Only d.  3 and 4 Only

11. Among two interacting species, if one  species  is  benefited and the other is  neither harmed nor benefited, this  type of interaction is called as

1.   Amensalism
2.   Competition
3.  Commensalism
4.  Mutualism

12. Consider the following statements about trophic levels in food chain


1.   Each trophic level has a certain mass of living material  at a particular time called as the standing crop.
2.   Only 10 per cent of the energy is  transferred to  each trophic level from the lower trophic level.
3.  Organisms  at each trophic level depend on those at  the lower trophic  level  for  their  energy
demands.
Which  of the statements  given above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.  1 and 2 Only c.  2 and 3 Only d.  All Three


13. With   reference  to  water  as  an important factor in maintaining balance in  ecology,  consider  the following statements


1.   The productivity and distribution of plants is  heavily dependent  on water.
2.   Some organisms  are tolerant of a
wide   range  of   salinities.   Such organisms are called as euryhalines
3.  Pure water has a pH very close to
7.
4.  Increase  in  ocean water pH  has been attributed to their bleaching in many parts of the world

Which    of   the   statements    given   is/are incorrect?

a.   3 Only b.  4 Only c.  2 Only d.  None

14. With     reference    to    types    of settlements, consider the following statements

1. Compact      or      Nucleated settlements are those in which large number of houses are built very close to each other. Such settlements develop along river valleys and in fertile plains. Communities are closely knit and share common occupations.

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                             Page 5
2.   Dispersed Settlements: In these settlements, houses  are spaced far apart and often interspersed with  fields.  A  cultural feature such as a place of worship or a market, binds  the  settlement together.
3. Rectangular   pattern:   Such patterns  of   rural  settlements
develop around lakes, tanks and sometimes the village is planned in such a  way that  the central part remains open and  is  used for keeping the animals to protect them from wild animals.

Which  of the statements  given above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only
c.  1 and 2 Only d.  All Three

15. Consider the following statements with reference to productivity

1.  The  productivity of  oceans is far more than the land
2.   Primary productivity  depends on the plant species inhabiting a particular area
3. In   Oceans,   phytoplanktons contribute more towards primary production

Which  of the statements  given above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  None
d.  2 and 3 Only
16. Consider the following statements about the intestinal flora


1. The intestinal microflora is  a complex  ecosystem  containing over 400 bacterial species.
2.   The  large  intestine  hosts  several kinds   of bacteria that   deal  with molecules the human body is  not able to break down itself.
3.  The flora also plays a  role in fiber digestion  and synthesizes  certain vitamins.
4.  Symbiosis is at work in intestine
5. The  intestinal  microflora  may prevent infection by interfering with pathogens.

Which    of   the   above  statements   is/are incorrect?

a.   5 Only b.  3 Only
c.  Both 3 and 5 d.  None


17. With  reference to  successions  in ecosystem, consider the following statements


1.  All  succession  whether taking place in water or on land, proceeds to a similar climax community – the mesic.
2.   Primary    succession   is   a   very slow process.
3.  Lichens  are pioneer species i.e.
integral     part    of    secondary succession

Which  of the statements  given above is/are correct?

a.   2 and 3 Only b.  1 and 3 Only

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                             Page 6
c.  None
d.  1 and 2 Only


18. Consider the following statements with reference to food chains


1.  In  an  aquatic ecosystem,  the detritus food chain is the major conduit for energy flow
2.   In  a    terrestrial  ecosystem,  a much larger fraction of energy flows through Grazing Food Chain than through the detritus food chain
3.  Natural interconnection of food chains make it a food web
4.  The detritus food chain (DFC)
begins with dead organic matter

Which  of the statements  given above is/are incorrect?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.  1 and 2 Only
c.  1,2, and 4 Only d.  None

19. In many species of fig trees, there is  a   tight one-to-one relationship with the pollinator species of wasp. This relationship can be called as

a.   Commensalism b.  Mutualism
c.  Parasitism
d.  None of the above

20. Consider the following statements about Small scale manufacturing,

1. It    is    distinguished   from household industries by its production  techniques  and place    of     manufacture   (a
workshop outside the home/cottage of the producer).
2.    This  type  of   manufacturing uses local raw material,  simple power-driven machines and semi-skilled labour.
3. It provides employment and raises local purchasing power

Which  of the statements  given above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  1 and 3 Only d.  All



21. Co-extinction  is  a  major cause of biodiversity loss. With reference to this, consider the following statements


1. When   a    species   becomes extinct,  the  plant and  animal species associated with it in an obligatory way also  become extinct.
2.   An  example is  the  case of  a coevolved         plant-pollinator
mutualism where extinction of one invariably leads to  the extinction of the other.
3. Coextinction     is     especially common     when     a keystone species goes extinct.
4.  A keystone                     species is
a species that             has           a disproportionately large effect on  its  environment relative to its abundance.

Which  of the statements  given above is/are correct?


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                             Page 7
a.   All four
b.  2,3 and 4 Only c.  1,2 and 3 Only d.  1,2 and 4 Only


22. With    reference  to   pyramid  of energy in  an ecosystem,  consider the following statements


1.  Pyramid of energy is not always upright, can sometimes be inverted in special cases
2. When  energy flows  from a particular  trophic  level to  the next trophic level, some energy is  always lost  as  heat  at  each step

Which    of   the   above  statements   is/are correct?
3.  Cotton  textile   mill   sector  is highly capital intensive and produces fine clothes in bulk.
4.  The  textile  industry continues to be the second largest employment generating   sector in India

Which  of the statements  given above is/are correct?

a.   1,2 and 3 b.  2,3 and 4
c.  1,2,3 and 4 d.  1,3 and 4

24. With    reference   to   Polymerase Chain Reaction, consider the following statements

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None

23. With  reference to Cotton  textile industry, consider the following statements

1. Handloom sector is  labour- intensive and provides employment to semi-skilled workers.  It  requires  small capital investment. This sector involves spinning, weaving and finishing of the fabrics.
2. The      powerloom      sector introduces machines and becomes  less  labour intensive and the volume of production increases.
1. In this reaction, multiple copies of the gene (or DNA) of interest is  synthesised in vitro using two sets of primers (small chemically synthesised oligonucleotides that  are complementary to the regions of DNA) and the enzyme DNA polymerase.
2.   It  was  developed in  1983
by Kary Mullis
3.  The         method        relies on thermal                cycling, consisting of cycles of repeated heating and cooling of   the   reaction  for DNA melting and enzymatic replic ation of the DNA.

Which    of   the   above  statements   is/are correct?

a.   2 and 3 Only b.  All three
c.  1 and 2 Only

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                             Page 8
d.  1 and 3 Only

25. Very   small   animals  are    rarely found in polar regions. This is because

1. Since small animals have a smaller  surface area relative to their volume, they tend to lose body heat  very fast when it is cold outside
2.   In cold conditions, they have to expend much energy to generate    body   heat    through
metabolism  and  this   is   not
possible for small animals owing to their size

Which  of the statements  given above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None

26. With      reference     to     artificial recombinant DNA  technology, consider the following statements


1. Plasmid is  an autonomously replicating circular extra- chromosomal DNA  found in microorganisms
2. These plasmid DNA  act as vectors to transfer the piece of DNA attached to it
3.  DNA  molecules are cut by an
enzyme called ligase




Which  of the statements  given above is/are correct?
a.   1 Only
b.  1 and 2 Only c.  3 Only
d.  2 and 3 Only

27. Consider the following statements with reference to homeostasis

1.  All  birds and mammals,  and a very few lower vertebrate  and invertebrate species are capable of thermoregulation and osmoregulation to maintain homeostasis
2.   Sweating  profusely is a form of regulating body temperature
3.  Shivering     is     nothing     but
conforming by the body to adjust to the external temperature
4.  Homeostasis is  the property of a  system in which variables are regulated so  that  internal conditions remain stable and relatively constant

Which  of the statements  given above is/are correct?

a.   1,2 and 3 Only b.  1,2 and 4 Only c.  1,3 and 4 Only d.  All

28. Temperature       is       the      most ecologically relevant environmental factor. With  reference to temperature  and ecology, consider the following statements


1.   Temperature  is important because it  affects the kinetics  of enzymes and through it the basal metabolism,  activity   and  other

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                             Page 9
physiological   functions    of    the organism
2.   The  primary organ responsible  for regulating        metabolism         is the hypothalamus and in  turn  it regulates body temperature
3.  Enzymes  are denatured or digested at   extreme  temperatures, this  is one of the reasons why polar bear
can’t thrive in Congo Basin
4.  A  few organisms can tolerate and thrive in  a  wide  range of temperatures. They  are called eurythermal.

Which  of the statements  given above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  1 and 4 Only c.  2 and 3Only d.  All Four

29. Indian cormorant is a

a.   It is a bird found in inland rivers or   large    wetlands   of peninsular India
b.  It is a rat species found in most
Indian wetlands
c.  It is  an invasive plant species found in most wetlands of India
d.  None of the above

30. Consider the following statements with reference to population density

1.  Both  natality and  emigration cause increase in population density
2. Mortality   and  immigration cause  decrease in   population density
3.  According to 2011 census, Bihar has  higher  population density than West Bengal

Which  of the statements  given above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.  3 Only
c.  1 and 2 Only d.  All three

31. Consider the following statements with reference to parasites

1. Parasites that  feed on  the external surface of the host organism are called ectoparasites
2.   Cuscuta,  a  parasitic plant, is an ectoparasite
3. The    female   mosquito   is considered as a prominent ectoparasite dependent on humans

Which    of   the   above  statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  1 and 2 Only d.  All.

32. With  reference to  decomposition in an ecosystem, consider the following statements

1.   Detritivores  function  through the process catabolism
2.   Humus  is   highly  resistant  to
microbial action and undergoes decomposition at  an extremely slow rate


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                          Page 10
3. Decomposition  is  largely an oxygen-requiring process.

Which  of the statements  given above is/are incorrect?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  1 and 3 Only c.   3 Only
d.  None

33. The pyramid of biomass in sea  is also generally inverted because,


a.   Biomass of  fishes  far  exceeds that of phytoplankton
b.  Biomass of zooplankton is  less than phytoplankton
c.  Biomass of  fishes  is  less  than that of phytoplankton
d.  None of the above

34. Soil    parameters  such    as   pH, mineral composition and topography determine to  a   large extent the vegetation in any area. With   reference to  this,  consider the following statements

1.   Soil pH specifically affects plant nutrient availability                by controlling the chemical forms of the nutrient
2.   The  optimum  pH   range for most plants is  between 5.5 and
7.0
3.  Aluminium  contributes to soil alkalinity

Which  of the statements  given above is/are incorrect?

a.   3 Only b.  2 Only
c.  1 Only d.  None

35. Consider the following statements with reference to diapauses

1.   It is  the delay in development in  response to regularly and recurring periods of adverse environmental conditions.
2.   Under unfavourable  conditions many  zooplankton species  in lakes and ponds are  known to enter   diapause,  a     stage    of
suspended development.
3.  In insects diapauses is not at all observed as they adapt themselves to different environments through other mechanisms

Which  of the statements  given above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  2 Only
d.  All

36. Consider the following statements

1.  A   slow   growing   animal  like the elephant could    reach    an enormous  population if  there were unlimited resources for its growth in its habitat
2.   No population of any species in nature has its disposal unlimited resources to permit exponential growth
3.  The carrying       capacity of      a
biological species in
an environment is                  the maximum  population size  of


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                          Page 11
the species  that  the environment can sustain indefinitely,         given          the food, habitat, water and     other necessities available in the environment.
4. A  population growing  in  a habitat with  limited  resources reaches a  final stage  when the
population density reaches the carrying capacity

Which  of the statements  given above is/are incorrect?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  2,3 and 4
d.  None

37. With     reference    to     ‘resource partitioning’ between competing species, consider the following statements

1.   It  concurs   with   the  Gause’s
‘Competitive Exclusion Principle’ which states that two closely  related species competing for the same resources cannot co-exist indefinitely and the competitively inferior  one will be eliminated eventually.
2.   According to it, if two species compete for the same resource,
they  could  avoid competition by choosing, for instance, different times  for  feeding or different foraging patterns.

Which of the above statements is correct?

a.   1 Only
b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None

38. Tropical  environments have large biodiversity. Plausible reasons are


1. Tropical environments, unlike temperate ones,  are more seasonal, relatively less  constant and  unpredictable. Such environments promote niche specialisation  and lead to a greater species diversity
2. There is more solar energy available  in  the tropics,  which contributes to higher productivity; this in turn might contribute indirectly to greater diversity
3. Speciation   is    generally      a function of time, unlike temperate regions subjected  to frequent glaciations in the past,
tropical latitudes have remained relatively undisturbed for millions of years and thus, had a long evolutionary time for species diversification.

Which   of  the  statements   given above is/are incorrect?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.  1 Only
c.  3 Only
d.  None

39. Consider the following statements about animal adaptations

1.   Allen’s                rule               is an ecogeographic  principle  that states that within a broadly distributed      taxonomic clade,

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                          Page 12
populations and species  of larger  size  are found in  colder environments, and species of smaller size are found in warmer regions.
2.   Bergmann's                            rule is
an ecogeographic  principle  that that endotherms  from      colder climates usually have shorter limbs (or appendages)  than the equivalent animals from warmer climates.
3.   Mammals from colder climates generally have shorter ears and
limbs to minimise heat loss.
Which  of the statements  given above is/are incorrect?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  1 and 3 Only c.  2 Only
d.  None

40. Altitude  sickness,  experienced in high altitude regions, is which type of adaptation?

a.   Morphological b.  Behavioural
c.  Physiological
d.  None of the above













































http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                          Page 13
