
INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK PRELIMINARY EXAM - 2014


INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST - 2

GENERAL STUDIES

PAPER-I

Time Allowed: Two Hours                                                                               Maximum Marks: 200


INSTRUCTIONS
1.   IMMEDIATELY AFTER THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE EXAMINATION, YOU SHOULD
CHECK  THAT  THIS  TEST  BOOKLET  DOES  NOT  HAVE  ANY  UNPRINTED  OR  TORN  OR MISSING PAGES OR ITEMS, ETC. IF SO, GET IT REPLACED BY A COMPLETE TEST BOOKLET.
2.  You have to enter your Roll Number on the Test I Booklet in the Box provided alongside. DO NOT write anything else on the Test Booklet.

4.  This Test Booklet contains 100 items (questions). Each item is printed only in  English. Each item comprises four responses (answers). You will select the response which you want to mark on the Answer Sheet. In case you feel that there is more than one correct response, mark the response which you consider the best. In any case, choose ONLY ONE response for each item.
5.  You have to mark all your responses ONLY on the separate Answer Sheet provided.  See directions in the
Answer Sheet.
6.  All items carry equal marks.

7.  Before you proceed to mark in the Answer Sheet the response to various items in the Test Booklet, you have to fill in some particulars in the Answer Sheet as per instructions sent to you with your Admission Certificate.

8.  After you have completed filling in all your responses on the Answer Sheet and the examination has concluded, you should hand over to the Invigilator only the Answer Sheet. You are permitted to take away with you the Test Booklet.

9.  Sheets for rough work are appended in the Test Booklet at the end.
10.  Penalty for wrong answers :
THERE WILL BE PENALTY FOR WRONG ANSWERS MARKED BY A CANDIDATE IN THE OBJECTIVE TYPE QUESTION PAPERS.
i.       There are four alternatives for the answer to every question. For each question for which a wrong answer has been given by the candidate, one-third of the marks assigned to that question will be deducted as penalty.
ii.       If a candidate gives more than one answer, it will be treated as a wrong answer even if one of the given answers happens to be correct and there will be same penalty as above to that question.
iii.       If a question is left blank, i.e., no answer is given by the candidate, there will be no penalty for that question.


http://insightsonindia.com


INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST SERIES FOR CIVIL SERVICES PRELIMINARY EXAM 2014





http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                        Page 1


1.     Consider  the following statements on fish farming


1.    Catla, Rohu and Mrigal  are famous marine fish  breeds of high economic value which  are farmed   in  sea water
2.    Finned fishes  like  mullets,
bhetki, and pearl spots are farmed in freshwater farms

Which   of  the  statements  given  above is/are correct?

a.    1 Only b.  2 Only c.   Both
d.  None

2.      On the basis of landmark judgments passed by the Supreme Court, the Election Commission  of  India  came up with  the following mandates:

1.     Every candidate has to make  a legal declaration, giving  full  details  of serious criminal cases pending against the candidate
2.     Details of the assets and liabilities of  the  candidate and his  or  her
family
3.   Education qualifications was not mandatory
4.    The  information furnished by the candidates has to be confidential.
5.    The   above mandates are   in  the spirit of Article 19.

Which of the statements is/are correct?

a.    1, 2 and 5 b.  1, 2 and 3
c.   1, 2, 3 and 4
d.  1, 2, 3, 4 and 5
3. Consider the following statements about
‘resource’

1.  Potential   resources  are  those resources whose quantity is known. These  resources are being  used in the present.

2.     Actual resources  are those whose entire quantity may not be known and these  are not  being  used  at present. These  resources could be used in the future.

3. Resources    that    are   found everywhere like the air we breathe, are ubiquitous.

Which   of  the  above statements is/are correct?

a.    1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.   3 Only
d.  1,2 and 3

4.      Consider the following statements

1.   Lord  Hastings, Governor  General of India  during 1813-23,  initiated a new policy of “paramountcy”. Now the Company claimed that  its authority was  paramount or supreme, hence its power was greater than that of Indian states.
2.    Rani    Channamma   of     Kitoor
(Karnataka)  took to  arms against this  policy  and led an anti-British resistance movement

Which   of  the  statements  given  above is/are correct?

a.    1 Only b.  2 Only c.   Both
d.  None



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                        Page 2
5.      Social Justice  is an ideal cherished by the founding fathers of the Indian Constitution. With regard to this, the Government of India had appointed Mandal Commission.
1.   Mandal Commision  was asked to determine the  criteria  to  identify the socially and educationally backward classes and the status of minorities in India.
2.    One of the recommendations  was that 27 percentages  of government jobs be reserved for the socially and educationally  backward classes and minorities.
3.   In  the Indira Sawhney and others Vs Union of India case, it was declared that  the governments order with  respect  to  reservation for   other  backward classes   was invalid.

Which of the statements is/are incorrect?

a.    1 Only b.  3 Only
c.   1, 2 and 3 d.  None

6.    Consider  the following statements about  James Mill,
1.  Suggested that the British should conquer all the territories in India to  ensure  the  enlightenment and happiness of the Indian people.
2.    Mill thought that all Asian societies were at a lower level of civilization than Europe.
3. He published a  massive three- volume work, A History of British India  in  which  he divided Indian history into three periods – Hindu, Muslim and British.

Which   of  the  above statement is/ are correct?

a.    1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   All Three
d.  None of them



7.   With  regard  to cropping  patterns, consider the following statements
1.   Crop   rotation  is   growing two or more crops simultaneously on the same piece of land,
2.   Inter-cropping     is   growing
two or more crops simultaneously on the same field in a definite pattern
3.   The   growing   of  different crops on a piece of land in a pre-planned succession  is known as mixed cropping.

Which   of  the  statements  given  above is/are correct?

a.    1 Only
b.  2 and 3 Only c.   2 Only
d.  All Three




8.   Which   of  the  following  diseases is/are caused by virus?
1.    Hepatitis-B
2.    Polio
3.   Measles
4.   Cholera
5.   Chicken Pox
Answer using the codes given below a.    1,2 and 4 Only
b.   1,3 and 4 Only c.   2,3 and 4 Only
d.  1,2,3 and 5 Only

9.   According  the parliamentary  form of  Government adopted in  India, which  of the following statements are correct?

1. The  Parliament  is  the  final authority for making laws.

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                        Page 3
2.    The  Parliament control over those who run the government  is  direct and full.
3.   The    Parliament   is    the   highest forum of discussion and debate on public issues and national policy.
4.   The   Parliament   of   India   enjoys
absolute   power   and   can   seek information  about any matter.

Select the correct answer using the codes given below

a.    1 and 3 b.  3 Only
c.   1, 2 and 3
d.  1, 2, 3 and 4



10.  Consider  the following statements with respect to the powers of the Rajya Sabha:

1.   Any   ordinary  law  needs  to  be passed by both the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha. But if there is a difference  between  the  two Houses, the final decision is  taken by Lok Sabha.
2.   Once the Lok Sabha passes the budget of the government or any other money related law, the Rajya Sabha cannot reject it.
3.   The Rajya Sabha has power to pass motion  of   no-confidence  against the Government.

Which of the statements is/are incorrect?

a.    2 Only b.  1 and 3
c.   1, 2 and 3
d.  None



11.   Read   carefully   the    following statements,

1.   The    population  pyramid   of   a country in which  birth and death rates both are high is broad  at the
base and rapidly narrows towards the top.

2.    In  countries  where    death rates (especially     amongst the very young) are decreasing, the pyramid is broad in the younger  age groups

Which   of  the  statements above   is/are correct?

a.    1 Only b.  2 Only c.   Both
d.  None




12.  Consider  the following statements with reference to the formation of Indian subcontinent


1.   One  of  the oldest landmasses, the Peninsula part, was a part  of the Gondwanaland.
2.    The   Gondwanaland included
India, Australia, South Africa, Arabian Peninsula,  Africa  and South America as one single land mass
3.   The collision  of Indi-Australian
plate with  the  Eurasian plate resulted in the formation of the Himalayas

Which   of  the  statements  given  above is/are correct?

a.    1 and 2 Only b.  1 and 3 Only c.   2 and 3 Only d.  All Three


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                        Page 4
13.  Which  of the following not correct about East India Company at 1600

a.  In 1600, the East India   Company acquired a charter  from the ruler of England
b.  No other trading  group in England
could compete with the East India
Company.
c.   The Company did not have to fear competition from other English trading companies.
d.  None of them



14. Consider  the following statements about East India Company

1.    The first English factory was set up on the banks of the river Hugli in
1651.
2.    This  was the base from which the Company’s traders, known at  that time as “factors”,

Which   of  the  above statement is/ are correct?

a.    1 only b.  2  only c.   Both
d.  None




15.  Carbon dioxide (CO2) is  the best extinguisher. Because,
1.     CO2,     being     heavier    than
oxygen, covers  the fire  like  a blanket. Since  the contact between the fuel and oxygen is cut off, the fire is controlled.
2.     The added advantage of CO2 is
that  in most cases it does not harm the electrical equipment.

Which   of  the  statements  given  above is/are correct?
a.    1 Only b.  2 Only c.   Both
d.  None


16. With reference to problems caused by deforestation, consider  the following statements,
1. Deforestation      is       a contributor            to global warming, and is often cited as one of the major causes of the enhanced greenhouse effect.
2.    Deforestation  reduces  soil
cohesion,   so   that erosion, flooding
and landslides ensue.
3.   Deforestation on  a   human scale results in decline in biodiversity, and     on      a natural global scale is known to cause the extinction of many species.
4.   Ground   water  level   also
gets lowered.
5.   In deforested  areas, the land heats up faster and reaches a  higher temperature, leading to localized upward motions  that  enhance the formation of clouds and ultimately produce more rainfall.

Which   of  the  statements  given  above is/are correct?

a.    1, 2, 3 and 4 Only b.  1, 2,3 and 5 Only c.   1,2,4 and 5 Only d.  1,2,3,4 and 5



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                        Page 5
17.  With  reference to  the cloning  of Dolly the sheep, consider the following statements


1.    Two cells that were used to clone   Dolly    were   taken from two female sheep (ewes)
2.    The  nucleus of the egg cell
was removed and replaced by the nucleus of the body cell
3.   Dolly was a  clone of donor of the egg cell

Which   of  the  above statements is/are correct?

a.    1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.   1 and 3 Only d.  All Three


18.  Consider  the following statements with  regard to  the Executives  of India:
1.    Functionaries who take day-to-day
decisions but do not exercise supreme power on  behalf of  the people are collectively  known  as the executive.
2.    The   temporary  executives   have
more power  than the permanent executives.
3.   Secretary of Ministry  of State and Director General of Police are part of temporary Executive.
4. The  temporary executives  are experts in the matters of their ministry.

Which of the statements is/are correct?

a.    1 and 2
b.  1, 2 and 3
c.   1, 2, 3 and 4 d.  None


19. Prime     Minister     is     the    most important political  institution  in the country. Consider the following statements:

1.   There  is  no direct election to the post of the Prime Minister.
2.    The  Prime  Minister   has  a   fixed tenure.
3.   A person who is not a member of Parliament can also become a minister provided he meets the required conditions.
4.   When the Prime Minister quits, the entire ministry quits.
5.   The  rise  of  coalition  politics  has
imposed certain constraints on the power of the Prime Minister.

Which of the statements is/are correct?

a.    1, 2 and 5 b.  2, 3 and 5
c.   1, 3, 4 and 5 d.  2, 3, 4 and 5

20. The Nachiketa Mor panel recently gave  several recommendations for increasing the level of financial inclusion in the country. What can be the direct and indirect benefits of financial inclusion?
1.    Increase in domestic savings base
2.   Higher economic growth for the nation
3.   Reduction in  local-money lending practices
4.   Discouraging  investment in  Ponzi
schemes, non-productive assets etc.
5.   Better public service delivery

Select the correct answer using the codes given below

a.    1 and 3
b.  1,2, 3 and 4 c.   4 and 5
d.  All of the above


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                        Page 6



21. With  reference to the national Population   Policy   2000,  consider the following statements

It imparts policy framework for,

1. Imparting      free     and compulsory school education up to 14 years of age.
2.  Reducing   infant mortality rate to below 30 per 1000 live births
3.   Achieving               universal
immunisation of children against all vaccine preventable diseases
4. Encouraging            delayed marriage  and child-bearing, education of  adolescents about the risks  of unprotected sex,  making contraceptive services accessible and affordable, providing  food supplements, nutritional services, strengthening  legal measures to  prevent child marriage.

Which   of  the  statements  given  above is/are correct?

a.    2 and 4 Only
b.  2,3 and 4 Only c.   2 and 3 Only
d.  1,2,3 and 4



22. Consider       the      following statements about   Aurangzeb’s farman,

1.   He had granted only the Company the right to trade duty free
2.  For private trade, the officials refused to pay the duty, causing an enormous loss  of revenue for Bengal

Which   of  the  above statement is/ are correct?

a.    1 only b.  2 only
c.   Both of Them d.  None of them


23. The Micro  Finance Institutions (MFIs)(Regulation and Development) Bill, 2012 intends to  regulate and  develop  the MFIs  sector. Who  can be the potential beneficiaries if  it becomes a law?


1.    Small and Marginal farmers
2.    Self-Help Groups
3.   MFIs
4.   Local money lenders

Select the correct answer using the codes given below

a.    1 and 2 only b.  3 and 4 only c.   1,2 and 3
d.  All of the above



24.      Consider  the  following   statements about forces

1.   Both  electrostatic  force  and  the force  exerted by  magnets are examples of non-contact forces
2.    The force of gravity acts on all of us
all the time.
3.   The force of friction always acts on all the moving  objects and its direction is always opposite to the
direction of motion.


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                        Page 7
Which   of  the  statements  given  above is/are correct?

a.    1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.   2 Only
d.  All Three

25.  Consider  the following  statements on sound

1.    The loudness of sound depends on its frequency. When the frequency of  vibration  is   large, the  sound produced is loud.
2.  The  amplitude determines the shrillness or pitch of a sound.
3.   In humans, the sound is  produced by the larynx.

Which   of  the  above statements is/are correct?

a.    1 and 2 Only b.  3 Only
c.   All Three
d.  None



26.  Assertion  (A):  Parliamentary democracy in  most countries is  often known as the Cabinet form of government.
Reason (R): It  is  not practical for all ministers  to  meet  regularly and discuss everything; hence the decisions are taken in Cabinet meetings

Which of the statements is correct?

a.    Both A and R are True and R is the correct explanation of A
b.  Both A and R are True and R is not
the correct explanation of A
c.   A is True and R is False d.  A is False and R is True


27.    With  reference to lightning, consider the following statements
1. During  storms,  negative   and positive charges meet in the clouds, producing streaks of bright light and sound. The process is called an electric discharge.
2.    During lightning coming in contact with  open  vehicles,  like motorbikes, tractors, construction machinery, open cars are not safe.
3.   During lightning it is not safe to use mobile phone but it is safe to use a landline.
4.   Carrying umbrella  is  not  a   good idea at all during thunderstorms

Which   of  the  above statements is/are correct?

a.    1,2 and 3 Only b.  2 and 3 Only
c.   1,2 and 4 Only d.  All Four

28.     The functions of the Indian Government is carried out by a number of Ministry  and Departments. Consider  the following statements:
1.    No minister can openly criticise any
decision of the government, even if it  is   about another Ministry   or Department.
2.    Every ministry has secretaries, who are civil servants.
3. The   secretaries  provide  the necessary background information to the ministers to take decisions.
4.   The  Prime  Ministers  decisions  are final  in  case  disagreements arise between Departments.

Which     of    the    statements   is/are incorrect?

a.    1 and 4
b.  1, 2 and 4
c.   1, 2, 3 and 4 d.  None


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                        Page 8
29. Free Trade Agreement (FTA)  between
India and ASEAN can potentially lead to:

1.    Increased                     employment opportunities in both nations
2.    Violation  of  WTO   global trading norms
3.   Higher Foreign Direct  Investment
(FDI) from ASEAN into India

Select the correct answer using the codes given below

a.    1 and 3 b.  1 and 2 c.   2 and 3 d.  Only 1


30. An  increase in  natural gas  prices  in India as suggested  by the Rangrajan formula  can directly affect which  of the following sectors:

1.    Manufacturing
2.    Agriculture
3.   Power
4.   Mining and Exploration of Natural
Gas
5.   Services

Select the correct answer using the codes given below

a.    3 and 4
b.  1, 2 and 5 c.   2, 3 and 4
d.  1, 2, 3 and 4

31. Consider the following statements with respect to the Himalayas

1.   The   northern  most  range is known as the Great or  Inner Himalayas or the ‘Himadri’.
2.    The core of Great Himalayas is
composed of sedimentary rocks.
3.   Shiwalik  ranges are composed of  unconsolidated sediments brought down by  rivers  from the  main Himalayan ranges located farther north.

Which   of  the  statements  given  above is/are correct?

a.    2 Only
b.  2 and 3 Only c.   1 and 3 Only d.  3 Only

32. With reference to river Ganga, consider the following statements

1.   The  Bhagirathi-Hooghly  river is  a major tributary of river Ganga that flows southwards through the deltaic plains to the Bay of Bengal.
2.    The   headwaters of   the   Ganga, called the ‘Bhagirathi’  is fed by the Gangotri Glacier and joined by the Alaknanda at Devaprayag in Uttaranchal.

Which   of  the  statements  given  above is/are correct?

a.    1 Only b.  2 Only c.   Both
d.  None

33.    Consider  the  following   statements about El Nino

1.    It is a cold ocean current that flows past the Peruvian Coast, in place of the warm Peruvian current, every 2 to 5 years.
2.    El Nino event affects the onset of
Monsoon
3.   The presence of the El Nino leads to a  decrease in  sea-surface temperatures and weakening of the
trade winds in the region

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                        Page 9
Which   of  the  statements  given  above is/are correct?

a.    1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.   2 Only
d.  3 Only

34.  Consider   the   following   statements about The Battle of Plassey,

1.  Robert Clive led the Company’s army  against   Sirajuddaulah at Plassey.
2.    Clive  had  managed  to secure Mir
jafar’s support by promising to make him  nawab after  crushing Sirajuddaulah.

Which   of  the  above statement is/ are correct?

a.    1 only b.  2  only
c.   Both of Them d.  None of them


35.  Consider   the   following   statements about indigo cultivation.

1.   There  were two main systems  of indigo cultivation – nij and ryoti
2.    Under nij system, farmers found it easy to cultivate and expand their cultivation

Which  of  the above statement is/ are correct?

a.    only b.  only
c.   All of Them
d.  None of them

36.   Consider   the   following   statements about smog
1.   Ground  level  ozone  is   a major pollutant and is  a constituent of smog
2.   Photochemical       smog      is
considered to be a problem of modern industrialization
3.   The smog created as a result
of a volcanic eruption is often     known     as  vog to distinguish it as a natural occurrence.

Which   of  the  statements  given  above is/are correct?

a.    1 and 3 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.   All Three
d.  3 Only



37. Consider the following instances with regard to exercise of a fundamental  right?

1. Men     and    women    under MGNERGA program get the same salary
2.    Parents    property  is   inherited  by
their children
3.   Workers   from  Bihar  go   to  the
Maharashtra in search of job
4.   Christian missions set up a chain of missionary schools and allure other persons to convert to Christianity.

Which of the statements is/are correct?

a.    2 Only b.  1 and 3 c.   2 and 4 d.  3 Only



38. The  foreign investments in  the National Manufacturing   and Investment zones (NMIZs) may

1.    Increase  India’s  current   account
deficit (CAD)


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      Page 10
2.   Supplement  domestic expertise and resources
3.   Result into de-congestion of nearby urban areas

Select the correct answer using the codes given below

a.    2 and 3 b.  Only 2 c.   1 and 2
d.  All of the above



39. Preferential  market access (PMA) policy  adopted by India  in  the National Electronics Policy 2012 violates international trade norms because:

1.    Foreign Suppliers are not treated  at par with domestic suppliers
2.    India  will  stop importing sensitive
electronic equipments for security- related  reasons
3. WTO    does  not  allow  any discrimination between foreign goods from different countries

Select the correct answer using the codes given below

a.    1 and 2 b.  1 and 3 c.   2 only d.  Only 1


40. Consider the following statements about The Munro system

1.    Developed by Thomas Munro, this system was gradually extended all over south India.
2.    British should act as paternal father figures protecting the ryots  under their charge

Which  of  the above statement is/ are correct?


a.    1 Only b.  2 Only c.   Both
d.  None

41.  Consider the following:

1.   Freedom to start a  movement to change the government
2.    Freedom  to   oppose   torture   in
prisons.
3. Freedom    to     criticise     the government on its policies.
4.   Freedom  to  paint  which   would incite  others  to  rebel against  the government.

Which  of the above is not available  to
Indian citizens?

a.    2 Only b.  2 and 3 c.   3 and 4 d.  4 Only



42.    We  use the term water-pollution to cover which of the following effects?

1.   A change in temperature of water
2.    The   removal of  desirable substances from water- bodies.
3.   The addition of undesirable substances to water-bodies.

Answer the question using the codes given below

a.    3 Only
b.  2 and 3 Only c.   All Three
d.  None

43. Consider the following statements

1.    Atmospheric       nitrogen      is converted  to   simpler   forms


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      Page 11
only by nitrogen fixing bacteria and not by any other method
2.  Nitrogen is essential in the formation of carbohydrates and fats in human bodies and plants

Which   of  the  statements  given  above is/are correct?

a.    1 Only b.  2 Only c.   Both
d.  None

44.    With  reference to  various weather phenomena occurring during hot weather season in Northern part of India, consider the following statements

1.   Loo  are  strong,  gusty,  hot,  dry winds blowing during the day over the north and northwestern India
2.    Dust   storms   are  very  common
during the month of May in northern India. These storms bring temporary relief as they lower the temperature and may bring  light rain and cool breeze.
3.   ‘Kaal Baisakhi’  or calamity for the month  of  Baisakh, is  a   localised thunderstorm, associated with violent winds, torrential downpours, often accompanied  by hail.

Which   of  the  statements  given  above is/are correct?

a.    1 Only
b.  1 and 3 Only c.   2 Only
d.  All Three
45. Which  of the following statements violates the Right to Freedom guaranteed by the Constitution of India?

1.   Indian citizens  need permission to visit   some  border  areas of   the country.
2.    Outsiders  are not allowed to buy property in some areas to protect the interest of the local population.
3. The    government   bans   the publication of a  book that  can go against the ruling party in the next elections.

Select the correct answer using the codes given below

a.    1 and 3 b.  2 Only c.   3 Only d.  2 and 3



46.  Which   of  the  following  statements is/are correct with respect to the Constitution of India?

1.    It  generates a   degree of  trust among people of India
2.    It   limits   the  powers  of  the
government
3. It     determines    how     a government should govern the country
4.   It determines the powers of the government

Select the correct answer using the codes given below

a.    1 and 4
b.  1, 3, and 4 c.   1, 2 and 4
d.  1, 2, 3 and 4









http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      Page 12
47. With  reference to hybridization in crops, consider the following statements

1.   Only way of incorporating desirable characters into crop varieties is by hybridization.
2.    Hybridisation   refers   to   crossing
between genetically dissimilar plants.
3.   This  crossing  may be intervarietal (between different varieties), interspecific  (between two different species of the same genus) or  intergeneric (between different genera).

Which   of  the  statements above is/are incorrect?

a.    1 Only
b.  2 and 3 Only c.   1 and 2 Only d.  None

48.  With   reference  to  the  human eye structure, consider the following statements

1.    The iris is        the transparent front part     of      the eye that      covers the cornea, pupil,     and    anterior chamber.
2.    The cornea    is    a     thin,   circular
structure in the eye, responsible for controlling the diameter and size of the pupil and thus  the amount of light reaching the retina.
3.   Behind the pupil of the eye is a lens which is thicker in the centre. The lens focuses light on the back of the eye, on a layer called retina. Retina contains several nerve cells. Sensations felt  by the nerve cells are then transmitted to the brain through the optic nerve.
4.   The pupil is  a  hole located in  the center  of   the iris of   the eye that allows light to enter the retina

Which   of  the  statements above is/are correct?

a.    1,2 and 3 Only b.  2 and 3 Only
c.   3 and 4 Only
d.  None

49. The shaggy horned wild ox, the bharal (blue sheep), wild sheep, and the kiang are mainly found in  which  of  the following regions?

a.    Arunachal Pradesh b.  Sikkim
c.   Ladakh
d.  Assam

50.  Which  of the following are biosphere reserves in India?

1.    Sunderbans
2.    Simlipal
3.   Gulf of Mannar
4.   Dihang-Dibang
5.   Agasthyamalai

Answer the question using the codes given below

a)   1,2 and 4 Only b)  2,3 and 4 Only c)  3,4 and 5 Only d)  1,2,3,4 and 5

51.  Which  of the following  statements is correct?

a.    Jet  stream, a  narrow belt of  high altitude (above 12,000 m) westerly winds in the troposphere plays an important role in causing Monsoon
rains.




http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      Page 13
b.  The Coriolis force is responsible for deflecting winds towards the left in the northern hemisphere and towards the right in  the southern hemisphere.
c.   Western disturbance is nothing but jet stream
d.  None of the above.

52.  Consider the following statements about National River  Conservation Plan (NRCP)

1.    It  is  a  wholly Centrally sponsored
Scheme
2.  NRCP      essentially     addresses pollution load  from sewer systems of town and cities  and works towards intercepting and diverting sewage, setting  up electric crematoria,  low-cost  sanitation, river front development, afforestation and solid  waste management.



Which   of  the  statements  given  above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.   2 Only c.   Both
d.   None

53. Which  of the following recent factors have caused ballooning  of  India’s  trade deficit with China?

1.    Low demand of iron-ore in China
2.    Indian ban on power equipments from China
3.   Protectionist  measures adopted  by
China
4.   Eurozone economic slowdown

Select the correct answer using the codes given below
a.    3 and 4 b.  1 and 2
c.   1,2,3 and 4 d.  1 and 3

54. India’s Constitution was drawn up under very difficult  circumstances. With reference to the making of the constitution of India, consider the following statements.

1.   In   1928,   Motilal   Nehru   and other Congress leaders drafted a Constitution for India.
2.    In    1931,    the   resolution   at
Lahore Session  of  the  Indian Nation Congress dwelt on how independent India’s constitution should look like.
3. Both       the        documents (mentioned above) were committed to the inclusion  of universal adult franchise and protection of rights of minorities.

Which   of   the  statement  is/are incorrect?

a.    1 Only b.  2 Only
c.   2 and 3 Only d.  1 and 3 Only



55. Consider the following statements regarding water pollution in India

1.    Discharge of  untreated sewage is the single most important cause for pollution of surface and ground water in India.
2.    A water sample with a 5 day BOD
greater than 20 mg O/L indicates ecologically-unsafe polluted water

Which   of  the  statements  given  above is/are correct?

a.    1 Only
b.    2 Only


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      Page 14
c.    Both
d.    None



56. With  regard to  making  of  the constitution, consider the following statements:

1.   Our  leaders were  inspired  by socialist revolution in French
2.    Our  leaders were  inspired  by the parliamentary democracy in U.S.
3. The     Indian    Constitution adopted many institutional details and procedures from Government of India Act, 1935
4. Much    of   the   consensus regarding  the democratic setup had evolved during the freedom struggle

Which of the statement is/are correct?

a.    1 and 3 b.  3 and 4
c.   1, 3 and 4
d.  1, 2 and 4

57.  Which  of the following  statements is incorrect?

a.    Organic farming is a farming system with  minimal or  no use  of chemicals as fertilizers,  herbicides, pesticides  etc.  and  with   a maximum input of organic manures, recycled farm wastes, and bio-agents,  with  healthy cropping systems.
b.  Mixed   farming   is   a    system   of
farming on a particular farm which includes crop production, rising of livestock etc.
c.  Composite fish culture system is commonly used for fish farming.
d.  None of the above



58. Consider the following statements with reference to manure

1.   Compost   which   is   prepared by using earthworms to hasten the process of decomposition of plant and animal refuse is  called as vermin-compost.
2.    Some plants like sun hemp or guar
are grown and then  mulched by ploughing them into the soil which becomes compost enriching the soil in nitrogen and phosphorus.
3.   The  process in which  farm waste material like livestock excreta (cow dung etc.), vegetable waste, animal refuse, domestic waste, sewage waste, straw, eradicated  weeds etc. is decomposed in pits is known as green manuring.

Which   of  the  statements  given  above is/are correct?

a.    1 Only
b.  1 and 3 Only c.   2 and 3 Only d.  All Three

59. Consider the following statements

1. The  elements of weather and climate are the same, i.e. temperature, atmospheric pressure, wind, humidity and precipitation.
2.    Weather refers to the state of the atmosphere over  an area   at   any point of time.
3.   Climate refers to the sum total of weather conditions  and  variations over a  large area for a  long period of time (more than thirty years)

Which   of  the  statements  given  above is/are correct?


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      Page 15
a.    1 and 2 Only b.  1 and 3 Only c.   2 and 3 Only d.  All Three

60. Consider the following statements with reference to the Preamble of the Constitution?

1. Taking  inspiration  from  the American model, India has chosen to begin its constitution with a preamble.
2.    Values that inspired and guided the
freedom struggle are embedded  in the Preamble of the Indian Constitution.
3.   It   is    the   soul   of   the   Indian
Constitution.
4.   It  provides a standard   to examine and evaluate any law and action of government.

Which of the statement is/are correct?

a) 2 and 4 b) 2 and 3
c) 2, 3 and 4
d) 1, 2, 3 and 4



61.  With reference to Ozone, consider the following statements

1. Unlike  the  normal  diatomic molecule of oxygen, ozone is poisonous.
2.    Ozone  is   a   powerful  oxidant (far
more so than dioxygen).This makes ozone a  potent respiratory hazard and pollutant near ground level.

Which   of  the  statements  given  above is/are correct?

a.  1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None
62.  India  is  growing  slowly  compared to the previous decade. Economic growth of India may be revived by controlling/reducing/reforming which of the following:

1.    Corruption
2.    Money-Laundering
3.   Law and order situation
4.   Red-tapism in the bureaucracy
5.   Medical expenses by citizens
6.   Gross Enrolment ratio (GER)

Select the correct answer using the codes given below

a.    1,2 and 4
b.  1,2,3,4,5  and 6 c.   5 and 6 only d.  3, 5 and 6


63. Which  of the following is  true about Double Tax avoidance agreements (DTAAs)?

1.    It  always lowers  the annual gross tax revenue generated  in the host country.
2.    It  is  in  the  interest  of  investing
individuals/companies.
3.   May  encourage round-tripping  of money.

Select the correct answer using the below given codes

a.    Only 1 b.  2 and 3 c.    Only 3
d.  All of the above



64. With reference to climate, consider the following statements

1. The  sea exerts  a  moderating influence   on    climate:   As    the


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      Page 16
distance from the sea increases, its moderating influence decreases and the people experience extreme weather conditions. This  condition is known as continentality.
2.    Ocean currents along with onshore winds affect the climate of the coastal areas,
3.   The  pressure and wind system of any area depend on the latitude and altitude of the place. Thus  it influences   the   temperature and rainfall pattern.

Which   of  the  statements  given  above is/are incorrect?

a.    1 Only b.  2 Only c.   3 Only d.  None

65. Constant rise  in  prices  of  goods and services, has led to erosion of real wages of workers. So the Government of India had come  up  with  a   new  Consumer  Price Index (CPI).With respect to the new Consumer Price Index, consider the following statements:

1.   Consumer Price Index is released every month
2.    The Common base year for CPI is 2012
3.   Consumer  Price  Index  represents the wholesale price of goods paid by the households for a  basket of goods and services.
4.   More    weightage    is    given    to   the
manufacturing items under CPI
5.   Housing forms one of the five major groups  for   which   Consumer   Price Index  is  available  for  both rural and urban areas.

Which of the statements is/are correct?

a.    1 Only
b.  1, 3 and 5 c.   2, 4 and 5
d.  1, 2, 3 and 4



66.  With   recent  growing  attractions to Bitcoins  across  the  globe. Consider  the following statements:
1.    Bitcoins are illegal in India
2.  Bitcoins can be used for illegal activities.
3.   Bitcoins have low transaction cost
4.   Bitcoins are Non-Volatile

Which  of the following  statements is/are correct?

a.    1 and 2 b.  2 and 3
c.   1, 2 and 3
d.  1, 2, 3 and 4



67. Consider the following statements about The Doctrine of Lapse

1. This  was the final wave of annexations, occurred under Lord Dalhousie who was the Governor- General from 1848 to 1856.
2.    The  doctrine  declared that  if  an Indian ruler died without  a  male heir  his   kingdom would  “lapse”, that is, becomes part of neighboring territory.

Which  of  the above statement is/ are correct?

a.    1 Only b.  2 Only c.   Both
d.  None



68. Consider the following statements about Western Disturbances

1.    Western Disturbance causes winter and pre  monsoon  season  rainfall across northwest India.
2.    Over  the Indo-Gangetic plains, it
brings  cold  wave conditions  and

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      Page 17
occasionally dense fog and cold day conditions
3.   This             is             a                 non- monsoonal precipitation      pattern driven by the Easterlies.

Which   of  the  statements  given  above is/are correct?

a.    1 Only
b.  1 and 2 Only c.   2 and 3 Only d.  3 Only

69.  What do you understand by the term ‘Hot
Money’?

a.    Currency   which   has  high  value  in international market
b.  Currency whose value increases rapidly
c.   Currency     whose    value    decreases rapidly
d.  Currency  which  has tendency to  fly out of the country



70. Recently six  major banks made currency swap pacts permanent. Which of the following  are correct  with  regard to currency swap?

1.    It helps in increasing liquidity
2.    They   are  considered   to   be   loans provided by one country to another
3.   They are risk free
4.   India is yet to have any currency swap arrangements with other countries.

Select the correct answer  using the below codes

a) 1 Only b) 1 and 2
c) 1, 2 and 3
d) 1, 2, 3 and 4


71.     Consider  the  following   statements about lakes in India
1.    The   Wular  lake  in  Jammu   and
Kashmir is of glacier origin
2.    The Chilika Lake, the Pulicat Lake, the Kolleru Lake are lagoons.

Which  of the statements above is/are correct?

a.    1 Only b.  2 Only c.   Both
d.  None




72. Which  of the following  are the steps taken by RBI to counter inflation?

1.    Increasing interest rates
2.  Introduction of Inflation-Indexed National Saving Securities (IINSSs) for retail investors
3.   Increasing excise duty on gold
4.   Permitting FDI in multi-band retail trading
Answer using the given codes below a.    1 and 3
b.  1 and 2
c.   1, 3 and 4
d.  1, 2, 3 and 4



73.  Consider the following statements:

1.    Leaders of the freedom movement had  an open mind about whether the country should be democratic or not after independence.
2.    Members    of    the    Constituent
Assembly  of  India  held the same views on all provisions of the Constitution.
3.   A  country that  has a  constitution must be a democracy.
4.   Constitution  cannot be  amended because it is the supreme law of a country.




http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      Page 18
Which   of  the  statements  given  above is/are correct?

a.    1 and 2 b.  1 and 3 c.   1 and 4 d.  None

74. Consider the following statements with reference to the Indus Water Treaty, 1960

1.   Under  the  Treaty, the  waters of Western  Rivers of the Indus river system are allocated to India.
2.    India is under obligation to let flow
the waters of the Eastern Rivers of the Indus river system except for the following uses: Domestic  Use, Non-consumptive use, Agricultural use as specified, and Generation of hydro-electric power as specified
3.   India  is   under  no  obligation  to supply  information of  its  storage and hydroelectric projects as specified.
4.   This    treaty   was   brokered   by
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development between India and Pakistan.

Which   of  the  statements  given  above is/are correct?

a.    1, 2, and 3 Only b.   2, 3 and 4 Only c.   3 and 4 Only
d.  4 Only



75. With respect to river drainage patterns, consider the following statements,

1. A trellis drainage pattern develops where hard and soft  rocks  exist  parallel to each other
2.    A      rectangular    drainage
pattern   develops    on    a
strongly jointed rocky terrain.
3. The    dendritic   pattern develops where the river channel follows the slope of the terrain
4.   The radial pattern develops
when streams flow in different directions  from  a central peak or  dome like structure.

Which   of  the  above definitions  is/are correct?

a.    1 and 2 Only
b.  1,2 and 3 Only c.   2, 3 and 4 Only d.  1, 2, 3 and 4

76.  In the context of India, which of these is  a   provision  that   a  democratic constitution does not have?

1.    Powers of the legislature
2.    Name of the country
3.   Powers of the head of the state
4.   Name of the head of the state

Answer the question using the codes given below

a.    2 Only b.  4 Only
c.   2, 3 and 4
d.  2 and 4



77. Consider the following statements

1.   The   Pitli  Island,  an  uninhabited island in the Andaman and Nicobar group of islands, has a  bird sanctuary.
2.    Many of the Lakshadweep  islands
are formed  by  corals  and are a major tourist attraction.

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      Page 19
Answer the question using codes given below

a.    1 Only b.  2 Only c.   Both
d.  None

78. A recent CRISIL  report suggested that the quantity and quality of non-farm jobs would shrink substantially in the coming years despite a  positive economic growth rate in India.  In such a  scenario which of the following  can potentially lead  to  an increase in employment levels in India?

1.    Increasing  the Cash Reserve Ratio
(CRR) and Interest rates


2.   Relaxing stringent labour laws
3.   Providing  incentives to the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs)


4.   Relaxing  FDI  caps in  Brownfield projects in the manufacturing  and services sector

Which   of  the  statements  given  above is/are correct?

a.    2 and 3 b.  1 and 2
c.   2, 3 and 4 d.  1, 3 and 4

79. Consider the following statements about census 2011

1.    Maharashtra is   the  second  most populous state in India
2.    The jump in percentage of literacy
from that of previous census report was more for men than women
b.  2 only c.    Both d.  None

80.   With regard to elections consider the following statements:

1.   Some   non-democratic  countries also hold elections.
2.    Sometimes election is held only for
one constituency to fill the vacancy caused by death or resignation of a member. This  is  called a  mid- election.
3. In India we follow a system of proportional representation for the election of members of Lok Sabha.
4.   Each constituency  should  have a roughly equal population  living within it.
Which   of  the  statements  given  above
is/are correct?
a.    2 and 4 b.  1 and 4
c.   1, 2 and 3
d.  1, 2, 3 and 4

81.      India is  divided into number of constituency for electing it’s representatives. Consider the following statements:

1. Each                  Parliamentary constituency has within it several assembly constituencies
2.    Each village or town is divided into several ‘wards’that are like constituencies.
3. Some                 Parliamentary constituencies  are reserved for people who belong to the Scheduled Castes (SC), Scheduled Tribes  (ST)  and Other Backward Class (OBC)

Which  of  the  statements is/are correct?

Which   of  the  above statement is/ are correct?
a.    1 only
a.    1 Only b.  1 and 3 c.   1 and 2
d.  1, 2 and 3


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      Page 20


82. Consider the following statements

1.   The  Deccan Trap  is  a   black soil region and the numerous rivers flowing in the region have deposited this  soil  over thousands of years
2.    Barchans (a  type of  sand dunes)
cover larger areas of Thar Desert.

Which   of  the  above statements  given above is/are correct?

a.    1 Only b.  2 Only c.   Both
d.  None

83. Which  of the following  is an example of a Forward  or Future contract?

1.    Mr. A pledging to sell his property in Canada to Mr. B, at a fixed dollar to rupee exchange rate at  a  fixed price in dollars two years later from now.
2.    Mr. B pledging to sell his property in  Canada   at   a  fixed  price  of  1 million Canadian dollars three years later.
3.   Mr.  B pledging to sell 5 tonnes of
wheat to Mr.  A  at  a  fixed  price later in the day.

Which   of  the  statements  given  above is/are correct?

a.    2 and 3 Only b.  1 Only
c.   1 and 2 Only
d.  All of the above



84.   Consider   the   following   statements about Marathas

1.    With  defeat in the Third  Battle of
Panipat   in   1761,    the   Marathas’
dream of  ruling  from  Delhi  was shattered.
2.    They were divided into many states
under different chiefs (sardars) belonging to dynasties such as Sindhia, Holkar, Gaikwad and Bhonsle.

Which  of  the above statement is/ are correct?

a.    1 only b.  2 only
c.   All of Them
d.  None of them

85.   Consider   the   following   statements
about  “subsidiary alliance”

1.   Indian rulers were not allowed to have their  independent armed forces.
2.    If  the Indian  rulers failed to make
the  payment, then  part of  their territory was taken away as penalty.

Which  of  the above statement is/ are correct?

a.    1 only b.  2 only
c.   All of Them
d.  None of them



86. Consider the following statements

1.   The  Garo,  the  Khasi  and the Jaintia Hills  in Meghalaya   are geologically part of the peninsular plateau
2.    The   Western   Ghats   are higher than the Eastern Ghats in elevation.
3. The  Deccan  Plateau  is higher in the east and slopes gently westwards.

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      Page 21
Answer the above question using the codes given below

a.    1 and 2 Only b.  2 Only
c.   1 and 3 Only d.  3 Only

87.  Our Constitution entitles every citizen to elect her/his  representative  and to be elected as a  representative. Which  of the following statements are correct with respect to local government?

1. The  system  of  reservation is extended to other weaker sections at the district and local level.
2.    Local bodies are now reserved for Other Backward Classes (OBC)  as well and one-fourth  of the seats are reserved in  rural and urban local bodies for women candidates.
3.   2% is reserved for disabled.

Select the correct answer using the codes given below

a.    1 Only b.  1 and 2
c.   1, 2 and 3 d.  None

88. Insider trading can be harmful to the domestic economy  and is illegal because,

a.    It hurts the economic growth of a nation, increases inflation and Current account deficit (CAD)
b.  It  results  in  crash of  the security
markets which  are so  vital for channeling savings in the domestic economy
c.   It  distorts  the  level-playing  field
between investors in the stock market and  makes  the  markets susceptible to heavy speculation
d.  Speculation by individual investors is    illegal    and  hurts   the   retail
investors



89. Which  of the following  measures was not a change made after the 1857 revolt by the British authorities?

a.    The land and property of Muslims was confiscated on a large scale and they were  treated with  suspicion and hostility.
b.  Policies   were   made  to   protect
landlords and zamindars and give them security of rights over their lands.
c.   The Governor-General of India was given the title of Viceroy, that is, a personal representative of  the Crown.
d.  It was decided that the proportion of  Indian soldiers  along  with  the number of European soldiers would be increased in the army.



90.  India  has a  federal government, with elected representatives  at the central, state and local levels. Which  of  the following statements are incorrect  with  regard to elections held in India?
1.    In a democratic election, the list of
those who  are eligible to  vote is prepared much before the election and given to everyone. This  list  is officially  called the Electoral Roll and is  commonly  known  as  the Voters’ List.
2.    A    complete    revision    of    the
Electoral Roll takes place every five years.
3.   Anyone who  can be a  voter can also  become  a   candidate in elections and the candidate’s minimum age should be 18 years.

Select the correct answer using the codes given below

a.    1 and 3 b.  3 Only c.   2 Only d.  None


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      Page 22


91.    Which  of the following statements is incorrect with reference to menstruation?

a.   At 45 to 50 years of age,  the menstrual cycle stops. Stoppage of menstruation is termed menopause.
b.  Menstruation occurs once in about
28 to 30 days. The  first  menstrual flow  begins at  puberty and is termed menarche
c.   If fertilized egg does not develop in the uterus after implantation, the egg and the thickened lining of the uterus along with its blood vessels are shed off. This causes bleeding in women which is called menstruation.
d.  None of the above



92.    The    Micro     Finance   Institutions
(MFIs)(Regulation and Development) Bill,
2012  intends to regulate and develop the MFIs   sector.  Who  can be the  potential beneficiaries if it becomes a law?

1.    Small and Marginal farmers
2.    Self-Help Groups
3.   MFIs
4.   Local money lenders

Select the correct answer using the codes given below

a.    1 and 2 only b.  3 and 4 only c.   1,2 and 3
d.  All of the above
93. Which  of the following can be a form
of economic “Protectionism” by India?

1.    Visa restriction for foreign nationals
2.    Preferential   market access policies for domestic industries
3.   Discouraging FII
4. Increasing   custom   duties  on imported goods and services
5.  Increasing  custom  duties  on exported goods and services

Select the correct answer using the codes below

a.    1, 2 and 5 b.  2 and 4
c.   1, 3 and 4 d.  1, 2 and 4

94.  The   East  India  company found  it difficult  to  separate trade from  politics. Because,

1.   Though the Royal Charter granted the company the sole right to trade with the East, it could not prevent other European powers  from entering the Eastern markets.
2.    Competition        amongst          the
European companies inevitably pushed  up  the  prices  at   which these  goods could  be  purchased, and this  reduced the profits  that could be earned.
3. The  urge to  secure  markets therefore led to fierce battles between the trading companies

Which   of  the  statements  given  above is/are correct?

a.    1 and 3 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.   3 Only
d.  All Three







http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      Page 23
95. With  reference to the consequences of granting Diwani of Bengal to the East India Company, consider the following statements

1.   The  outflow of gold from Britain increased after the Battle of Plassey, and it  increased more  after  the assumption of Diwani
2.    The new revenues could be used to
purchase cotton and silk textiles in India,  maintain Company  troops, and meet the cost of building the Company fort and  offices  at Calcutta
Which   of  the  statements  given  above is/are correct?

a.    1 Only b.  2 Only c.   Both
d.  None

96. Consider the following statements about CITES

1.   It   lists  several species  of animals and birds in    which  trade   is prohibited

2.    It  is  also  known  as  Washington
Convention

Which   of   the  above  statement is/are correct?

a.    1 Only b.  2 Only c.   Both
d.  None



97.  Which   of  the  following  statements is/are correct?

1.   To  win  back the  loyalty of  the people, the British announced rewards for loyal landholders would
be  allowed to  continue to  enjoy traditional rights over their lands.
2.    Those who had rebelled were told
that   if   they   submitted  to   the British, and if  they had  not killed any white people, they would remain safe and their  rights  and claims to land would not be denied.
3.   Nevertheless,  hundreds of  sepoys, rebels, nawabs and rajas were tried and hanged.

Answer the question using codes given below

a.    1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.   1 Only
d.  All Three

98. Consider the following statements with reference to regions of Northern plains of India

1.   The  rivers,  after descending  from the mountains deposit pebbles in a narrow belt of about 8 to 16 km in width lying parallel to the slopes of the Shiwaliks. It is known as Terai.
2.    South  of  Terai,  the  streams and
rivers re-emerge and create a  wet, swampy and marshy region known as Bhabar.
3.   The  largest part of  the  northern plain is  formed of older alluvium. They lie above the flood plains of the rivers and present a terrace  like feature. This   part  is   known  as Khadar.
4.   The newer, younger deposits of the
flood plains are called Bhangar.

Which   of  the  statements  given  above is/are correct?

a.    1 and 4 Only
b.  2, 3 and 4 Only c.   1, 2, 3 and 4
d.  None of the above

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      Page 24


99. Which of the following pair is correctly matched?

a)   Dargah  – An open prayer place of
Muslims primarily meant for id
b)  Khanqah – The tomb of a Sufi saint c)  Idgah – A sufi lodge, often used as a rest house for travellers and  a place where        people come to discuss spiritual matters, get the blessings
of saints, and hear sufi music
d)  Cul-de-sac – Street with a dead end




100.      Which   of   the  following   is/are matched incorrectly?

1.    Sarpagandha  : Used to treat blood pressure; it is found only in India.
2.    Jamun :    The juice from ripe fruit is used to prepare vinegar which is carminative and          diuretic, and has digestive properties. The powder of the seed is used for controlling diabetes.
3.   Arjun :  The fresh juice of leaves is a cure for earache. It is also used to regulate blood pressure.
4.   Babool :  Leaves are used as a cure for eye sores. Its  gum is used as a tonic.

Answer the above question using the codes given below

a.    1 and 2 Only b.  3 Only
c.   4 Only
d.  All are correct














http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      Page 25
