
INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK PRELIMINARY EXAM - 2014


INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST - 3

GENERAL STUDIES

PAPER-I

Time Allowed: Two Hours                                                                                Maximum Marks: 200


INSTRUCTIONS
1.   IMMEDITELY AFTER THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE EXAMINATION, YOU SHOULD
CHECK  THAT  THIS  TEST  BOOKLET  DOES  NOT  HAVE  ANY  UNPRINTED  OR  TORN  OR MISSING PAGES OR ITEMS, ETC. IF SO, GET IT REPLACED BY A COMPLETE TEST BOOKLET.
2.  You have to enter your Roll Number on the Test I Booklet in the Box provided alongside. DO NOT write anything else on the Test Booklet.

4.  This Test Booklet contains 100 items (questions). Each item is printed only in  English. Each item comprises four responses (answers). You will select the response which you want to mark on the Answer Sheet. In case you feel that there is more than one correct response, mark the response which you consider the best. In any case, choose ONLY ONE response for each item.
5.  You have to mark all your responses ONLY on the separate Answer Sheet provided. See directions in the
Answer Sheet.
6.  All items carry equal marks.

7.  Before you proceed to mark in the Answer Sheet the response to various items in the Test Booklet, you have to fill in some particulars in the Answer Sheet as per instructions sent to you with your Admission Certificate.

8.  After you have completed filling in all your responses on the Answer Sheet and the examination has concluded, you should hand over to the Invigilator only the Answer Sheet. You are permitted to take away with you the Test Booklet.

9.  Sheets for rough work are appended in the Test Booklet at the end.
10.  Penalty for wrong answers :
THERE WILL BE PENALTY FOR WRONG ANSWERS MARKED BY A CANDIDATE IN THE OBJECTIVE TYPE QUESTION PAPERS.
(i)   There are four alternatives for the answer to every question. For each question for which a wrong answer has been given by the candidate, one-third of the marks assigned to that question will be deducted as penalty.
(ii)  If a candidate gives more than one answer, it will be treated as a wrong answer even if one of the given answers happens to be correct and there will be same penalty as above to that question.
(iii)    If a question is left blank, i.e., no answer is given by the candidate, there will be no penalty
for that question.


http://insightsonindia.com


INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST SERIES FOR CIVIL SERVICES PRELIMINARY EXAM 2014





http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                        Page 1
1.   With reference to waterways in India, consider the following statements
1. There are five national waterways in India
2.   The National Waterway-
V connects Brahmani river  &  Mahanadi delta system  along with  East Coast Canal

Which  of the above statements  is/are correct?

a.    1 Only b.   2 Only c.    Both
d.   None



2.   Power sharing is the very spirit of  democracy. In this  context, which of the following statements are correct?


1.  Power sharing increases conflict  among different communities
2.   Power sharing increases
the possibility of arbitrariness
3.  Power    sharing     delays
decision making process
4.  Power sharing increases instability  and divisiveness
5. Power                 sharing undermines the unity of a country


Select  the  correct  answer using the codes below


a.   1, 2 and 5 Only b.  2 and 3 Only
c.  2, 3 and 4 Only
d.  None


3.  India needs to be energy secure for ensuring robust economic growth. What  are the characteristics of a good source of energy:

1.   Readily accessible
2.   Easy   to   store   and transport
3.  High calorific value
4.  Should be renewable

Select  the  correct  answer using the codes below



a.   1, 2, 3 and 4
b.  1, 2 and 3 Only c.  3 and 4 Only
d.  2 and 4 Only





4.  Nineteenth century witnessed one of the important phase of transition in the  history of the world. With regard



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                               Page 2
to the plethora of novels that surfaced during this period, consider the following statements:


1.  Novels  focused  more  on  the lives of the great people
2. Novels    focused    on    the problems faced by the working class
3.  Novels  focused  more  on  the
lives of the ordinary man
4. Oliver Twist was one of the famous novel of this period


Which of the above is/are correct?


a) 1 and 4 b) 2 and 3 c) 3 and 4
d) 2, 3 and 4




5. Consider       the      following statements  on  WIFS programme


1.    Iron folic acid tablet can be taken during illness and even during menstruation.
2.   The weekly Iron Folic Acid Supplementation (WIFS) is an evidence based programme for  addressing Iron Deficiency Anaemia which   is    both   safe    and
effective.
3.  If taken on empty stomach, these tablets can even cause death  in many cases of children
4.  This programme is restricted to   the   children   between class 4th to class 12th as children  below 4th  standard are vulnerable to side effects.

Which  of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  1 and 3 Only
c.  1,2 and 3 Only d.  All Four




6. With  reference to the Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat  Sashaktikran Abhiyan (RGPSA) scheme, consider the following statements,


1. The schemes of Rashtriya Gram   Swaraj Yojana(RGSY), e-Panchayat, Panchayat Empowerment and  Accountability Incentive Scheme(PEAIS) and Panchayat Mahila Evam Yuva Shakti Abhiyan (PMEYSA)  will  be subsumed in  RGPSA  from
2013-14

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                               Page 3
2.   The funding of RGPSA  for
State plans is envisaged on a
90:10 sharing basis by the Central and all State Governments respectively.
3.  During the 12th   plan, grants
to State Election Commissions is linked to the performance under RGPSA
4.  Constitution       of       State
Finance Commission(SFC) every five years and placement of Action  Taken Report (ATR) on the recommendations of  the SFC in the state Assembly is a  must to avail funds under RGPSA

Which  of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1,2 and 3 Only b.  1,3 and 4 Only c.  2, 3 and 4 Only d.  All Four



7.  Sarojini Naidu was one of the famous personality on the 20th Century. Which  of  the following statements is/are correct?


1.   Sarojini Naidu was the first
Indian   woman  to  become
the President of  the Indian
National Congress
2.   Sarojini Naidu was the first woman Governor of India
3.  Sarojini Naidu’s birthday is celebrated as "Women's Day"
4.  Sarojini  Naidu was  one  of the framers of Indian Constitution.


Select  the  correct  answer using the codes below




a.   1 and 4 Only
b.  1, 3 and 4 Only c.  1, 2 and 4Only d.  1, 2, 3 and 4


8.  With    regard  to   Indian    Literature consider the following:


1.   Stories in prose was new to India.
2.   Panchatantra  is a prose.
3.  Prose overlooks asthetic appeal.
4.  Dastan contains tales of adventure and heroism in  Persian and Urdu and is regarded as a prose


Which  of the statements given above is/are correct?



a.   1, 2 and 3 b.  2, 3 and 4

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                               Page 4
c.  1 Only
d.  1, 3 and 4





9. With   reference  to  resource planning and development, consider the following statements
1.  Resource  planning includes matching the resource development plans with overall  national development plans.
2.   The availability  of resources
is  a  necessary condition for the development of  any region, but mere availability of resources in  the absence of corresponding changes in technology  and institutions may hinder development.



Which  of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None




10. Consider        the       following statements,
1.   The         Limits        to
Growth is a 1972 book
about  the  computer modeling                 of exponentialeconomic and  population
growth with       finite resource supplies
2.   The Club  of  Rome is a                    global think tank that deals with a variety of international political issues.
3.  The   purpose  of The
Limits                       to
Growth was to
explore how exponential growth interacts with finite resources.

Which  of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  1 and 3 Only c.  2 and 3 Only d.  All Three



11. Power is shared among different organs of government. Such a separation of powers ensures that none of the organs can exercise  unlimited power. Which  the following system of power sharing is  called checks and balances?


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                               Page 5

1.   Horizontal   division    of powers
2.   Separation  of powers
3.  Vertical      division      of powers
4.  Federal     division       of powers


Which  of  the above answers is/are correct?


a.   1 Only b.   1 and 3 c.   1 and 4 d.   4 Only




12. In    the    parliamentary  system    of Government, India  has adopted the principle of checks and balances. Consider the following statements:


1. Even   though    ministers    and government  officials  exercise power, they are responsible to the Parliament or State Assemblies.
2.   Powers shared among governments at different levels
3.  Although  judges are appointed by the executive, they can check the functioning of  executive  or  laws made by the legislatures
4. Power  shared among different social groups, such as the religious
and linguistic groups.
Which    of    the   statements    is/are incorrect?


a.   2 and 4 Only b.  1 and 3 Only
c.  1, 2 and 3 Only d.  1, 2, 3 and 4





13. Which  of the following mirrors are best suited to  be used in Solar cookers?
a.   Concave   and   Convex
both
b.  Only Plane Mirror
c.  Convex mirror only d.  Concave mirror only




14. What is the basic force behind the  generation  of  Ocean thermal energy?
a.   Heat  generated   by  the
seabed volcanoes.
b. Energy  of  waves  and currents
c. Temperature  difference between the surface and deeper ocean
d.  Rise and fall in the level of tides

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                               Page 6
15. Which   of   the  following   are correct?


1. The modern novel form developed in  India  in  the eighteenth century, as Indians became familiar with the Western novel.
2.   Print and vernacular  helped in  the development of  the modern novel.
3.  The earliest novel in Marathi was Baba Padmanji’s Yamuna Paryatan,  which spoke  about the  plight  of widows.


Select  the  correct  answer using the codes below


a.   2 Only b.  1 and 2 c.  2 and 3
d.  1, 2 and 3




16. Consider the following:


1. Indian novelists of the nineteenth century wrote for a cause.
2.   Colonial  rulers  regarded
the contemporary culture of India as superior.
3.  Indian  novelists failed to
develop      a         modern
literature of the country that  could produce a sense of national belonging and cultural equality with  their colonial masters.


Which  of the above statements  is/are correct?


a.   1 Only b.  1 and 2 c.  3 Only d.  None




17.  In  the  modern India,  though there  was  an increase in  the Indian novels, the spread  of it was declined because of which of the following factors?


1.  Absence   of   translations of novels into different regional languages.
2.   Absence of Print
3.  Vernacular languages did not help in development of the novels.
4.  Fear of Western  culture invading Indian culture


Select the correct answers using the codes below


a.   1, 2 and 3

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                               Page 7
b.  2, 3 and 4 c.  1, 3 and 4 d.  None


18. Consider        the        following statements about Agenda 21
1.   Agenda 21 is a binding  action plan of  the United  Nations with   regard  to sustainable development
2.   The "21" in Agenda 21 refers to  the 21  important points that are need to be implemented by all the countries
3.  In    2012,    at      the United
Nations     Conference     on
Sustainable
Development the   attending members reaffirmed their commitment  to  Agenda 21 in their outcome document called "The  Future We Want"

Which  of the above statements  is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  3 Only
d.  All Three




19. The First World War created   a new   economic   and  political
situation in India which. Consider the following statements  related to the First World War :



1. Customs   duties  were introduced and income tax was raised to finance the war.
2. Through the war years prices increased – doubling between 1913 and  1918  –  leading to extreme hardship for the common people.
3. Soldiers were forcefully recruited from the rural areas which  caused widespread  anger among the people.
4.  The   end  of   the   First World  War  improved the lives of the people.



Which    of   the   above  statement/s is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only
c.  1, 3 and 4 only
d.  1, 2 and 3






20. Which      of     the     following


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                               Page 8
statements  about Mahatma Gandhi's famous philosophy of SATYAGRAHA is/are  correct
?



1.  Satyagraha is not physical force. A satyagrahi does not inflict  pain on the adversary; he does not seek the destruction of the enemy.
2. Mahatma Gandhi first experimented with Satyagraha  at Champaran in Bihar.
3. Satyagraha      aims     at appealing to  the conscience of the oppressor.
4.  Satyagraha               Theory
influenced Martin Luther King, Jr.'s and James Bevel's campaigns  during the civil rights movement in the United States



Select  the  correct  answer using the codes below

a.   1 and 2 only
b.  1, 2 and 3 only c.  1, 3 and 4 only
d.  1, 2, 3 and 4
21.  On 13 April 1919, the infamous Jallianwalla Bagh  incident took place in Amritsar. Consider the following statements on the Jallianwalla Bagh massacre.



1.  The people had gathered at JallianwallaBagh to attend  the annual Baisakhi fair  and  there wasn't any protest.
2. The     British     media strongly condemned General Dyer  for ordering  the  killings  of the people.
3.  The Government held an
inquiry commision, chaired by Lord Hunter.
4.  This commission did not
have any members  and the report was uncritical of General Dyer.



which   of  the  above    statement/s is/are correct?




a.   1 only b.  2 only
c.  2 and 3 only
d.  none of the above





http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                               Page 9
22.  Consider        the       following
Statements:


1.  In  India,  citizens  have the right to seek enforcement of the Fundamental Rights
2.   The Right to Constitutional Remedies is not a Fundamental Right.
3.  In  case  of  violation  of  a
Fundamental Right  the citizen can directly approach Supreme Court or High Court.
4.  Only the High Courts  have the right to issue orders for the enforcement of both Fundamental Rights  and Legal rights.
5.  The Courts can also enforce the  Fundamental Rights against private individuals and bodies.


Which    of    the   statements    is/are correct?


a.   1 and 3
b.  1, 3 and 5
c.  1, 3, 4 and 5 d.  1, 2, 3 and 5


23. The   concept   of   sustainable development focuses  on  the needs of :
a. Future  generation   of humanity only
b.  Conservation                 of
environment irrespective of the needs of economic growth
c. Present    and    future generations of humanity
d. Conservation   of   fossil fuels to ensure energy security of the nations




24.  The fusion  reaction is  said to the future source of energy. What are the conditions needed to achieve fusion reaction?
a.   Extremely  high pressure and extremely low temperature
b. Extremely low pressure and extremely low temperature
c.  Extremely  high pressure and extremely high temperature
d. Extremely low pressure and extremely high temperature




25. Which      of     the     following statements is/are true?



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                             Page 10
a. The hydrogen bomb is based on  thermonuclear fission reaction.
b.  The fundamental physics of the fission chain reaction in a  nuclear weapon is quite different to the physics of a controlled nuclear reactor. Also,  the two types of devices are engineered differently.
c.  No  industrialized nation
has  been  able to  meet even one-fourth of its total demand of  energy from nuclear reactors.

Select  the  correct  answer using the codes below

a.   All of the above b.  3 only
c.  1 and 2 only
d.  None of the above




26. With  reference to  the Special Industry Initiative scheme known as UDAAN, consider the following statements,


1.  It will  be implemented by the National Skills Development    Corporation
(NSDC)    and  Ministry    of
Home Affairs along with the corporate sector
2.    It targets the youth of J&K,
Naxal affected districts  and North East India, specifically graduates and postgraduates, who are  seeking global  and local opportunities.

Which  of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None


27. A new campaign for the safety of women titled ‘I respect women’ has been launched by


a.    Ministry of tourism
b.   Ministry  of  women and family welfare
c.   Ministry of Home Affairs
d.   None of the above


28. Consider        the        following statements  on  National Urban Health  Mission   (NUHM), which  along with  National Rural Health Mission (NRHM)


1.   Both the schemes have been now clubbed under Sarva Swasthya Abhiyan.


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                             Page 11
2.    A  NUHM is   proposed for the urban poor with  focus on those living in urban slums.
3. One    Accredited    Social Health Activist  ASHA (community   link   worker) for  200 to  500 households will  work under NUHM scheme

Which  of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  3 Only
d.  2 Only

29. Consider the following statements:


1. The  Concurrent  List  contains forest, education  and agriculture as its subjects.
2.   All  States in the Indian Union do not have identical powers.
3.  The Union  territories do not have the powers of a State
4.  The       Constitution       originally
provided for a  two-tier system of government, the Union Government and the State Government only.


Which    of    the   statements    is/are correct?
a.   1 and 4
b.  1, 2 and 4 c.  2, 3 and 4
d.  1, 2, 3 and 4




30. Country  ‘A’  is   said  to  be  a federal country. Which  of  the following are the features of a federal government?


1.  There  are  four  levels  (or tiers) of government.
2.   The fundamental  provisions of  the  constitution  can be unilaterally changed by one level of government.
3.  Courts  have the  power  to interpret the constitution and the powers of different levels of government.
4.  Sources of revenue for each level of government are clearly specified to ensure its financial autonomy.


Select  the  correct  answer using the codes below


a.   3 and 4
b.  1, 3 and 4 c.  1 and 3
d.  1, 2, 3 and 4




http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                             Page 12
31. During  the  19th   Century, Bengal literature was one of the important vernacular literature which has contributed immensely to the Indian literature. Which  of the following is/are correct with reference to Bengal literature?


1.  Initially   the  Bengali novel used a  colloquial style associated with urban life.
2.   Initially   the  Bengali novel
used meyeli, the language associated with women’s speech.
3. Bankim    Chandra    was famous for verse-oriented Indian writing.
4.  Vandhe Mataram was taken from Rabindranath tagore’s Anandamath


Select  the  correct  answer using the codes below


a.   1 and 2 Only
b.  1, 3 and 4 Only c.  1, 2 and 3 Only d.  None





32. With    regard  to   Vernacular literature,       consider        the
following:


1. Vernacular novels were used by colonial administrators in governing the Indian society.
2. Vernacular           novels inspired the spirit of Nationalism in the remote areas.
3.  Vernacular  novels  failed to revive the Indian culture.
4. Vernacular novels were translated into English by British administrators.


Which of the above is/are correct?


a.   2 Only
b.  1 and 2 Only
c.  1, 2 and 4 Only d.  1, 2, 3 and 4


33. The Himalayan Yew is a


a.   Bird  species  known  for its  long beautiful  white feathers
b. A  sub species of Owl which  is  bigger in  size than any other owl species in the world
c.  A medicinal plant known from      which       world

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                             Page 13
famous anti-cancer drug is produced
d.  None of the above




34. Consider        the        following statements  about decline in India’s biodiversity


1.   Habitat         destruction, hunting, poaching, over- exploitation, environmental pollution, poisoning and forest fires are factors,  which  have led   to   the   decline   in India’s biodiversity.
2.   Other  important causes of environmental destruction are unequal access, inequitable consumption of resources and differential  sharing of responsibility for environmental well- being.

Which  of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None
35. Consider        the        following statements on forests,


1.  Assam   has   the   largest area under permanent forests,   constituting   75 per cent of its total forest area.
2.   Reserved  and protected forests  are also  referred to  as  permanent forest estates maintained for the purpose of producing timber  and other  forest produce, and for protective reasons.
3.  In India  More  than half of  the  total forest  land has been declared reserved forests. Reserved forests are regarded as the most  valuable as  far  as the conservation of forest and wildlife resources are concerned.
4.  Almost  one-third of  the
total forest area is protected forest, as declared by  the  Forest Department. This  forest land are  protected from any further depletion.

Which  one of  the statements  given above is/are correct?

a.   1, 2and 4 Only

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                             Page 14
b.  2,3 and 4 Only c.  1 and 4 Only
d.  All Four



36. The first  proper modern novel was written by Srinivas Das, which was titled Pariksha-Guru. Which  of the following is  the theme of Pariksha Guru?


a.   It is based on the inner and outer world of the newly emerging middle classes.
b.  It    is    based   on    India’s
freedom struggle.
c.  It is  based on the plight of women.
d.  It  is   based on  the  issues between a  master and a student





37. What    are   the   benefits   of watershed management?


1.   Boosts local communities’
income
2. Rejunevates    land  and water sources
3. Increases   the  life   of downstream dam and reservoirs
4. Mitigates  drought   and floods
Select  the  correct  answer using the codes below

a.   1 and 2 Only
b.  1, 2 and 3 Only
c.  All of the above d.  3 and 4




38. Storing   water   in    form    of groundwater is often considered to be a  better option than storing it on surface reservoirs. What can be the possible reasons behind it?


1. Unlike   surface  water, groundwater  can always be free of contaminants.
2. Evaporation of  surface reservoirs is higher as compared to groundwater.
3. Stagnated surface water provides a breeding ground  for  disease vectors.
4.  Even nearby wells can be
recharged and water need not be conveyed to each well.

Which  of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   All of the above b.  2, 3 and 4


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                             Page 15
c.  1, 2 and 3
d.  1 and 4 only




39. Which      of     the     following statements are true?


1.   The regions of water scarcity are also the regions of high poverty in India.
2.   Narmada   Bachao Aandolan and Chipko  Movement are examples of movements related to  the  conservation of the environment.
3.  Local irrigation  solutions  as
compared to Mega-irrigation projects  enable the local communities to exercise more control  over their fields and environment.


Select the correct answer using the codes below


a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.  1 and 3 only
d.  All of the above




40. The  Rowlatt Act,1919 was an act hurriedly passed through the Imperial    Legislative   Council
despite the united opposition of
the Indian members.



Consider   the   following   statements with regard to this Act:

1. It   gave     the   government enormous powers to repress only  the  political  activities  of the Indians.
2.   It allowed detention of political
prisoners without trial for three or more years.
3.  Opposition to this law was the
sole reason for Gandhiji to call for the Non-Cooperation Movement.



Which   of  the  statements  above is/are correct?

a.   1 only
b.  1 and 2 only c.  1 and 3 only d.  1, 2 and 3



41. The  Non-Cooperation-Khilafat
Movement  began   in   January
1921. Various social groups participated in this  movement, each with its own specific aspiration in  their  own  way. Consider the following social groups:


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                             Page 16
1.Students, headmasters    and teachers,          and lawyers
2. Peasants
3.Tribals
4.Plantation workers



Which  of the above group/groups participated in the movement?




a.   1 and 2 only
b.  1, 2 and 3 only c.  1, 3 and 4 only d.  1, 2, 3 and 4



42. Which  of the following mission mode projects  are exclusively implemented by the state governments under National e- Governance Plan?


1.   Education
2.   Health
3.  PDS
4.  Agriculture
5.  Insurance
6.  Banking
7.  Road Transport

Select   the   codes   given   below   to answer the question

a.  1,2,3,5,and  7 Only
b.  1,2,3,4 and 7 Only c.  1,2,4 and 7 Only
d.  1,2 and 4 Only




43. The  newly  launched “Seekho
aur Kamao” scheme is,


1.  a  100%  Central Sector Scheme for Skill Development of minorities
2.     Implemented        by       the
Ministry of Youth Affairs

Select   the   codes   given   below   to answer the question

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None




44. The Tory government in Britain constituted a Statutory Commission under Sir John Simon which  was to arrive in India in 1928.



1.   It did not have even a single Indian member.
2.   Lord              Reading, announced in October
1929, a vague  offer  of
dominion  status     for
India in an unspecified

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                             Page 17
future.
3. All     the    political parties in India except the Muslim League participated in     Go back Simon demonstrations.



Which    of    the   above   is/are incorrect?

a.   1 and 2 b.  2 and 3 c.  2 only d.  3 only



45. Consider the statements on the impact of the Great Depression (which began in 1929 and lasted till the mid-1930s) on India.



1.  Both the exports and imports of India nearly halved   between
1928 and 1934.
2. In             these depression years, India  became an exporter of precious metals, notably gold.
Which  of the above statement/s is/are correct?




a.   1 only b.  2 only
c.  Both 1 and 2
d.  Neither 1 nor 2



46. Which      of     the     following statements is/are correct?


a. In  India  joint  forest management (JFM) programme e has been in formal   existence    since
1988   when  the state  of
Orissa passed the first resolution for joint forest management
b. JFM  depends  on  the government to undertake protection activities mostly on degraded forest land managed  by the forest department.

Select the right answer using the codes below

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None





http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                             Page 18
47. Consider        the        following statements:



1. Dr     B.R.    Ambedkar organised  the dalits into the Depressed Classes Association in 1930
2. He      clashed      with Mahatma  Gandhi at  the second Round Table Conference by demanding reserved seats for   dalits   in   provincial and central legislative councils.
3.  Gandhiji   began     a    fast unto death opposing reservations to Depressed Classes in 1932.



Which  of the above statement/s is/are correct?




a.   1 only
b.  1 and 2 only c.  1 and 3 only d.  1 , 2 and 3






48. Consider        the        following statements   about the  Science,
Technology     and    Innovation
Policy (STI) 2013


1.  One of its key features is positioning India among the top five global scientific powers by 2020
2.   Raising Gross     Expenditure in Research and Development   (GERD)    to
2% from the present 1%  of the GDP  in this  decade by encouraging enhanced private sector contribution.
3.   India has declared 2010-20 as the “Decade of Innovation”
4.   A Strong and viable Science, Research and Innovation system for High Technology led path for India (SRISHTI) are the goal for the STI policy.




Which  of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1and 2 Only
b.  1,2 and 3Only c.  3 and 4Only
d.  All Four




49. Consider        the        following statements about the ‘Jiyo Parsi’ scheme


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                             Page 19


1.  It  has  been  launched   in order  to  reverse  the declining trend of Parsi population.
2.   Financial assistance  will  be
provided under the scheme for investigation and detection of infertility, counselling and fertility treatment to couples.
3.  This   is   a    100%   Central sector scheme

Which   of  the  following  statements is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  1 and 3 Only c.  3 Only
d.  All Three




50. Consider   the  following   state about the “Nai Roshni” scheme
1. It  is   launched by  the ministry of women and family welfare to impart leadership skills  to rural women
2.   This scheme is  also known as “Scheme for Leadership Development of Minority Women”.

Which   of  the  following  statements is/are correct?
a.   1 Only b.  2  Only c.  Both
d.  None




51. Consider        the        following statements  about  the National Urban Livelihoods Mission (NULM)


1.  It is an an improved version of the earlier poverty alleviation    programme   for the urban poor titled Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY)
2.  It is  being implemented by the Ministry  of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation (HUPA)

Which  of the statements  above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None


52. With  reference to the Lifestyle Disease Education and Awareness Programme (LEAP), consider the following statements


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                             Page 20
1. The  Programme is  a   joint initiative of the National Rural  Health  Mission   and the State  Departments of Health and Education of Kerala government
2. The    new    initiative   will complement a  peer programme                 titled
‘Amrutham,  Arogyam’   for
adults in the State.
3. Training    for    students   in vegetable  farm making and making healthy diet is one of its main objectives

Which  of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  All Three
d.  None




53. Consider        the        following statements:


1. Indian Constitution has given the status of national language  to Hindi.
2. Seventh           Schedule contains the languages recognized    by    Indian
Constitution.
3.  Languages in   India   are grouped as scheduled and non-scheduled languages.
4.  In India, states have been created  on the linguistic basis with the theory ‘one language- one state’


Which   of  the  statements   is/are correct?


a.   3 Only b.  2 and 3
c.  1, 2 and 4 d.  1, 2 and 3


54. Rise of coalition government  at the centre has led to which of the following?


1.   More autonomy to the States.
2.   The federal power sharing has become more effective
3.  Delay in decision making
4.  It is one of the casual factors for instability


Which   of  the  statements   is/are correct?


a.   2 and 3
b.  2, 3 and 4 c.  1, 2 and 4


d.  1, 2, 3 and 4


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                             Page 21


55. Consider the following with regard to 73rd and 74th Amendment Act.


1.   The panchayat works under the overall supervision of the gram sabha.
2.  Seats are reserved  in the elected bodies and the executive heads of these institutions for the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes.
3. At   least  one-third  of   all positions are reserved for women and one-sixth for minorities.
4. An    independent  institution called the State Election Commission has been created in each State to conduct panchayat  and municipal elections. He can only be removed by  the  President of India.


Which  of the above statements  is/are correct?


a.   1 and 3
b.  1, 2 and 4 c.  2 and 3
d.  2, 3 and 4
56. The   salient  features   of   the Scheme of Tourist Visa on Arrival (TVOA) are:


1. The TVOA  is  available  to foreign nationals arriving from Japan, USA, UK, Singapore, Finland, Luxembourg, New Zealand, Cambodia, Laos,  Vietnam, Philippines, Myanmar and Indonesia.
2. The TVOA is allowed for a maximum of two times in a calendar  year to a  foreigner with a minimum gap of two months between each visit. TVOA is non-extendable and non-convertible.
3. The TVOA  facility is  even applicable to the holders of Diplomatic/Official Passports.

Which  of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1and 2 Only b.  2 and 3Only c.  2 Only
d.  All Three



57. Consider        the        following statements about Swavalamban Yojana



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                             Page 22
1.   "NPS -Swavalamban Model" is  designed to ensure ultra- low  administrative and transactional  costs,  so  as to make small investments viable
2.   Open to eligible citizens  of
India,  in  the  age  group   of
40–60 years.  Subscriber  is free to  choose  the amount he/she wants to invest every year.
3.  Regulated  by Pension Fund
Regulatory       Development
Authorities (PFRDA)

Which  of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1and 2 Only b.  1 and 3Only c.  2 Only
d.  All Three




58. With reference to the proposed the LPG Connection Portability Scheme, consider the following statements


1.   An  LPG consumer in these markets can now switch  to the distributor of his/her choice  within  a   cluster  of LPG distributors in the vicinity under this scheme
2.   This initiative is expected to usher in improvement in customer  service  by fostering healthy competition among each cluster of distributors.
3. No     Transfer    fee    or additional security   deposit will  be charged for transfer of connection under the portability scheme.

Which  of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1and 2 Only b.  1 and 3Only c.  3 Only
d.  All Three


59. Consider        the        following statements on water scarcity and water stress


1.  Water scarcity is the lack of sufficient available water resources to meet the demands of  water usage within a region
2.   Water    stress     is     the
difficulty of obtaining sources of fresh water for use during a  period of time  and may  result  in further depletion and deterioration  of available
water resources.

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                             Page 23
3. According   to   Falken Mark, a  Swedish expert, water stress occurs when water availability  is  less than 1,000  cubic  metre per person per day.
4. The        per        capita availability of  water  in India is 1545 cubic meters as  per  the  2011   census compared to 1816   cubic meters in 2011

Which  of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1,2 and 3 Only b.  2,3 and 4 Only c.  3 and 4 Only
d.  All Four




60. Which      of     the     following statements is/are correct?


1.   Aus, Aman and Boro are three crops of wheat grown  in and around Punjab and Haryana
2.   Cotton,  jute,  groundnut
and soyabean are mostly grown during Zaid season which is cropping season between Rabi and Kharif seasons.
Select  the  correct  answer using the codes below.

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None


61. Consider        the        following statements about pulses


1. India   is   the   largest producer as well  as  the consumer of pulses in the world.
2. Major pulses that are grown  in  India  are tur (arhar), urad, moong, masur, peas and gram.
3.  Being leguminous crops, all these crops  including arhar help  in   restoring soil fertility by fixing nitrogen from the air

Which  of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 Only
c.  3 Only
d.  All Three




62. Consider        the        following statements  about the  Printing Press in India:

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                             Page 24


1.   The printing press first came to Kerala(Cochi) with  Portuguese missionaries in the mid- sixteenth century.
2.   The Bengal Gazette, a  weekly
newspaper, is  the  first published        Indian newspaper, brought out by Gangadhar Bhattacharya,   who was close to Rammohun Roy.


Which of the above is/are correct?


a.   1 only b.  2 only
c.  both 1 and 2
d.  neither 1 nor 2





63. The  following  energy  sources are the  most  widely  used  in India.


1.   Coal
2.   Petroleum  and  Natural
Gas
3.  Hydroelectricity
4.  Nuclear energy
5.  Wind energy

Which option shows their arrangement in  increasing  order  of consumption in India?

a.   5, 4, 3, 2 ,1
b. 4,5,3,2,1 c. 2,5,4,3,1 d.  2,4,5,3,1




64. To which  crop does following descriptions apply?


1. It       requires       high temperature, light rainfall or irrigation, 210 frost- free days and bright sunshine for its growth.
2.   It  is  a   kharif crop  and requires 6 to 8 months to mature.

Select   the   correct   answer  from following choices

a.   Sugarcane b.  Cotton
c.  Tobacco d.  Jute




65. With reference to the Rashtriya Bal Swaasthya Karyakram, consider the following statements,


1.  It   is    a     newly   launched scheme by ministry of HRD and Social Justice which assures a  package   of health


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                             Page 25
services for children up to 18 years of age.
2.   It is    part of  the National
Rural Health Mission
3. The  services  under  this programme aim to cover all children of 0-6 years of age group in rural areas and urban slums,  in  addition to children  enrolled in  classes
1st to    12th in    Government
and    Government     aided schools.

Which  of the statements given above is/are correct?

1.   1 and 2 Only
2.   1 and 3 Only
3.  2 and 3 Only
4.  All Three




66. Consider        the        following statements on generic drugs


1. A  generic  drug  is  a pharmaceutical product that is manufactured without  a   license  from the innovator company and marketed after the expiry date of the patent or other exclusive rights.
2.   Generic drugs are subject
to  the  same regulations
over         manufacturing, packaging,    testing   and quality standards, as their patented/branded equivalent.
3.  Prices           of           the
branded/patented drugs are generally  quite high, due to the temporary monopoly over the product, bestowed by the patent.
4.  At ‘Jan Aushadhi Stores',
where quality generic medicines, which are equivalent to the expensive branded drugs, in terms of their potency and efficacy, are sold  at cheaper prices.

Which  of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1,2 and 4 Only b.  1,2 and 3 Only c.  1,2 and 4 Only d.  All Four




67. Consider        the        following statements  about the National Electric Mobility Mission Plan (NEMMP) 2020



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                             Page 26
1. It   is   a    roadmap   for progressive induction and expansion of efficient and environmentally friendly electric  and hybrid vehicles in the country.
2.   It aims to boost  6-7 million units of new vehicle sales of the  full   range of   electric vehicles by year 2020
3.  The Mission Plan lays special emphasis on progressive indigenization of technology, localization of manufacturing and eventually, job creation.

Which  of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  1 and 3 Only c.  All Three
d.  None




68. The   beneficiaries   under   the Antyodaya Anna Yojana" (AAY)  include


1. and persons  earning  their livelihood  on daily basis in the informal sector like porters, coolies, rickshaw pullers,   hand  cart  pullers,
fruit    and   flower    sellers, snake charmers, rag pickers
2.  Single women or single men with  no  family or  societal support or assured means of subsistence.
3. Families of  HIV   positive persons and all primitive tribal households
4. Landless              agriculture labourers, marginal farmers, rural artisans/craftsmen

Which  of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1,2 and 3 Only b.  1 and 3 Only
c.  1 and 4
d.  All Four




69. Consider        the        following statements  about the Direct Benefits  Transfer  (DBT) scheme


1. The scheme is  aimed at cutting the bloated subsidy bill of Rs.1, 64,000 crores.
2. Aims        to       eliminate middlemen in various government sponsored welfare schemes and subsidized   food,  fuel   and
fertiliser schemes.


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                             Page 27
3.  On the basis of Aadhar cards money is deposited in beneficiaries’ accounts.
4. It  would  infuse  financial inclusion  on a  greater   scale in rural India.

Which  of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1,2 and 3 Only b.  1,3 and 4 Only c.  1 and 4
d.  All Four




70. Consider        the        following statements


1.  Operation    Sadhbhavana is evidence of the Indian Army's "organisational innovation and operational learning".
2.   Youth     Employment    and Guidance                     Node (YEGN)  programme under Operation Sadhbhavana  was launched  a  few years  back in  border and remote areas of  Jammu   and Kashmir   to enable  the   youth   to   get employment

Which  of the statements given above is/are correct?
a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None
71. Consider        the        following statements,


1.  The  running water cuts through  the  clayey soils and makes deep channels as gullies. It is known as gully erosion.
2.   Sometimes  water  flows
as a sheet over large areas down a slope. In such cases the top soil is washed away. This is known as sheet erosion.
3.  Soil erosion is also caused
due to defective methods of farming.
4.  When  the land becomes unfit for cultivation it  is known as bad land.

Which  of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1,2 and 3 b.  2,3 and 4 c.  1,3 and 4 d.  All Four




72. With     reference   to    various species  and their  status  n  the



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                             Page 28
wild   in   India,    consider   the following statements


1. Great  Indian  Bustard, Siberian Crane, Red- headed Vulture  and Forest Owlet are now listed under critically endangered birds
2.   Among  animals,  Pygmy
Hog,  Kondana Rat   and The  Sumatran Rhinoceros are listed as critically endangered
3.  The Leatherback turtle is listed  as  vulnerable species

Which  of the above statements  is/are correct?

a.  1 and 2 Only b. 2 and 3 Only c.  1 and 3 Only d. All Three




73. Consider the following criteria;


1. Populations            have declined or will decrease, by greater than 80% over the last 10 years  or three generations.
2.   Have       a          restricted
geographical range.
3.  Small population size  of less  than 250 individuals and continuing decline at
25% in  3    years or  one generation.
4.  Very  small or  restricted
population of fewer than
50 mature individuals.

Which of the following categories would be aptly described by the above criteria for a species?

a.   Vulnerable
b.  Critically Endangered c.  Endangered
d.  Near Risk Category




74. Social  Justice   is   one  of   the ideals enshrined in the preamble of  the  Constitution. Which of the following are correct with regard to the social differences that occur in a society?


1.   All   kinds   of social differences are based         on accident     of birth.
2.   Some  of  the differences are


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                             Page 29
based on  our choices.
3.  Every     social
difference
does not lead to social division.
4.  Democracy always    leads to disintegration of  society  on the   basis   of social
divisions.


Select  the  correct  answer using the codes below


a.   2 and 3
b.  2, 3 and 4 c.  1, 3 and 4 d.  1, 2 and 4




75. Which   of  the  following  are the measures  taken by Government to reduce social differences in the society?


1.  The  government  has provided for 33% reservation for women in the Parliament.
2.   Hindi Language has been made the  national language   of  the
country.
3. The    State     intervenes    in thematters  of religion in order to ensure equality within religious communities.
4.  Enactment of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA)


Select  the  correct  answer using the codes below


a.   1 and 4 b.  3 and 4
c.  1, 2 and 4
d.  1, 2, 3 and 4




76. Communalism    is  based on  the belief that:
1. People who follow  different religions cannot belong to  the same social community.
2.   Any     difference     that      the
followers of a particular  religion may have is irrelevant or trivial for community life.
3.  The fundamental  interests of a particular community are the same.
4. If the followers  of different religion have some commonalities these are superficial and immaterial.


Which   of  the  statements   is/are correct?

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                             Page 30


a.   1 and 4
b.  1, 2 and 4 c.  1, 2 and 3
d.  1, 2, 3 and 4






77. Consider        the       following statements:


1.  The Constitution of India ensures  equality  of citizens within religious communities.
2.   A                    democratic
government  is  the most legitimate government
3.  Preamble   is     not    an
integral     part    of    the
Constitution
4. Democracy    helps    in promoting dignity and freedom of the individual


Which  of the following statements is/are correct?


a.   1 Only b.  1 and 4
c.  1,2 and 4
d.  1, 2, 3 and 4
78. Consider        the       following statements with regard to Pressure Groups.


1.  They have political ideology and take positions  on political issues
2.   Their   decision   making   is more formal and rigid.
3.  Their  principal  concern  is
the betterment and well- being of their members, not society in general.
4. They      have      deepened democracy.
5.  These   groups   are  formed
having uncommon objectives.


Which    of    the   statements    is/are correct?


a.   1, 4     and 5 b.  3, 4 and 5
c.  1, 3 and 4
d.  1, 2, 4 and 5






79. Which    of   the   following   is associated  with  or  true about Ozone (O3) ?


1.Human    exposure to   ozone   is   not
harmful.

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                             Page 31
2. The        chemicals used       in       fire extinguishers deplete        ozone layer.
3.The             United
Nations Environment Programme succeeded          in freezing            the production         of ozone-depleting substances       like CFCs   only  at  the
beginning    of   21st
century.

Select  the  correct  answer using the codes below

a.   2 and 3 b.  2 only c.  1 and 3
d.  1,2 and 3




80. The  Ganga   Action   Plan was being implemented from 1985 to  make Ganga  pollution-free. Which   of  the  following qualities in the Ganga water would ensure that it is safe for human uses?
1.  High concentration of Coliform bacteria which is found in human intestine and kills other harmful micro-organisms.
2.   Low pH value of Ganga water
3.  Complete absence of all metals from the Ganga water.

Select  the  correct  answer using the codes below

a.   1 and 2 b.   2 and 3 c.   2 only
d.   None of the above


81. Who are the stakeholders in the conservation of forests in India?


1.   Manufacturing Industries
2.   Tourists and wildlife enthusiasts
3. Forest                   Department, Government of India
4.  Forest inhabitants

Select  the  correct  answer using the codes below

a.   All of the above b.  2,3 and 4
c.  3 and 4 only d.  4 only




82. Which      of     the     following statements  have been realized




http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                             Page 32
to be true by communities and governments around the world?


1. Partnering         local communities in the conservation of forests ensures decentralised economic growth and ecological
conservation.
2.   Ecological stability of the area  may be disturbed by  banning traditional methods of exploitation of  forest produce by the local communities.

Select  the  correct  answer using the codes below

a.   Both b.  1 only c.  2 only d.  None




83. With      reference     to     land utilization in India, consider the following definitions


1. Culturable waste land includes   land   available for cultivation, whether taken up or not taken up for  cultivation once, but
not cultivated during the
last five years or more in succession   including the current year for some reason or the other .
2.   Fallow lands other than current fallows includes all land which was taken up for cultivation  but is temporarily out of cultivation for a period of not less than one year and not more than five years.


3. Land which  cannot be brought under cultivation except  at  an exorbitant cost is classified as unculturable whether such  land is  in  isolated blocks or within cultivated holdings.

Which  of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  1 and 3 Only d.  All Three




84. Consider        the        following statements about soils


1.  Alluvial soils  as a  whole are  very  fertile.  Mostly

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                             Page 33
these soils contain adequate proportion of potash, phosphoric acid and lime which are ideal for the growth of sugarcane,  paddy, wheat and other cereal and pulse crops.
2.   Black soils  are black in colour and are also known as regur soils.
3.  Black soils are rich in soil nutrients, such as calcium carbonate, magnesium, potash and lime.  These soils are generally  poor in phosphoric contents.
4.  The laterite soil develops in areas with high temperature and  heavy rainfall.

Which  of the above statements  is/are correct?

a.   1,2 and 3 Only b.  1,3 and 4 Only c.  2,3 and 4 Only d.  All Four



85. In the Indian context, which of the following statements are incorrect with respect to the multi-party system adopted?
1. It leads to political instability.
2.   It deepens democracy.
3. It creates  a  natural system of checks and balance
4.  It  may lead to  hung parliament


Select the correct answers using the codes below


a.   1, 2 and 3 b.  3 Only
c.  1, 2, 3 and 4 d.  None




86. Democracies  that   follow   a   federal system all over the world tend to have two kinds of political parties; parties that  are present in  only  one of  the federal units and parties that are present in several or all units of the federation. Which of the following are the necessary conditions for a party  to be recognized as a  national party in India?


1. The   party  should   secure  a minimum 6%  of total valid votes in the Lok Sabha elections or the Assembly elections in four or more
States.





http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                             Page 34
2.   The party should win a  minimum of 2% of Lok Sabha seats by contesting from at least 3 states.
3.  The party should be recognised as a   state  party in  minimum  of  3 states.
4.  The party should have won at least
4 seats in Lok Sabha elections


Select the correct answers using the codes below


a.   1 and 4 b.  2 and 3 c.  1 Only d.  None




87.  Reforming political parties is one of the   aspects   of   good    governance. Which  of the following is/are  a  step in this direction?


1. The  Parliament enacted anti- defection law
2.   On  Supreme  Courts   orders,  it’s
now  mandatory  for  every candidate who contests elections to file an Affidavit giving details of his property and criminal cases pending against him.
3.  The  Election  Commission  passed
an order making  it  necessary for political parties to hold their organizational   elections   and  file
their income tax returns.
4.  The political parties do not come under the ambit of Right to Information Act.


Select the correct answers using the codes below


a.   1 and 4
b.  1, 2 and 4 c.  1, 2 and 3
d.  1, 2, 3 and 4




88. Consider        the        following statements  about sustainable development


1.  Sustainable      development ties   together  concern   for the carrying
capacity of natural   systems
with  the  social  and economic challenges faced by humanity.
2.   The carrying    capacity of   a
biological species in
an environment is            the minimum population size of the species that the environment can sustain definitely,        given         the food, habitat, water and
other necessities available in the environment

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                             Page 35
3. Economic       development, social  development, and environmental protection are the interdependent and mutually reinforcing  pillars of sustainable development

Which  of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  1 and 3 Only c.  2 and 3 Only d.  All Three




89. Which    of   the   following statements  are true concerning the construction of dams?
1. The vegetation that is submerged under the dam, rots under anaerobic  conditions and gives rise to large amounts of methane.
2.   The construction of dams
is    preferable   in    hilly areas.
3.  It  disturbs   the  natural
eco-system       of       the surrounding areas.

Select the correct answers using the codes below



a.   1 and 3
b.  1,2 and 3 c.  1 and 2
d.   Only 3




90.What are the usual constraints in promoting solar energy at  a large scale in India?


1. The manufacturing of solar cells is very expensive given the level of technology India posses.
2.   The   energy  efficiency   of solar cells is very low.
3.  Solar cells require heavy and
costly maintenance.

Select the correct answers using the codes below


a.   1 and 2


b.  1,2 and 3 c.  1 only
d.  2 and 3


91. Which      of     the     following statements is/are true?


1. The green plants in a terrestrial ecosystem capture the  majority of the fraction of  the solar energy  falling  on   their
leaves.


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                             Page 36
2. Only a fraction of the energy is transferred from one trophic level to the other via the food chain.
3.  The lower trophic levels house greater number of individuals than the higher levels.



Select the correct answers using the codes below


a.   1 and 2 b.  2 only c.  1 and 3 d.  2 and 3


92. Which  of the following is true regarding the  process  of Biological Magnification?
1. The               maximum concentration of the chemicals is found at the highest trophic level.
2. The effect of biological magnification in vegetables, fruits etc. can always be  overcome by washing them properly.
3.  The  chemical  must  be
non-biodegradable for Biological   magnification to occur.

Select the correct answers using the codes below



a.   1 and 3


b.  1 only c.  2 and 3


d.  3 only

93. With   regard to  the  necessary conditions  for  a   party to  be recognized as a State   party. Consider the following statements:


1. A  political party should secure  at   least  6%  of  the total valid votes polled during general  election to a State  Legislative Assembly and should, in addition, win at least two seats in that Assembly  or  the  party should win at least 3% of the total number of seats or three seats in the Legislative Assembly,  whichever  is more.
2. A  political party should secure  at   least  6%  of  the total valid votes polled in a State during a  general election to Lok Sabha and win at  least one seat in the Lok Sabha  from that  State, or the party should win  at
least  one  seat   in  the  Lok

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                             Page 37
Sabha  for every 25 seats  or any fraction thereof allotted to that State.


Which    of    the   statements    is/are correct?


a.   1 Only b.  2 Only
c.  Both 1 and 2
d.  Neither 1 nor 2






94. With     regard   to    registration    of political parties in India, consider the following statements:


1.  All  political  parties must register themselves with the Election Commission.
2.   Not all parties that  are registered with the Election Commission  are recognized by it.
3. The registered parties will  get unique symbols.
4.  The registered parties are  entitled for free broadcasting or telecasting facilities.


Select the correct answers using the codes below
a.   2 and 4 b.  1 and 3
c.  1, 3 and 4


d.  1, 2, 3 and 4



95. Which   of  the  following  non- metals form oxides on burning of fossil fuels:
1.   Carbon
2.   Nitrogen
3.  Sulphur

Select  the  correct  answer using the codes below

a.   1 and 2


b.  2 and 3 c.  1 and 3


d.  1,2 and 3


96. Which      of     the     following statements is/are true?
1. The     availability    of electrical energy to each individual in a country is one of the parameters to measure the  growth  of the country.
2. The   transmission   of electricity is less efficient than transporting coal or petroleum over the same distance.

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                             Page 38
Select the correct answer using the codes below


a.   1 only b.  2 only c.  Both


d.  None


97. Consider        the       following statements  about the Constituent  Assembly  formed in 1946:


1. The  members of  the Constituent Assembly were elected in 1946 directly on the basis of universal franchise.
2. The             Constituent Assembly that came into being was dominated  by the Congress party.
3. The    Congress    party members of the Constituent Assembly were unanimous in theiropinion on all the critical issues.


Which    of   the   above  is/are incorrect?


a.   1 only
b.  1 and 2 only c.  1 and 3 only
d.  1, 2 and 3


98. In    the    nineteenth   century, hundreds of thousands of Indian and Chinese labourers went to work in various countries around the world. Consider the following statements with regard to  the  migration  of Indian                          labourers:


1. In India, indentured labourers were hired under contracts which  promised good  working conditions and permanent settlement in  those  countries.
2. Most Indian indentured workers came from the present- day regions of Rajasthan, Gujarat,             and      Punjab.
3. The labourers were hired  to work on plantations,  in mines, and in road and railway construction   projects   around the                                   world.


Which  of  the above is/are correct?


a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 Only
c.  3 Only
d.  1 and 3 Only


99. India  had   a  very rich  and old tradition      of       handwritten

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                             Page 39
manuscripts. Which  of the following statement/s  about the  manuscripts  is/are incorrect?


1.The manuscripts were written in Sanskrit, Arabic, Persian only and never in any of the vernacular                   languages.
2.Manuscripts    ceased   to   be
produced well before the introduction         of         print.
3.Manuscripts     were     highly
expensive and were not widely used      in       everyday     life.


Select  the  right  answer using the             codes             below


a.   1 and 2Only b.  2 Only
c.  3 Only
d.  1     and       3       Only
100.      Consider the following statements  about Raja  Ravi Varma :


1. Raja  Ravi  Varma achieved recognition for his depiction of scenes from the epics of the Mahabharata and Ramayana.
2. Raja  Ravi Varma produced images for mass circulation.
3. Ravi  Varma's  prints  began shaping popular ideas about modernity and tradition, religion and politics, and society and culture.


Which of the above is/are correct?


a.   2 only
b.  2 and 3 only c.  1 and 3 only d.  1, 2 and 3

























http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                             Page 40
