INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 6 - SOLUTIONS





1. Solution: c)

Dr Mahbub-ul-Haq and Prof Amartya Sen were close friends and have worked together under the leadership of Dr Haq to bring out the initial Human Development Reports. Both these South Asian economists have been able to provide  an alternative view of development.

A man of vision and compassion,  Pakistani economist Dr Mahbub-ul-Haq created the Human Development Index in 1990. According to him, development is all about enlarging people’s choices in order to lead long, healthy lives with dignity. The United Nations Development  Programme has used his concept of human development to publish the Human Development Report annually since 1990.

Nobel Laureate Prof Amartya Sen saw an increase in freedom (or decrease in unfreedom) as the main objective of development. Interestingly, increasing freedoms is also one of the most effective ways of bringing about development. His
work explores the role of social and political institutions and processes in increasing freedom.

The works of these economists are path breaking and have succeeded  in bringing people to the centre of any discussion on development.




2. Solution: A)

In 1967,  gold was displaced by creating the Special Drawing Rights (SDRs),  also known as ‘paper gold’,  in the IMF with the intention of increasing the stock of international reserves. Originally defined in terms of gold, with 35 SDRs being equal to one ounce of gold (the dollar-gold rate of the Bretton Woods system), it has been redefined several times since 1974.  At present, it is  calculated daily as the weighted sum of the values in dollars of four currencies (euro, dollar, Japanese yen, pound sterling) of the five countries (France, Germany, Japan, the UK and the US). It derives its  strength from IMF members being willing  to use it  as  a  reserve currency and use it as a means  of payment between central banks to exchange for
national currencies. The original installments of SDRs were distributed to member




http://insightsonindia.com                     INSIGHTS                                                                                      Page 1
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 6 - SOLUTIONS


countries according to their quota in the Fund (the quota was broadly related to the
country’s economic importance as indicated by the value of its international trade)







3.   Solution: a)

After getting into the body of the person, the virus enters into macrophages where RNA genome of the virus replicates to form viral DNA with the help of the enzyme reverse transcriptase. This viral DNA gets incorporated into host cell’s DNA and directs the infected cells to produce virus particles. The macrophages continue to produce virus and in this way acts like a HIV  factory. Simultaneously, HIV  enters into helper T-lymphocytes (TH), replicates and produce progeny viruses. The progeny viruses released in the blood attack other helper T- lymphocytes. This is repeated leading to a progressive decrease in the number of helper T-lymphocytes in the body of the infected person.

During this period, the person suffers from bouts of fever, diarrhoea and weight loss. Due to decrease in the number of helper T lymphocytes, the person starts suffering from infections that could have been otherwise overcome such as those due to bacteria especially Mycobacterium, viruses, fungi and even parasites like Toxoplasma. The patient becomes so immuno-deficient that he/she is unable to protect himself/herself  against these infections. A widely used diagnostic test for AIDS is enzyme linked immuno-sorbent assay (ELISA). Treatment of AIDS with anti-retroviral drugs is only partially effective. They can only prolong the life of the patient but cannot prevent death, which is inevitable.




4.   Solution: c) POPULATION GROWTH
The population growth or population change refers to the change in number of inhabitants of a territory during  a specific period of time. This change may be positive as well as negative. It can be expressed either in terms of absolute numbers
or in terms of percentage. Population change in an area is an important indicator of



http://insightsonindia.com                     INSIGHTS                                                                                      Page 2
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 6 - SOLUTIONS


economic development, social upliftment and historical and cultural background of the region.

Growth of Population : Change of population in particular  area between  two points of time is known as growth of population. For example, if we deduct the
population of India 1991 (84.63 crore) from population of 2001 (102.70 crore) then we shall get the growth of population (18.07 crores) in actual numbers.

Growth  Rate of Population : This is the change of population expressed in percentage.

Natural Growth  of Population: This is the population increased by difference between births and deaths in a particular  region between  two points of time.

Natural Growth = Births – Deaths

Actual Growth of Population : This is Births – Deaths + In Migration – Out
Migration

Positive Growth of Population: This happens when the birth rate is more than the death rate between  two points of time or when people from other countries migrate permanently to a region.

Negative Growth  of Population: If the population decreases between two points of time it is known as negative growth of population. It occurs when the birth rate falls below the death rate or people migrate to other countries.




5. Solution: B)

The revenue deficit includes only such transactions  that affect the current income and expenditure of  the government.  When  the government  incurs  a   revenue deficit, it implies that the government is dissaving and is using up the savings of the other sectors of the economy to finance  a part of its consumption expenditure. This situation means that the government will  have to borrow not only to finance its investment but also its consumption requirements. This will lead to a build up of stock of debt and interest liabilities and force the government, eventually, to cut expenditure. Since a major  part of revenue expenditure is committed expenditure,
it   cannot  be   reduced.  Often   the   government   reduces  productive  capital


http://insightsonindia.com                     INSIGHTS                                                                                      Page 3
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 6 - SOLUTIONS


expenditure or welfare expenditure. This would mean lower growth and adverse welfare implications.




6.  Solution: A)

The  proportional income tax, thus,  acts as an automatic  stabiliser  – a  shock absorber because it makes disposable income, and thus consumer spending, less sensitive to fluctuations in GDP. When GDP rises, disposable income also rises but by less than the rise in GDP because a part  of it is siphoned off as taxes. This helps limit the upward fluctuation in consumption spending. During  a  recession when GDP falls, disposable income falls less sharply, and consumption does not drop as much as it  otherwise would have fallen had  the tax liability been fixed.  This reduces the fall in aggregate demand and stabilises the economy.




7.  Solution: d)

THE FOUR PILLARS OF HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

Just as any building is supported by pillars, the idea of human development is supported by the concepts of equity, sustainability, productivity and empowerment.

Equity refers to making equal access to opportunities available to everybody. The opportunities available to people must be equal irrespective of their gender, race, income and in the Indian case, caste. Yet this is very often not the case and happens in almost every society.

For example, in any country, it is interesting to see which group the most of the school dropouts belong to. This should then lead to an understanding of the reasons for such behaviour. In India, a large number  of women and persons belonging to socially and economically backward groups drop out of school. This shows how the choices of these groups get limited by not having access to knowledge.

Sustainability means continuity in the availability of opportunities. To have sustainable human development, each generation must have the same
opportunities. All environmental, financial and human resources must be used


http://insightsonindia.com                     INSIGHTS                                                                                      Page 4
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 6 - SOLUTIONS


keeping in mind the future. Misuse of any of these resources will lead to fewer opportunities for future generations.

A good example is about the importance of sending girls to school. If a community does not stress the importance of sending its girl children to school, many opportunities will be lost to these young women when they grow up. Their career choices will be severely curtailed and this would affect other aspects of their lives. So each generation must ensure the availability of choices and opportunities to its future generations.

Productivity here means human labour productivity or productivity in terms of human work. Such productivity must be constantly enriched by building capabilities in people. Ultimately, it is people who are the real wealth of nations. Therefore, efforts to increase their knowledge, or provide better health facilities ultimately leads to better work efficiency.

Empowerment means to have the power to make choices. Such power comes from increasing freedom and capability. Good governance and people-oriented  policies are required to empower people. The empowerment of socially and economically disadvantaged groups is of special importance.




8.  Solution: b)

FACTORS INFLUENCING THE DISTRIBUTION OF POPULATION I. Geographical Factors
(i) Availability of water: It is the most factor for life. So, people prefer to live in areas where fresh water is easily available. Water is used for drinking, bathing and cooking – and also for cattle, crops, industries and navigation. It is because of this that river valleys are among the most densely populated areas of the world.

(ii) Landforms: People prefer living on flat plains and gentle slopes. This is because such areas are favourable for the production of crops and to build roads and industries. The mountainous  and hilly areas hinder the development of transport network and hence initially do not favour agricultural and industrial development.
So, these areas tend to be less populated. The Ganga plains are among the most



http://insightsonindia.com                     INSIGHTS                                                                                      Page 5
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 6 - SOLUTIONS


densely populated areas of the world while the mountains zones in the Himalayas are scarcely populated.

(iii) Climate: An extreme climate such as very hot or cold deserts are uncomfortable for human habitation. Areas with a comfortable climate, where there is not much seasonal variation attract more people. Areas with very heavy rainfall or extreme and harsh climates have low population. Mediterranean regions were inhabited from early periods in history due to their pleasant climate.

(iv) Soils: Fertile soils are important for agricultural and allied activities. Therefore, areas which have fertile loamy soils have more people living on them as these can support intensive agriculture. Can you name some areas in India which are thinly populated due to poor soils?

II. Economic Factors

(i) Minerals: Areas with mineral deposits attract industries. Mining and industrial activities generate employment. So, skilled and semi–skilled workers move to these areas and make them densely populated. Katanga Zambia copper belt in Africa is one such good example.

(ii) Urbanisation: Cities offer better employment opportunities, educational and medical facilities, better means of transport and communication.  Good civic (iii) Industrialisation: Industrial belts provide job opportunities and attract large numbers of people. These include not just factory workers but also transport operators, shopkeepers, bank employees, doctors, teachers and other service providers. The Kobe-Osaka region of Japan is thickly populated because of the presence of a number  of industries.

III. Social and Cultural Factors

Some places attract more people because they have religious or cultural significance. In the same way – people tend to move away from places where there is social and political unrest. Many a times governments offer incentives to people
to live in sparsely populated areas or move away from overcrowded places.








http://insightsonindia.com                     INSIGHTS                                                                                      Page 6
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 6 - SOLUTIONS


9.  Solution: d)

All are correct.

When breeding is between animals of the same breed it is called inbreeding, while crosses between different breeds  are called outbreeding.

Inbreeding : Inbreeding refers to the mating of more closely related individuals within the same breed for 4- 6 generations. The breeding strategy is as follows – superior males and superior females of the same breed are identified and mated in pairs.

The progeny obtained from such matings are evaluated and superior males and females among them are identified for further mating. A superior female, in the case of cattle, is the cow or buffalo that produces more milk per lactation. On the other hand,  a superior male is the bull, which gives rise to superior progeny as compared to those of other males.

Inbreeding increases homozygosity. Thus inbreeding is necessary if we want to evolve a pureline in any animal. Inbreeding exposes harmful recessive genes that are eliminated by selection. It also helps in accumulation of superior genes and elimination of less desirable genes. Therefore, this approach, where there is
selection at each step, increases the productivity of inbred population. However,
continued inbreeding, especially close inbreeding, usually reduces fertility and even productivity. This is called inbreeding depression. Whenever this becomes a problem, selected animals of the breeding population should be mated with unrelated superior animals of the same breed. This usually helps restore fertility and yield.




10. Solution (d)

Types of changes that an economy  undergoes, which affect land-use.The size of the economy (measured in terms of value for all the goods and services produced in the economy)grows over time as a result of increasing population, change in income levels, available technology  and associated factors. As a result, the pressure on land will increase with time and marginal lands would come under use.



http://insightsonindia.com                     INSIGHTS                                                                                      Page 7
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 6 - SOLUTIONS


The composition of the economy would undergo  a change  over time. In other words, the secondary and the tertiary sectors usually grow much faster than the primary sector, specifically the agricultural sector. This type of change is common in developing countries like India. This process would result in a gradual shift of land from agricultural uses to non-agricultural uses. You would observe that such changes are sharp around large urban areas. The agricultural land is being used for building purposes.
Inheritance practices leads to land fragmentation and small size of the plots makes it difficult for the farmer to use modern machinery.
Relief features influences the extent to which farm machinery can be used and the rate of erosion of the soil. It also has influence over the climate.
Tradition, farmers are accustomed to doing things as they know it, therefore they are less productive because the methods are outdated.

Reference: Page 41 (India People and Economy Class XII) & http://prezi.com/dcgpsgprxfol/factors-affecting-land-use-physical-factors- economic-factors-and-human-factors/



11.  Solution: c)

Antibiotics do not ‘completely’ eliminate microorganisms. They either kill or
inhibit their growth.




12.  Solution: A)

Refer to Section 6.2 Foreign Exchange in Chapter-5, 12th Macroeconomics




13. Solution (a)

There are three distinct crop seasons in the northern and interior parts of country, namely kharif, rabi and zaid. The kharif season largely coincides with Southwest Monsoon under which the cultivation of tropical crops such as rice, cotton, jute, jowar,  bajra and tur is possible. The rabi season begins with the onset of winter in October-November and ends in March-April. The crops are Wheat, Gram, Rapeseeds Rice, Maize, Ragi, and Mustard, Barley Groundnut, Jowar. The low temperature conditions during this season facilitate the cultivation of temperate and subtropical crops such as wheat, gram and mustard.


http://insightsonindia.com                     INSIGHTS                                                                                      Page 8
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 6 - SOLUTIONS


Zaid is a short duration summer cropping season beginning after harvesting of rabi crops. The cultivation of watermelons, cucumbers, vegetables and fodder crops during this season is done on irrigated lands.

Reference: Page 44 (India People and Economy Class XII)



14. Solution: c)

Refer to Section 6.2 Foreign Exchange in Chapter 5 12th  Macroeconomics




15. Solution: d)

All are correct.

Both growth and development refer to changes over a period of time. The difference is that growth is quantitative and value neutral. It may have  a positive or a negative  sign. This means that the change may be either positive (showing an increase) or negative (indicating a decrease).

Development means a qualitative change which is always value positive. This means that development  cannot take place unless there is an increment or addition to the existing conditions. Development occurs when positive growth takes place. Yet, positive growth does not always lead to development. Development occurs when there is a positive change in quality.

For example, if the population of a city grows from one lakh to two lakhs over a period of time, we say the city has grown. However, if a facilities like housing, provision of basic services and other characteristics remain the same, then this growth has not been accompanied by development.




16. Solution: B)

Deliberate action to stabilise the economy is often referred to as discretionary fiscal policy to distinguish it from the inherent automatic stabilising  properties of the fiscal system. As discussed earlier, proportional taxes help to stabilise the economy
against upward and downward  movements.  Welfare transfers also help to stabilise


http://insightsonindia.com                     INSIGHTS                                                                                      Page 9
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 6 - SOLUTIONS


income. During boom years, when employment is high, tax receipts collected to finance such expenditure increase exerting a  stabilising pressure on high consumption spending; conversely, during a  slump, these welfare payments help sustain consumption. Further, even the private sector has built-in stabilisers.

Corporations  maintain their dividends in the face of a change  in income in the short run and households try to maintain their previous living standards.

All these work as shock absorbers without the need for any decision-maker  to take action. That is, they work automatically. The built-in stabilisers, however, reduce only part of the fluctuation in the economy, the rest must be taken care of by deliberate policy initiative.




17. Solution: d)

Methanogens are microorganisms  that produce methane as a metabolic byproduct in anoxic conditions. They are classified as archaea, a domain  distinct from bacteria. They are common in wetlands, where they are responsible for marsh gas, and in the digestive tracts of animals such as ruminants and humans, where they are responsible for the methane content of belching in ruminants and flatulence in humans. In marine sediments biomethanation is generally confined to
where sulfates are depleted,  below the top layers. Moreover, the methanogenic archaea populations  play an indispensable  role in anaerobic wastewater treatments. Others are extremophiles, found in environments such as hot springs and submarine hydrothermal vents as well as in the "solid" rock of the Earth's crust, kilometers below the surface. Not to be confused
with methanotrophs which rather consume methane for their carbon and energy requirements.




18.  Solution (d)

Human development is a process of enlarging the range of people’s choices, increasing their opportunities for education, health care, income and empowerment  and covering the full range of human choices from a sound
physical environment to economic, social and political freedom.


http://insightsonindia.com                     INSIGHTS                                                                                    Page 10
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 6 - SOLUTIONS




Reference: Page 24, Chapter 3, (India People and Economy Class XII)




19. Solution (b)


There was a negative  Decadal Population Growth between 1911-1921, as shown by the Census 1921 data.


Reference : Page 5, Chapter 1, (India People and Economy Class XII),  Census 2011 data.




20. Solution: a)

The dough, which is used for making bread, is fermented using baker’s yeast
(Saccharomyces cerevisiae).




21. Solution: D)

The current account records exports and imports in goods and services and transfer payments. Trade in services denoted as invisible trade (because they are not seen to cross national borders) includes both factor income (payment for inputs-investment income, that is, the interest, profits and dividends on our assets abroad minus the income foreigners earn on assets they own in India) and non-factor  income (shipping, banking, insurance, tourism, software services, etc.). Transfer payments are receipts which the residents of a country receive ‘for free’, without having to make any present or future payments in return. They consist of remittances, gifts and grants. They could be official or private. The balance of exports and imports of
goods is referred to as the trade balance. Adding trade in services and net transfers
to the trade balance, we get the current account balance. The capital account records all international purchases and sales of assets such as money, stocks, bonds, etc. We note that any transaction  resulting in a payment  to foreigners is entered as a debit and is given  a negative  sign. Any transaction resulting in a receipt from
foreigners is entered as a credit and is given  a positive sign.


http://insightsonindia.com                     INSIGHTS                                                                                    Page 11
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 6 - SOLUTIONS


22. Solution: d)

People migrate for a better  economic and social life. There are two sets of factors that influence migration.

The Push factors make the place of origin seem less attractive for reasons like unemployment, poor living conditions, political turmoil, unpleasant climate, natural disasters, epidemics and socio-economic backwardness.

The Pull factors make the place of destination seem more attractive than the place of origin for reasons like better job opportunities and living conditions, peace and stability, security of life and property and pleasant climate.




23. Solution: d)

Biological control of pests and diseases: In agriculture, there is a method  of controlling pests that relies on natural predation rather than introduced  chemicals. A key belief of the organic farmer is that biodiversity furthers health. The more variety  a landscape  has, the more sustainable it is. The organic farmer, therefore, works to create a system where the insects that are sometimes called pests are not eradicated, but instead are kept at manageable  levels by a complex system of checks and balances within a living and vibrant ecosystem. Contrary to the
‘conventional’ farming practices which often use chemical methods to kill both useful and harmful life forms indiscriminately, this is a holistic approach that seeks to develop an understanding of the webs of interaction between the myriad of organisms that constitute the field fauna and flora. The organic farmer holds the view that the eradication of the creatures that are often described as pests is not only possible, but also undesirable, for without them the beneficial predatory and parasitic insects which depend upon them as food or hosts would not be able to survive. Thus, the use of biocontrol measures will greatly reduce our dependence on toxic chemicals and pesticides. An important part of the biological farming approach is to become familiar with the various life forms that inhabit the field, predators as well as pests, and also their life cycles, patterns of feeding and the habitats that they prefer. This will help develop appropriate means of biocontrol.

The very familiar beetle with red and black markings – the Ladybird, and
Dragonflies  are useful to get rid of aphids and mosquitoes, respectively. An

http://insightsonindia.com                     INSIGHTS                                                                                    Page 12
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 6 - SOLUTIONS


example of microbial biocontrol agents that can be introduced in order to control butterfly caterpillars is the bacteria Bacillus thuringiensis (often written as Bt). These are available in sachets as dried spores which are mixed with water and sprayed onto vulnerable plants such as brassicas and fruit trees, where these are eaten by the insect larvae. In the gut of the larvae, the toxin is released and the larvae get killed. The bacterial disease will kill the caterpillars, but leave other
insects unharmed. Because of the development of methods of genetic engineering in
the last decade or so, the scientists have introduced B. thuringiensis toxin genes into plants. Such plants are resistant to attack by insect pests. Bt-cotton is one such example, which is being cultivated in some states of our country.

For more info:

http://www.business-standard.com/article/news-cm/organic-farming-being- promoted-in-a-big-way-india-exporting-1-6-lakh-tonne-organic-products-
114022500332_1.html




24. Solution: b)

Australia’s age-sex pyramid is bell shaped and tapered towards the top. This shows birth and death rates are almost equal leading to a near constant population.

Refer page no. 18 for Diagrams (Fundamentals of Human Geography, Class 12th, NCERT)




25. Solution: d)

Cyclosporin A is an immunosuppressant  drug widely used in organ
transplantation to prevent rejection. It reduces the activity of the immune system by interfering with the activity and growth of T cells. It was initially isolated from the fungus Tolypocladium inflatum (Beauveria nivea), found in a soil sample obtained in 1969.

In addition to transplants, ciclosporin is also used in psoriasis, severe atopic dermatitis,Kimura's  disease, pyoderma gangrenosum, chronic autoimmune urticaria,
and, infrequently,  in rheumatoid arthritis and related diseases, although it is only


http://insightsonindia.com                     INSIGHTS                                                                                    Page 13
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 6 - SOLUTIONS


used in severe cases. It is commonly prescribed in the US as an ophthalmic emulsion for the treatment of dry eyes. It has been investigated for use in many other autoimmune disorders, and is sometimes prescribed in veterinary cases, particularly in extreme cases of immune-mediated hemolytic anemia. Inhaled ciclosporin has been investigated to treat asthma and is being studied as a
preventive therapy for chronic rejection of the lungs. Ciclosporin has also been used to help treat patients with acute severe ulcerative colitis that do not respond to treatment with steroids. This drug is also used as a treatment  of posterior or intermediate uveitis with noninfective etiology. Ciclosporin is a drug  currently used to experimentally treat cardiac hypertrophy  (an increase in cell volume).




26. Solution (b)

About 80 per cent of the coal deposits in India is of bituminous type and is of non- coking grade.
Crude petroleum occurs in sedimentary rocks of the tertiary period
Uranium deposits occur in the Dharwar rocks.
World’s richest monazite deposits occur in Palakkad and Kollam districts of Kerala, near Vishakhapatnam in Andhra Pradesh and Mahanadi river delta in Orissa

Reference: Pages 78, 80, 82 (India People and Economy Class XII)




27. Solution: D)

Fiscal deficit is the difference between the government’s total expenditure and its
total receipts excluding borrowing

Gross fiscal deficit = Total expenditure – (Revenue receipts + Non-debt creating capital receipts)

Non-debt creating capital receipts are those receipts which are not borrowings and, therefore, do not give rise to debt. Examples are recovery of loans and the proceeds from  the  sale of  PSUs.  The  fiscal  deficit  will  have to  be  financed through borrowing. Thus, it indicates the total borrowing requirements of the government
from all sources. From the financing side




http://insightsonindia.com                     INSIGHTS                                                                                    Page 14
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 6 - SOLUTIONS


Gross fiscal deficit = Net borrowing at home + Borrowing from RBI + Borrowing from abroad




28. Solution: c)

Primary treatment : These treatment steps basically involve physical removal of particles – large and small – from the sewage through filtration and sedimentation. These are removed in stages; initially, floating debris is removed by sequential filtration. Then the grit (soil and small pebbles) are removed by sedimentation. All solids that settle form the primary sludge, and the supernatant forms the effluent. The effluent from the primary settling tank is taken for secondary treatment.

Secondary treatment or Biological treatment : The primary effluent is passed into large aeration tanks where it is constantly agitated mechanically  and air is pumped into it. This allows vigorous growth of useful aerobic microbes into flocs (masses of bacteria associated with fungal filaments to form mesh like structures). While growing, these microbes consume the major part of the organic matter in the effluent. This significantly reduces the BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) of the effluent. BOD refers to the amount of the oxygen that would be consumed if all
the organic matter in one liter of water were oxidised by bacteria. The sewage water is treated till the BOD is reduced. The BOD test measures the rate of uptake of oxygen by micro-organisms in a sample of water and thus, indirectly, BOD is a measure of the organic matter present in the water. The greater the BOD of waste water, more is its polluting potential.

Once the BOD of sewage or waste water is reduced significantly, the effluent is then passed into a settling tank where the bacterial ‘flocs’ are allowed to sediment. This sediment is called activated sludge. A small part of the activated sludge is pumped back into the aeration tank to serve as the inoculum. The remaining major part of the sludge is pumped into large tanks called anaerobic sludge digesters.
Here, other kinds of bacteria, which grow anaerobically, digest the bacteria and the
fungi in the sludge. During this digestion, bacteria produce  a mixture of gases such
as methane, hydrogen sulphide and carbon dioxide. These gases form biogas and can be used as source of energy as it is inflammable.





http://insightsonindia.com                     INSIGHTS                                                                                    Page 15
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 6 - SOLUTIONS


29. Solution (b)

Haryali is a watershed development project sponsored by the Central Government which aims at enabling  the rural population to conserve water for drinking, irrigation, fisheries and afforestation. The Project is being executed by Gram Panchayats with people’s participation. One of the objective of Haryali is Employment generation, poverty alleviation, community empowerment and development of human and other economic resources of the rural areas. It aims at enabling rural population to conserve water and not urban population.

Reference: Page 66, 67 (India People and Economy Class XII) &
http://dolr.nic.in/hariyaliguidelines.htm



30. Solution: c)

The revenue deficit includes only such transactions  that affect the current income and expenditure of  the government.  When  the government  incurs  a   revenue deficit, it implies that the government is dissaving and is using up the savings of the other sectors of the economy to finance  a part of its consumption expenditure. This situation means that the government will  have to borrow not only to finance its investment but also its consumption requirements. This will lead to a build up of stock of debt and interest liabilities and force the government, eventually, to cut expenditure. Since a major  part of revenue expenditure is committed expenditure, it cannot be reduced. Often the government  reduces productive capital expenditure or welfare expenditure. This would mean lower growth and adverse welfare implications.




31. Solution: b)

The sex ratio is an important information about the status of women in a country. In regions where gender discrimination is rampant, the sex ratio is bound to be unfavourable to women. Such areas are those where the practice of female foeticide, female infanticide  and domestic violence against women are prevalent.
One of the reasons could be lower socio-economic status of women in these areas.





http://insightsonindia.com                     INSIGHTS                                                                                    Page 16
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 6 - SOLUTIONS


More women in the population does not mean they have  a better status. It could be that the men might have migrated to other areas for employment.

On an average, the world population reflects a sex ratio of 990 females per 1000 males. The highest sex ratio in the world has been recorded in Latvia which is 1187 females per 1000 males. In contrast, the lowest sex ratio occurs in U.A.E. which is
468 females per 1000 males.

The world pattern of sex ratio does not exhibit variations in the developed regions of the world. The sex ratio is favourable for females in 139 countries of the world and unfavourable  for them in the remaining 72 countries listed by the United Nations.

In general, Asia has a low sex ratio. Countries like China, India, Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, Afghanistan have a lower sex ratio.

On the other extreme is greater part of Europe (including Russia) where males are in minority. A deficit of males in the populations of many European countries is attributed to better status of women, and an excessively male-dominated out- migration to different parts of the world in the past.

Haryana has lowest sex ratio. It showed improvement between 2001 and 2011 census from 861 to 877 females per thousand males.




32. Solution: d)

Single-cell protein (SCP) typically refers to sources of mixed protein extracted from pure or mixed cultures of algae, yeasts, fungi or bacteria (grown on
agricultural wastes) used as a substitute for protein-rich foods, in human and animal feeds.

It has been calculated  that a 250 Kg cow produces 200 g of protein per day. In the same period, 250g of a micro-organism like Methylophilus methylotrophus, because of its high rate of biomass production and growth, can be expected to produce 25 tonnes of protein.

Large-scale production of microbial biomass has many advantages over the traditional methods for producing proteins for food or feed.


http://insightsonindia.com                     INSIGHTS                                                                                    Page 17
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 6 - SOLUTIONS


1.  Microorganisms have a high rate of multiplication and, hence, rapid succession of generations  (algae: 2–6 hours, yeast: 1–3 hours, bacteria: 0.5–2 hours)
2.  They can be easily genetically modified for varying the amino acid composition.
3. A very high protein content 43–85% in the dry mass.
4. They can utilize a broad  spectrum of raw materials as carbon sources, which include even waste products. Thus, they help in the removal of pollutants also.
5. Strains with high yield and good composition can be selected or produce relatively easily.
6. Microbial biomass production occurs in continuous cultures and the quality is consistent, since the growth is independent of seasonal and climatic variations.
7. Land requirements is low and is ecologically beneficial.
8. A high solar-energy-conversion efficiency per unit area.
9. Solar energy conversion efficiency can be maximized  and yield can be enhanced by easy regulation of physical and nutritional  factors.
10. Algal culture can be done in space that is normally unused and so there is no need to compete for land.






33. Solution: A)

Refer to the section on FRBMA in Chapter 4, 12th Macroeconomics NCERT




34. Solution: b)

As traditional breeding techniques failed to keep pace with demand and to provide sufficiently fast and efficient systems for crop improvement, another technology called tissue culture got developed. What does tissue culture mean? It was learnt by scientists, during 1950s, that whole plants could be regenerated from explants, i.e., any part of a plant  taken out and grown in a test tube, under sterile conditions in special nutrient media. This capacity to generate  a whole plant from any
cell/explant is called  totipotency. You will learn how to accomplish this in higher
classes. It is important to stress here that the nutrient medium must provide  a


http://insightsonindia.com                     INSIGHTS                                                                                    Page 18
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 6 - SOLUTIONS


carbon source such as sucrose and also inorganic salts, vitamins, amino acids and growth regulators like auxins, cytokinins etc. By application of these methods it is possible to achieve propagation of a large number  of plants in very short durations. This method of producing thousands of plants through tissue culture is called
micropropagation. Each of these plants will be genetically identical to the original
plant from which they were grown, i.e., they are somaclones. Many important food plants like tomato, banana, apple, etc., have been produced on commercial scale using this method. Try to visit a tissue culture laboratory with your teacher to better understand and appreciate the process.




35.  Solution: c)

Revenue receipts are divided  into tax and non-tax revenues.

Tax revenues consist of the proceeds of taxes and other duties levied by the central government. Tax revenues, an important component  of revenue receipts, comprise of direct taxes – which fall directly on individuals (personal income tax) and firms (corporation tax), and indirect taxes like  excise  taxes  (duties levied on goods produced within the country), customs duties (taxes imposed on goods imported into and exported out of India) and service tax.

Non-tax revenue of the central government mainly consists of interest receipts (on account of loans by the central government  which  constitutes the single largest item of  non-tax revenue), dividends and profits  on  investments made by the government, fees and other receipts for services rendered by the government. Cash grants-in-aid   from  foreign  countries  and   international organisations  are   also included.




36. Solution (a)

Water Allocation Priorities: In the planning and operation of systems, water allocation priorities should be broadly as follows: Drinking water, Irrigation, Hydropower, Ecology, Agro industries and non-agricultural industries
Navigation and other uses.




http://insightsonindia.com                     INSIGHTS                                                                                    Page 19
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 6 - SOLUTIONS


Reference: Chapter  5 (India People and Economy Class XII)& Ministry of Water
resources.




37.  Solution: A)

Fiscal deficit is not always inflationary. It depends whether the increased demand for the good and services is matched by adequate new supplies.

The subsidies as a % of GDP has been decreasing till 2005-06, but has then picked up to FY 2013-14.




38. Solution: D)

The main items of capital receipts are loans raised by the government from the public which are called market borrowings, borrowing by the government from the Reserve Bank and commercial  banks and other financial institutions through the
sale of treasury bills, loans received from foreign governments and international
organisations, and recoveries of loans granted by the central government. Other items include small savings (Post-Office Savings Accounts, National Savings Certificates, etc), provident funds and net receipts obtained from the sale of shares
in Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs).




39. Solution: c)

A biofertilizer (also bio-fertilizer) is a substance which contains
living microorganisms which, when applied to seed, plant surfaces, or soil, colonizes the rhizosphere or the interior of the plant and promotes growth by increasing the supply or availability of primary nutrients to the host plant. Bio-fertilizers add nutrients through the natural processes of nitrogen fixation,
solubilizing phosphorus, and stimulating plant growth through the synthesis of growth-promoting substances. Bio-fertilizers can be expected to reduce the use
of chemical fertilizers and pesticides. The microorganisms in bio-fertilizers restore the soil's natural nutrient cycle and build soil organic matter. Through the use of
bio-fertilizers, healthy plants can be grown, while enhancing the sustainability and


http://insightsonindia.com                     INSIGHTS                                                                                    Page 20
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 6 - SOLUTIONS


the health of the soil. Since they play several roles, a preferred  scientific term for such beneficial bacteria is "plant-growth promoting rhizobacteria" (PGPR). Therefore, they are extremely advantageous in enriching soil fertility and fulfilling plant nutrient requirements by supplying the organic nutrients through microorganism  and their byproducts. Hence, bio-fertilizers do not contain any chemicals which are harmful to the living soil.




40. Solution: c)

Thomas Malthus in his theory (1793) stated that the number of people would increase faster than the food supply. Any further increase would result in a population crash caused by famine, disease and war. The preventive checks are better than the physical checks. For the sustainability of our resources, the world will have to control the rapid population increase.

Malthus argued that two types of checks hold population within resource
limits: positive checks, which raise the death rate; and preventive ones, which lower the birth rate. The positive checks include hunger, disease and war; the preventive checks, abortion, birth control, prostitution, postponement of marriage and celibacy.




41.   Solution (a)

Kashmiri language is classified under the Dardic-Aryan group of Indo-European
Family.

Konkani language spoken in Goa is classified under the Indo-European(Aryan)
family of languages.

Reference : Page 10, Chapter 1, (India People and Economy Class XII)




42.  Solution: A)

This  includes  expenditure  on  the  acquisition  of  land,  building,  machinery, equipment, investment in shares, and loans and advances by the central government


http://insightsonindia.com                     INSIGHTS                                                                                    Page 21
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 6 - SOLUTIONS


to  state   and union  territory  governments,   PSUs  and other  parties.  Capital expenditure is also categorised as plan and non-plan in the budget documents. Plan capital expenditure, like its revenue counterpart, relates to central plan and central assistance for state and union territory plans.

Non-plan capital expenditure covers various general, social and economic services provided by the government.





43. Solution. (c)


Atleast 75 per cent of male working population engaged in non-agricultural pursuits.

Reference : Any text on India's Urban Geography(Majid Husain), Internet.




44. Solution: b)

All are correct.

Refer page no. 168-169 Biology 12th NCERT




45. Solution: c)

Budget documents classify total revenue expenditure into plan and
non-plan expenditure. Plan revenue expenditure relates to central Plans
(the Five-Year  Plans) and central assistance for State and Union Territory Plans.




46. Solution: d)

Mutation is the process by which genetic variations are created through changes in the base sequence within genes resulting in the creation of a new character or trait not found in the parental type. It is possible to induce mutations artificially through
use of chemicals or radiations (like gamma radiations), and selecting and using the


http://insightsonindia.com                     INSIGHTS                                                                                    Page 22
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 6 - SOLUTIONS


plants that have the desirable character as a source in breeding – this process is called mutation breeding. In mung bean, resistance to yellow mosaic virus and powdery mildew were induced by mutations.

For more information:

http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/agriculture/mutation-breeding-of-oil-seeds- pulses-and-cereals/article5142401.ece




47. Solution: b)

DEMOGRAPHIC TRANSITION

Demographic transition theory can be used to describe and predict the future population of any area. The theory tells us that population of any region changes from high births and high deaths to low births and low deaths as society progresses from rural agrarian and illiterate to urban industrial and literate society. These changes occur in stages which are collectively known as the demographic cycle.

The first stage has high fertility and high mortality because people reproduce more to compensate for the deaths due to epidemics and variable food supply. The population growth is slow and most of the people  are engaged in agriculture where large families are an asset. Life expectancy is low, people  are mostly illiterate and have low levels of technology. Two hundred years ago all the countries of the world were in this stage.

Fertility remains high in the beginning of second stage but it declines with time. This is accompanied by reduced mortality rate. Improvements in sanitation and health conditions lead to decline in mortality. Because of this gap the net addition to population is high.

In the last stage, both fertility and mortality decline considerably. The population is either stable or grows slowly. The population becomes urbanised, literate and has high technical know-how and deliberately  controls the family size.

This shows that human beings are extremely flexible and are able to adjust their fertility.




http://insightsonindia.com                     INSIGHTS                                                                                    Page 23
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 6 - SOLUTIONS


In the present day, different countries are at different  stages of demographic transition.




48. Solution (d)

Minerals have certain characteristics.  These are unevenly distributed over space. All minerals are exhaustible over time. These take long to develop geologically and they cannot be replenished immediately at the time of need. Thus, they have to be conserved  and not misused as they do not have the second crop. Most of the metallic minerals in India occur in the peninsular plateau region in
the old crystalline rocks. Over 97 per cent of coal reserves occur in the valleys of Damodar, Sone, Mahanadi and Godavari. Petroleum reserves are located in the sedimentary basins of Assam, Gujarat and Mumbai High i.e. off-shore region in the Arabian Sea. New reserves have been located in the Krishna-Godavari and Kaveri basins.
Bauxite is found mainly in tertiary deposits and is associated with laterite rocks occurring extensively either on the plateau or hill ranges of peninsular India and also in the coastal tracts of the country.
Dharwar system of rocks. Copper, zinc have been major minerals.

Reference: Pages 73-76 (India People and Economy Class XII)




49. Solution: c)

Broadly  speaking, revenue expenditure consists  of all  those expenditures of the government which do not result in creation of physical or financial assets. It relates to those expenses incurred for the normal functioning of the government departments and various services,  interest  payments on  debt incurred by  the government,  and grants given to state governments  and other parties (even though some of the grants may be meant for creation of assets).




50. Solution. (a)


In fertile alluvial plains of India, Clustered settlements are found




http://insightsonindia.com                     INSIGHTS                                                                                    Page 24
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 6 - SOLUTIONS


Reference : Page 33, Chapter  4, (India People and Economy Class XII)




51. Solution: a)

Accessibility  to morphine will improve further with the passing of The Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (Amendment) Bill, 2011.  Morphine is essential for patients suffering from terminal illnesses such as cancer, HIV  and thalassemia.

Morphine is one of the cheapest and the best known pain-relieving drug. With the new act, which was passed by the Rajya Sabha, there will be a single window clearance to medical institutions wanting to store morphine.

Earlier 4-5 licenses were required to store morphine in hospitals for therapeutic use.

Drugs

The drugs, which are commonly abused are opioids, cannabinoids  and coca alkaloids. Majority of these are obtained from flowering plants. Some are obtained from fungi.

Opioids are the drugs, which bind to specific opioid receptors present in our central nervous system and gastrointestinal  tract. Heroin, commonly called smack is chemically diacetylmorphine which is a white, odourless, bitter crystalline compound. This is obtained by acetylation of morphine, which is extracted from the latex of poppy plant Papaver somniferum. Generally taken by snorting and injection, heroin is a depressant and slows down body functions.

Cannabinoids are a group  of chemicals , which interact with cannabinoid receptors present principally in the brain. Natural cannabinoids are obtained from the inflorescences of the plant Cannabis sativa. The flower tops, leaves and the resin of cannabis  plant are used in various combinations to produce marijuana, hashish, charas and ganja. Generally taken by inhalation and oral ingestion, these are known for their effects on cardiovascular system of the body.

Coca alkaloid or cocaine is obtained from coca plant Erythroxylum coca, native to South America. It interferes with the transport of the neuro-transmitter dopamine. Cocaine, commonly called coke or crack is usually snorted. It has a potent stimulating action on central nervous system, producing a sense of euphoria and
increased energy. Excessive dosage of cocaine causes hallucinations. Other well-


http://insightsonindia.com                     INSIGHTS                                                                                    Page 25
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 6 - SOLUTIONS


known plants with hallucinogenic properties are Atropa belladona and Datura. These days cannabinoids are also being abused by some sportspersons.

Drugs like barbiturates, amphetamines, benzodiazepines, lysergic acid diethyl amides (LSD), and other similar drugs, that are normally used as medicines to help patients cope with mental illnesses like depression and insomnia, are often abused. Morphine is a very effective sedative and painkiller,  and is very useful in patients who have undergone surgery. Several plants, fruits and seeds having hallucinogenic properties have been used for hundreds of years in folk-medicine, religious ceremonies and rituals all over the globe. When these are taken for a purpose other than medicinal use or in amounts/frequency that impairs one’s physical, physiological or psychological functions, it constitutes drug abuse.




52. Solution: d)

The exaggerated response of the immune system to certain antigens present in the environment is called allergy. The substances to which such an immune response is produced are called allergens. The antibodies produced to these are of IgE type. Common examples of allergens are mites in dust, pollens, animal dander, etc. Symptoms of allergic reactions include sneezing, watery eyes, running nose and difficulty in breathing. Allergy is due to the release of chemicals like histamine and serotonin from the mast cells. For determining the cause of allergy, the patient is exposed to or injected with very small doses of possible allergens, and the reactions studied. The use of drugs like anti-histamine, adrenalin and steroids quickly reduce the symptoms of allergy. Somehow, modern-day life style has resulted in lowering of immunity and more sensitivity to allergens – more and more children in metro cities of India suffer from allergies and asthma due to sensitivity to the
environment. This could be because of the protected environment provided early in life.




53. Solution: c)

National Income  = Consumption  + Investment  + Government spending( It includes all taxes and sources of income also.)



http://insightsonindia.com                     INSIGHTS                                                                                    Page 26
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 6 - SOLUTIONS


It does not  include external commercial borrowing, which  is  included in  the external capital account.




54. Solution: c)

The principle of immunisation or vaccination is based on the property of ‘memory’ of the immune system. In vaccination, a preparation  of antigenic proteins of pathogen or inactivated/weakened pathogen (vaccine) are introduced into the body. The antibodies produced in the body against these antigens would neutralise the pathogenic agents during actual infection. The vaccines also generate memory – B and T-cells that recognize the pathogen quickly on subsequent exposure and overwhelm the invaders with a massive production of antibodies. If a person is infected with some deadly microbes to which quick immune response is required
as in tetanus, we need to directly inject the preformed antibodies, or antitoxin (a
preparation containing antibodies to the toxin). Even in cases of snakebites, the injection which is given to the patients, contain preformed antibodies against the snake venom. This type of immunisation is called passive immunisation.




55. Solution: D)

By borrowing, the government  transfers the burden of reduced consumption on future generations. This is because it borrows by issuing bonds to the people living at present but may decide to pay off the bonds some twenty years later by raising taxes. These may be levied on the young population that have just entered the work force, whose disposable income will go down and hence consumption. Thus, national savings, it was argued would fall. Also,  government borrowing from the people reduces the savings available to the private sector. To the extent that this reduces capital formation and growth,  debt acts as a ‘burden’  on future generations. Traditionally,  it has been argued that  when a  government  cuts taxes and runs a budget deficit, consumers respond to their after-tax income by spending more. It is possible that these people are short-sighted  and do not understand the implications of budget deficits.  They may not realise that  at  some point in the future, the
government will have to raise taxes to pay off the debt and accumulated  interest.




http://insightsonindia.com                     INSIGHTS                                                                                    Page 27
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 6 - SOLUTIONS


Even if they comprehend this, they may expect the future taxes to fall not on them but on future generations.




56.  Solution: D)

Refer to Section 6.2 Foreign Exchange in Chapter 5 12th  Macroeconomics




57. Solution: d)

All are correct.

Acquired immunity, on the other hand, is pathogen specific. It is characterised by memory. This means that our body when it encounters a pathogen  for the first time produces a response called primary response which is of low intensity. Subsequent encounter with the same pathogen elicits a highly intensified secondary or anamnestic response. This is ascribed to the fact that our body appears to have memory of the first encounter.

The primary and secondary immune responses are carried out with the help of two special types of lymphocytes present in our blood, B-Lymphocytes  and T- Lymphocytes. The B-lymphocytes  produce an army of proteins in response to pathogens into our blood to fight with them. These proteins are called antibodies. The T-cells themselves do not secrete antibodies but help B cells produce them. Each antibody molecule has four peptide chains, two small called light chains and two longer called heavy chains. Hence, an antibody is represented as H2L2.

Different types of antibodies are produced in our body. IgA, IgM, IgE, IgG are some of them. Because these antibodies are found in the blood, the response is also called as humoral immune response. This is one of the two types of our acquired immune response – antibody mediated. The second type is called cell-mediated immune response or cell-mediated immunity (CMI). The T-lymphocytes mediate CMI.
Very often, when some human organs like heart, eye, liver, kidney fail to function satisfactorily, transplatation is the only remedy to enable the patient to live a normal life. Then a search begins – to find a suitable donor Grafts from just any
source – an animal, another primate, or any human beings  cannot be made since the
grafts would be rejected sooner or later. Tissue matching, blood group matching are

http://insightsonindia.com                     INSIGHTS                                                                                    Page 28
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 6 - SOLUTIONS


essential before undertaking any graft/transplant  and even after this the patient has to take immuno–suppresants  all his/her  life. The body is able to differentiate ‘self ’ and ‘nonself’ and the cell-mediated immune response is responsible for the graft rejection.




58. Solution: A)

When a  country runs a  trade deficit, it is important to look at the right side of equation to see whether there has been a decrease  in saving, increase in investment, or an increase in the budget deficit. There is reason to worry about  a country’s long- run prospects if the trade deficit reflects smaller saving or a  larger budget deficit (when the economy has both trade deficit and budget deficit, it is said to be facing twin deficits). The deficit could reflect higher private or government consumption. In such  cases, the country’s capital stock will  not rise  rapidly enough  to yield enough growth (called the ‘growth dividend’) it needs to repay its debt. There is less cause to worry if the trade deficit reflects a rise in investment, which will build the capital stock more quickly and increase future output. However, we must note that since private saving, investment and the trade deficit are jointly determined, other factors too must be taken into account.




59. Solution (d)



A semi-arid climate or steppe climate are climatic regions that receive precipitation below potential evapotranspiration, but not extremely.

Cotton is a tropical crop grown in kharif season in semi-arid areas of the country. Wheat  being a rabi crop, it is mostly grown under irrigated conditions at high altitudes and it is also grown as a rainfed  crop in the semi-arid region.

Jowar is the main food crop in semi-arid areas of central and southern India. Maharashtra alone produces more than half of the total jowar production of the country.

Maize is a food as well as fodder crop grown under semi-arid climatic conditions and over inferior soils.

http://insightsonindia.com                     INSIGHTS                                                                                    Page 29
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 6 - SOLUTIONS


Pearl Millet is one of the major rainfed cereal that is grown in semi-arid region. Groundnut is also grown in semi-arid region.

Reference: Chapter  5 (India People and Economy Class XII)



60.Solution (a)

Glaciers, groundwater, freshwater lakes, salt lakes, atmosphere and rivers

Reference: Chapter  6 (India People and Economy Class XII)



61. Solution (c)

Percolation tanks would be constructed for all borewells owned by the government. These works are done under MGNREGA, which helps in water conservation.

Water (Prevention  and Control of Pollution) Act 1974 and Environment Protection Act 1986 help in control of water pollution. Water Cess Act 1977, is also meant to reduce pollution.

Rural Drinking Water Program is not concerned with conservation of water.

Reference: Page 66, 67 (India People and Economy Class XII)





62. Solution: d)

Innate immunity is non-specific type of defence, that is present  at the time of birth. This is accomplished by providing different types of barriers to the entry of the foreign agents into our body. Innate immunity consist of four types of barriers. These are —

(i) Physical barriers : Skin on our body is the main barrier which prevents entry of the micro-organisms. Mucus coating of the epithelium lining the respiratory,
gastrointestinal  and urogenital tracts also help in trapping microbes entering our body.




http://insightsonindia.com                     INSIGHTS                                                                                    Page 30
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 6 - SOLUTIONS


(ii) Physiological barriers : Acid in the stomach, saliva in the mouth, tears from eyes–all prevent microbial growth.

(iii) Cellular barriers : Certain types of leukocytes (WBC) of our body like polymorpho-nuclear leukocytes (PMNL-neutrophils) and monocytes and natural
killer (type of lymphocytes) in the blood as well as macrophages in tissues can
phagocytose  and destroy microbes.

(iv) Cytokine barriers : Virus-infected cells secrete proteins called interferons which protect non-infected cells from further viral infection.




63. Solution: c)

Gambusia is a large genus of fish in family Poeciliidae. Gambusia contains over 40
species, most of which are principally found in freshwater habitats, though some species may also be found in brackish or saltwater habitats. Gambusiaspecies are often called topminnows or simply gambusias; they are also known as mosquitofish, which, however, refers more specifically to two species, G. affinis and G. holbrooki. These can be introduced into ponds to eat mosquito larvae. As a consequence they have been introduced  widely outside their native range, and sometimes
become invasive, threatening the local species.They are very important in aquarium
trade, desired for small size, ease of breeding, and charming gracefulness. They are viviparous—they have live young.




64. Solution: d)

Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) is an arthropod-borne  virus, of the genus Alphavirus, that is transmitted to humans by virus-carrying Aedes mosquitoes.There have been recent breakouts of CHIKV associated with severe illness.

CHIKV infection causes an illness with a similar mode of transmission as dengue fever, with an acute febrile phase lasting two to five days, followed by a longer period of joint pains in the extremities. The pain associated with CHIKV infection of the joints may persist for weeks or months, or in some cases years. Prevention is via mosquito control and preventing  bite by infected mosquitoes. There is no specific treatment with medications used to help with symptoms.




http://insightsonindia.com                     INSIGHTS                                                                                    Page 31
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 6 - SOLUTIONS


65. Solution (b)

Reference: Chapter  6 (India People and Economy Class XII)



66. Solution: c)

Plasmodium enters the human body as sporozoites (infectious form) through the bite of infected female Anopheles mosquito. The parasites initially multiply within the liver cells and then attack the red blood cells (RBCs) resulting in their rupture. The rupture of RBCs is associated with release of a toxic substance, haemozoin, which is responsible for the chill and high fever recurring every three to four days. When a female  Anopheles mosquito bites an infected person, these parasites enter the mosquito’s body and undergo further development. The parasites multiply within them to form sporozoites that are stored in their salivary glands. When these mosquitoes bite a human,  the sporozoites are introduced into his/ her body,
thereby initiating the events mentioned above. It is interesting to note that the malarial parasite requires two hosts – human and mosquitoes – to complete its life cycle; the female Anopheles mosquito is the vector (transmitting  agent) too.




67. Solution: a)

Many fungi belonging to the genera Microsporum, Trichophyton and Epidermophyton  are responsible for ringworms which is one of the most common infectious diseases in man. Appearance of dry, scaly lesions on various parts of the body such as skin, nails and scalp. are the main symptoms of the disease. These lesions are accompanied  by intense itching. Heat and moisture help these fungi to grow, which makes them thrive in skin folds such as those in the groin or between the toes. Ringworms are generally acquired from soil or by using towels, clothes or even the comb of infected individuals.




68. Solution (d)

The cereals occupy about 54 per cent of total cropped  area in India. The country produces about 11 per cent cereals of the world and ranks third in production
after China and U.S.A. India produces a variety of cereals, which are classified as

http://insightsonindia.com                     INSIGHTS                                                                                    Page 32
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 6 - SOLUTIONS


fine grains (rice, wheat) and coarse grains (jowar, bajra, maize, ragi), etc. Maize is a food as well as fodder crop grown under semi-arid climatic conditions and
over inferior soils.Pulses are legume crops which increase the natural fertility of
soils through nitrogen fixation.

Reference: Page 47 (India People and Economy Class XII)



69.Solution (d)

Many irrigation projects, past and present, are severely affected by secondary salinization or sodication  and waterlogging. Secondary salinization of soil is the main degradation process in arid and semi-arid areas.

Reference: Chapter  5 (India People and Economy Class XII)



70. Solution: a)

A wide range of organisms belonging to bacteria, viruses, fungi, protozoans, helminths, etc could cause diseases in man. Such disease causing organisms are called  Pathogens. All parasites are therefore pathogens as they cause harm to the
host by living in (or on) them. The pathogens can enter our body by various means, multiply and interfere with normal vital activities, resulting in morphological and functional damage. Pathogens have to adapt to life within the environment of the host. For example, the pathogens that enter the gut must know a way  of surviving in the stomach at low pH and resisting the various digestive enzymes.

Many viruses also cause diseases in human beings. Rhino viruses represent one such group of viruses which cause one of the most infectious human ailments – the common cold. They infect the nose and respiratory  passage but not the lungs. The common cold is characterised by nasal congestion  and discharge, sore throat, hoarseness, cough, headache, tiredness, etc., which usually last for 3-7 days. Droplets resulting from cough or sneezes of an infected person are either inhaled directly or transmitted through contaminated objects such as pens, books, cups, doorknobs, computer keyboard or mouse, etc., and cause infection in a healthy  person.

An oncovirus is a virus that can cause cancer. This term originated from studies of acutely transforming retroviruses in the 1950–60s, often called oncornaviruses to


http://insightsonindia.com                     INSIGHTS                                                                                    Page 33
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 6 - SOLUTIONS


denote their RNA virus origin. It now refers to any virus with a DNA or RNA genome causing cancer and is synonymous with "tumor virus" or "cancer virus". The vast majority of human and animal viruses do not cause cancer, probably because of long-standing coevolution between the virus and its host.

Worldwide, the WHO International Agency for Research on Cancer estimated that in 2002 17.8% of human cancers were caused by infection, with 11.9% being caused by one of seven different viruses. The importance of this is that these cancers might be easily prevented through vaccination (e.g., papillomavirus vaccines), diagnosed with simple blood tests, and treated with less-toxic antiviral compounds.



71. Solution: b)

Some of the human diseases are caused by protozoans too. You might have heard about malaria, a disease man has been fighting since many years. Plasmodium, a tiny protozoan is responsible for this disease. Different species of Plasmodium (P. vivax, P. malaria and P. falciparum) are responsible for different types of malaria. Of these, malignant malaria caused by Plasmodium falciparum is the most serious one and
can even be fatal.

Article from The Hindu

Regarding third statement

http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/health/medicine-and-research/breakthrough- in-malaria-research-claimed/article5722806.ece




72. Solution (c)

Area under Permanent Pastures and Grazing Lands : Most of this type land is owned by the village ‘Panchayat’ or the Government. Only a small proportion of this land is privately owned. The land owned by the village panchayat comes under
‘Common Property Resources’.
Culturable Waste-Land: Any land which is left fallow (uncultivated) for more than five years is included in this category. It can be brought under cultivation after improving it through reclamation practices.
Current Fallow: This is the land which is left without cultivation for one or less than one agricultural year. Fallowing is a cultural  practice  adopted for giving the land rest. The land recoups the lost fertility through natural processes.

http://insightsonindia.com                     INSIGHTS                                                                                    Page 34
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 6 - SOLUTIONS


Net Area Sown: The physical extent of land on which crops are sown and harvested is known as net sown area.

Reference: Page 41 (India People and Economy Class XII) & online

73. Solution (b)

The area under non-agricultural uses is increasing  at the expense of wastelands and agricultural land. The rate of increase is the highest in case of area under non-agricultural uses. This is due to the changing structure of Indian economy,
which is increasingly depending on the contribution from industrial and services sectors and expansion of related infrastructural facilities. Also, an expansion of area under both urban and rural settlements has added to the increase. Thus, the area under non-agricultural uses is increasing  at the expense of wastelands and agricultural land.

The four categories that have registered a decline are barren and wasteland, culturable wasteland, area under pastures and tree crops and net area sown.

As per the present assessment, the Forest and Tree cover of the country is 78.29 million ha, which is 23.81% of the geographical  area of the country. In 1960 it was around 18%.

Reference: Page 42 (India People and Economy Class XII) & PIB



74. Solution (b)

Land, according to its ownership can broadly be classified under two broad heads – private land and common property resources (CPRs). While the former is owned by an individual or a group  of individuals, the latter is owned by the state meant for the use of the community. CPRs provide fodder for the livestock and fuel for the households along with other minor forest products like fruits, nuts, fibre, medicinal plants, etc. In rural areas, such land is of particular
relevance for the livelihood of the landless and marginal farmers and other
weaker sections since many of them depend on income from their livestock due to the fact that they have limited access to land. CPRs also are important for women as most of the fodder and fuel collection is done by them in rural areas.
They have to devote long hours in collecting fuel and fodder from a degraded


http://insightsonindia.com                     INSIGHTS                                                                                    Page 35
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 6 - SOLUTIONS


area of CPR. CPRs can be defined as community’s natural resource, where every member has the right of access and usage with specified obligations, without anybody having property rights over them. Community forests, pasture lands, village water bodies and other public spaces where a group  larger  than a household or family unit exercises rights of use and carries responsibility of management are examples  of CPRs.

Reference: Page 43 (India People and Economy Class XII)



75. Solution: b)

In our body, cell growth and differentiation is highly controlled and regulated. In cancer cells, there is breakdown of these regulatory mechanisms. Normal cells show a property called contact inhibition by virtue of which contact with other cells inhibits their uncontrolled growth. Cancer cells appears to have lost this property. As a result of this, cancerous cells just continue to divide giving rise to masses of cells called tumors.

Tumors are of two types: benign and malignant. Benign tumors normally remain confined to their original location and do not spread to other parts of the body and cause little damage. The malignant tumors, on the other hand are a mass of proliferating cells called neoplastic or tumor cells. These cells grow very rapidly, invading and damaging the surrounding normal tissues. As these cells actively divide and grow they also starve the normal cells by competing for vital nutrients. Cells sloughed from such tumors reach distant sites through blood, and wherever  they
get lodged in the body, they start a new tumor there. This property called
metastasis is the most feared property of malignant tumors.



















http://insightsonindia.com                     INSIGHTS                                                                                    Page 36
