INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 2 - SOLUTIONS




1.

Solution: d)

Some marine fish of high economic value are also farmed in seawater. This includes finned fishes like mullets, bhetki, and pearl spots, shellfish such as prawns. mussels and oysters as well as seaweed. Oysters are also cultivated for the pearls they make.

In such a system, a combination of five or six fish species is used in a single fishpond. These species are selected so that they do not compete for food among them having different types of food habits. As a result, the food available in all the parts of the pond is used. As Catlas are surface feeders, Rohus feed in the middle-zone of the pond, Mrigals and Common Carps are bottom feeders, and Grass Carps feed on the weeds, together these species can use all the food in the pond without competing with each other. This increases the fish yield from the pond.


2.

Solution (a)
Every person who wishes to contest an election has to fill a ‘nomination form’ and give some money as ‘security deposit’. Recently, a new system of declaration has been introduced  on direction from the Supreme Court. Every candidate has to make  a legal declaration, giving full details of : Serious criminal cases pending against the candidate; Details of the assets and liabilities of the candidate and his or her family; and Education qualifications of the candidate. This information has to be made public. This provides an opportunity  to the voters to make their decision on the basis of the information provided by the candidates.

Right to Information is a part of fundamental rights under Article 19(1)  of the Constitution. Article 19(1)  says that every citizen has freedom of speech and expression. In 1976, the Supreme Court said in the case of Raj Narain vs State of UP, that people cannot speak or express themselves unless they know. Therefore, right to information is embedded in article 19. Reference: Page No. 64 (Democratic Politics –I)




3.

Solution: c)

On the basis of their development and use resources  can be classified into two groups, actual resources and potential resources.

Actual resources  are those resources  whose  quantity is known. These resources  are being used in the present.  The rich deposits of coal in Ruhr region of Germany and petroleum in the West Asia, the dark soils of the Deccan  plateau in Maharashtra are all actual resources.


http://insightsonindia.com INSIGHTS                                                                                                           Page 1
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 2 - SOLUTIONS


Potential resources  are those  whose  entire quantity may not be known and these are not being used  at present. These resources  could be used in the future. The level of technology  we have at present may not be advanced enough to easily utilise these resources.  The uranium found in Ladakh is an example of potential resource  that could be used in the future. High speed winds were a potential resource  two hundred  years ago. Today they are an actual resource  and wind farms generate energy using windmills  like in Netherlands. You will find some in Nagercoil in Tamil Nadu and on the Gujarat coast.




4.

Solution: c)

Lord Hastings, Governor General of India between 1813 - 1823, initiated a new policy of “paramountcy”. Now the Company claimed that its authority was paramount or supreme, hence its power was greater than that of Indian states. In order to protect its interests
it was justified in annexing or threatening to annex any Indian kingdom. This view continued to
guide later British policies as well.



This process, however, did not go unchallenged. For example, when the British tried to annex the small state of Kitoor (in Karnataka today), Rani Channamma took to arms and led an anti-British resistance movement. She was arrested in 1824 and died in prison in 1829. But Rayanna,  a poor chowkidar of Sangoli in Kitoor, carried on the resistance. With popular support he destroyed many British camps and records. He was caught and hanged by the British in 1830.


5.

Solution (c)

The Government of India had appointed the Second Backward Classes Commission in 1979. It was headed by B.P. Mandal. Hence it was popularly called the Mandal Commission. It was asked to determine the criteria to identify the socially and educationally backward classes in India and
‘not’ minorities.

It recommended steps to be taken for their advancement. The Commission gave its Report in
1980 and made many recommendations.  One of these was that 27 per cent of government jobs be reserved for the socially and educationally backward classes.

Some persons and associations opposed to this order filed a number  of cases in the courts. They appealed to the courts to declare the order invalid and stop its implementation. The Supreme Court of India bunched all these cases together. This case was known as the ‘Indira Sawhney and others Vs Union of India case’. Eleven judges of the Supreme Court heard arguments of both sides. By a majority,  the Supreme Court judges in 1992 declared that this order of the



http://insightsonindia.com INSIGHTS                                                                                                           Page 2
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 2 - SOLUTIONS


Government of India was valid. It declared that well-to do persons among the backward classes should be excluded from getting the benefit of reservation.
Reference: Page No. 80, 81 (Democratic Politics –I)



6.

Solution: c

In 1817, James Mill, a Scottish economist and political philosopher, published a massive three- volume work, A History of British India. In this he divided Indian history into three periods – Hindu, Muslim and British. This periodisation came to be widely accepted. Mill thought that all Asian societies were at a lower level of civilisation than Europe. According to his telling of history, before the British came to India, Hindu and Muslim despots ruled the country.

Religious intolerance, caste taboos and superstitious practices dominated social life. British rule, Mill felt, could civilise India. To do this it was necessary to introduce European manners, arts, institutions and laws in India. Mill, in fact, suggested that the British should conquer all the territories in India to ensure the enlightenment and happiness of the Indian people. For India was not capable of progress without British help.

7.

Solution: c)

Mixed cropping is growing two or more crops simultaneously on the same piece of land, for example, wheat + gram, or wheat + mustard, or groundnut + sunflower. This reduces risk and gives some insurance against failure of one of the crops.

Inter-cropping is growing two or more crops simultaneously on the same field in a definite pattern. A few rows of one crop alternate with a few rows of a second crop, for example, soyabean + maize, or finger millet (bajra) + cowpea (lobia). The crops are selected such that their nutrient requirements  are different. This ensures maximum utilization of the nutrients supplied, and also prevents pests and diseases from spreading to all the plants belonging to one crop in a field. This way, both crops can give better returns.

The growing of different crops on a piece of land in a pre-planned succession is known as crop rotation. Depending upon the duration, crop rotation is done for different crop combinations. The availability of moisture and irrigation facilities decide the choice of the crop to be cultivated
after one harvest. If crop rotation is done properly then two or three crops can be grown in a year
with good harvests.








http://insightsonindia.com INSIGHTS                                                                                                           Page 3
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 2 - SOLUTIONS


8.

Solution: d)

Cholera is caused by bacteria whereas all other diseases are caused by virus.

9.

Solution (c)

Parliament is the final authority for making laws in any country. This task of law making or legislation is so crucial that these assemblies  are called legislatures. Parliaments all over the world can make new laws, change existing laws, or abolish existing laws and make new ones in their place.

Parliaments all over the world exercise some control over those who run the government. In some countries like India this control is direct and full. Those who run the government can take decisions only so long as they enjoy support of the Parliament.

Parliament is the highest forum of discussion and debate on public issues and national policy in any country. Parliament can seek information  about any matter but it does not enjoy absolute power unlike Britain. The Parliament of India is bound by the provisions of the Constitution. Reference: Page No. 83, 84 (Democratic Politics –I)




10.

Solution (b)

Rajya Sabha some special powers over the states. But on most matters, the Lok Sabha exercises supreme power. Any ordinary law needs to be passed by both the Houses. But if there is a difference between the two Houses, the final decision is taken in a joint session in which members of both the Houses sit together.

Lok Sabha exercises more powers in money matters. Once the Lok Sabha passes the budget of the government or any other money related law, the Rajya Sabha cannot reject it. The Rajya Sabha can only delay it by 14 days or suggest changes in it. The Lok Sabha may or may not accept these changes.

Most importantly, the Lok Sabha controls the Council of Ministers. Only a person who enjoys the support of the majority of the members in the Lok Sabha is appointed the Prime Minister. If the majority of the Lok Sabha members say they have ‘no confidence’ in the Council of Ministers, all ministers including the Prime Minister, have to quit. The Rajya Sabha does not have this power. Reference: Page No. 84, 85 (Democratic Politics –I)






http://insightsonindia.com INSIGHTS                                                                                                           Page 4
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 2 - SOLUTIONS




11.

Solution: c)

The population pyramid of a country in which birth and death rates both are high is broad at the base and rapidly narrows towards the top. This is because although, many children are born, a large percentage of them die in their infancy, relatively few become adults and there are very few old people. This situation is typified by the pyramid shown for Kenya.

In countries where death rates (especially amongst the very young) are decreasing, the pyramid is broad in the younger  age groups,  because more infants survive to adulthood. This can be seen in the pyramid for India. Such populations contain a relatively large number of young people and which means a strong and expanding labour force.

12.

Solution: d)

The oldest landmass, (the Peninsula part), was a part of the Gondwana land. The Gondwanaland included India, Australia, South Africa and South America as one single land mass. The convectional currents split the crust into a number  of pieces, thus leading to the drifting of the Indo-Australian  plate after being separated from the Gondwana land, towards north. The northward drift resulted in the collision of the plate with the much larger Eurasian Plate. Due to this collision, the sedimentary rocks which were accumulated in the geosyncline known as the Tethys were folded to form the mountain system of western Asia and Himalayas.

The Himalayan uplift out of the Tethys sea and subsidence of the northern flank of the
peninsular plateau resulted in the formation of a large basin. In due course of time this depression, gradually got filled with deposition of sediments by the rivers flowing from the mountains in the north and the peninsular plateau in the south.

13.

Solution: d)

In 1600, the East India Company acquired a charter  from the ruler of England, Queen Elizabeth I, granting it the sole right to trade with the East. This meant that no other trading group in England could compete with the East India Company. With this charter the Company could venture across the oceans, looking for new lands from which it could buy goods at a cheap  price, and
carry them back to Europe to sell at higher  prices. The Company did not have to fear competition from other English trading companies. Mercantile trading companies in those days made profit primarily by excluding competition, so that they could buy cheap and sell dear. The royal charter, however, could not prevent other European powers from entering the Eastern markets.


http://insightsonindia.com INSIGHTS                                                                                                           Page 5
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 2 - SOLUTIONS


By the time the first English ships sailed down the west coast of Africa, round the Cape of Good Hope, and crossed the Indian Ocean, the Portuguese had already established their presence in the western coast of India, and had their base in Goa. In fact, it was Vasco da Gama, a Portuguese explorer, who had discovered  this sea route to India in 1498. By the early seventeenth century, the Dutch too were exploring the possibilities of trade in the Indian Ocean. Soon the French traders arrived on the scene. The problem was that all the companies were interested in buying the same things. The fine qualities of cotton and silk produced in India had a big market in Europe. Pepper, cloves, cardamom and cinnamon  too were in great demand. Competition amongst the European companies inevitably pushed up the prices at which these goods could be
purchased,  and this reduced the profits that could be earned. The only way the trading companies
could flourish was by eliminating rival competitors. The urge to secure markets therefore led to fierce battles between the trading companies. Through the seventeenth  and eighteenth centuries they regularly sank each other’s ships, blockaded routes, and prevented  rival ships from moving with supplies of goods. Trade was carried on with arms and trading posts were protected through fortification. This effort to fortify settlements  and carry on profitable trade also led to intense conflict with local rulers. The company therefore found it difficult to separate trade from politics.



14.

Solution: c)



The first English factory was set up on the banks of the river Hugli in 1651. This was the base from which the Company’s traders, known at that time as “factors”, operated. The factory  had a warehouse where goods for export were stored, and it had offices where Company officials sat. As trade expanded, the Company persuaded merchants  and traders to come and settle near the factory.

15.

Solution: c)

For fires involving electrical equipment and inflammable materials like petrol, carbon dioxide (CO2) is the best extinguisher. CO2, being heavier than oxygen, covers the fire like a blanket. Since the contact between the fuel and oxygen is cut off, the fire is controlled. The added advantage of CO2 is that in most cases it does not harm the electrical equipment.

How do we get the supply of carbon dioxide? It can be stored at high pressure as a liquid in cylinders. In what form is the LPG stored in cylinders? When released from the cylinder, CO2 expands enormously in volume and cools down. So, it not only forms a blanket around the fire, it also brings down the temperature of the fuel. That is why it is an excellent fire extinguisher. Another way to get CO2 is to release  a lot of dry powder of chemicals like sodium bicarbonate
(baking soda) or potassium bicarbonate. Near the fire, these chemicals give off CO2.





http://insightsonindia.com INSIGHTS                                                                                                           Page 6
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 2 - SOLUTIONS


16.

Solution: d)

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deforestation#Environmental_problems




17.

Solution:  a)

During the process of cloning Dolly, a cell was collected from the mammary gland of a female Finn Dorsett sheep . Simultaneously, an egg was obtained from a Scottish blackface ewe. The nucleus was removed from the egg. Then, the nucleus of the mammary gland cell from the Finn Dorsett sheep was inserted into the egg of the Scottish blackface ewe whose nucleus had been removed. The egg thus produced was implanted into the Scottish blackface ewe. Development of this egg followed normally and finally Dolly was born.

Though Dolly was given birth by the Scottish blackface ewe, it was found to be absolutely identical to the Finn Dorsett sheep from which the nucleus was taken. Since the nucleus from the egg of the Scottish blackface ewe was removed, Dolly did not show any character of the
Scottish blackface ewe. Dolly was a healthy  clone of the Finn Dorsett sheep and produced  several
offspring of her own through normal sexual means. Unfortunately, Dolly died on 14th February
2003 due to a certain lung disease.




18.

Solution (a)

At different levels of any government we find functionaries who take day-to-day decisions but do not exercise supreme power on behalf of the people. All those functionaries  are collectively known as the executive. Thus, when we talk about ‘the government’ we usually mean the executive.

In a democratic country, two categories make up the executive. One that is elected by the people for a specific period, is called the political executive (temporary executive). Political leaders who take the big decisions fall in this category. In the second category, people are appointed on a long- term basis. This is called the permanent executive or civil services.They remain in office even when the ruling party changes.These officers work under political executive and assist them in carrying out the day-to-day administration.  Political executive have more power than the non- political executive

In a democracy  the will of the people is supreme. The minister is elected by the people and thus empowered to exercise the will of the people on their behalf. She is finally answerable to the people for all the consequences of her decision. That is why the minister takes all the final

http://insightsonindia.com INSIGHTS                                                                                                           Page 7
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 2 - SOLUTIONS


decisions. The minister decides the overall framework and objectives in which decisions on policy should be made. The minister is not, and is not expected to be, an expert in the matters of her ministry. The minister takes the advice of experts on all technical matters.
Reference: Page No. 86 (Democratic Politics –I)

19.

Solution (c )

The President appoints the Prime Minister, no direct election to the Prime Minister. But the
President cannot appoint anyone she likes. The President appoints the leader of the majority
party or the coalition of parties that commands a majority  in the Lok Sabha, as Prime Minister. In case no single party or alliance gets a majority,  the President appoints the person most likely to secure a majority  support.

The Prime Minister does not have  a fixed tenure. He continues in power so long as he remains the leader of the majority party or coalition. Sometimes, a person who is not a member  of Parliament can also become  a minister. But such a person has to get elected to one of the Houses of the Parliament within six months of appointment as minister.

When the Prime Minister quits, the entire ministry quits.

In recent years the rise of coalition politics has imposed certain constraints on the power of the Prime Minister. The Prime Minister of a coalition government cannot take decisions as he likes. He has to accommodate different groups and factions in his party as well as among alliance partners. He also has to heed to the views and positions of the coalition partners and other parties, on whose support the survival of the government depends.
Reference: Page No. 87, 88, 89 (Democratic Politics –I)

20.

Solution: d)

http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/2014-01-16/news/46264332_1_financial-inclusion-nachiket- mor-bank-account

http://www.livemint.com/Opinion/VPzOA6NoPIXCynO9smJBiL/A-failed-attempt-at-financial- inclusion.html

21.


Solution: d)

National Population Policy

Recognising that the planning of families would improve individual health and welfare, the
Government of India initiated the comprehensive Family Planning Programme in 1952. The


http://insightsonindia.com INSIGHTS                                                                                                           Page 8
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 2 - SOLUTIONS


Family Welfare Programme has sought to promote responsible and planned parenthood on a voluntary basis. The National Population Policy 2000 is a culmination of years of planned efforts. The NPP 2000 provides a policy framework for imparting free and compulsory school education up to 14 years of age, reducing infant mortality rate to below 30 per 1000 live births, achieving universal immunisation of children against all vaccine preventable diseases, promoting delayed marriage for girls, and making family welfare a people-centered programme.

NPP 2000 and Adolescents

NPP 2000 identified adolescents as one of the major sections of the population that need greater attention. Besides nutritional requirements, the policy put greater emphasis on other important needs of adolescents including protection from unwanted pregnancies  and sexually transmitted diseases (STD). It called for programmes that aim towards encouraging delayed marriage and child-bearing, education of adolescents about the risks of unprotected sex, making contraceptive services accessible and affordable, providing food supplements, nutritional services, strengthening legal measures to prevent child marriage.


22.


Solution: c

The Company tried continuously to press for more concessions and manipulate existing privileges. Aurangzeb’s farman, for instance, had granted only the Company the right to trade duty free. But officials of the Company, who were carrying on private trade on the side, were expected to pay duty. This they refused to pay, causing an enormous  loss of revenue for Bengal.


23.

Solution: c

http://www.prsindia.org/billtrack/the-micro-finance-institutions-development-and-regulation-bill-2012-
2348/

24.


Solution: d)

A magnet can exert a force on another magnet without being in contact with it. The force exerted by a magnet  is an example of a non-contact force.






http://insightsonindia.com INSIGHTS                                                                                                           Page 9
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 2 - SOLUTIONS


The force exerted by a charged  body on another charged or uncharged body is known as electrostatic force. This force comes into play even when the bodies are not in contact. The electrostatic force, therefore, is another example of a non-contact force.

The force of friction always acts on all the moving objects and its direction is always opposite to the direction of motion. Example, A ball rolling along the ground gradually slows down and finally comes to rest.


25.

Solution: b)

The loudness of sound depends on its amplitude. When the amplitude of vibration is large, the sound produced is loud. When the amplitude is small, the sound produced is feeble.

The frequency determines the shrillness or pitch of a sound. If the frequency of vibration is higher we say that the sound is shrill and has a higher  pitch. If the frequency of vibration is lower, we say that the sound has a lower pitch. For example, a drum vibrates with a low frequency. Therefore,
it produces a low-pitched sound. On the other hand, a whistle has a high frequency and therefore, produces a sound of higher pitch.


26.

Solution (a)

Cabinet Ministers are usually top-level leaders of the ruling party or parties who are in charge of the major ministries. Usually the Cabinet Ministers meet to take decisions in the name of the Council of Ministers. Cabinet is thus the inner ring of the Council of Ministers.

Since it is not practical for all ministers to meet regularly and discuss everything, the decisions are taken in Cabinet meetings. That is why parliamentary democracy in most countries is often known as the Cabinet form of government.
Reference: Page No. 87 (Democratic Politics –I)

27.

Solution: c)

During the development of a thunderstorm, the air currents move upward while the water droplets move downward. These vigorous movements cause separation of charges. By a process, not yet completely understood, the positive charges collect near the upper edges of the clouds and the negative charges accumulate near the lower edges. There is accumulation of positive charges near the ground also. When the magnitude of the accumulated charges becomes very
large, the air which is normally a poor conductor of electricity is no longer able to resist their



http://insightsonindia.com INSIGHTS                                                                                                        Page 10
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 2 - SOLUTIONS


flow. Negative and positive charges meet, producing streaks of bright light and sound. We see streaks as lightning. The process is called an electric discharge.

Open vehicles, like motorbikes, tractors, construction machinery, open cars are not safe. Open fields, tall trees, shelters in parks, elevated places do not protect us from lightning strokes. Carrying umbrella is not a good  idea at all during thunderstorms. If in a forest, take shelter under shorter trees. If no shelter is available and you are

in an open field, stay far away from all trees. Stay away from poles or other metal objects. Do not lie on the ground. Instead, squat low on the ground. Place your hands on your knees with your head between the hands.

Inside the house

Lightning can strike telephone cords, electrical wires and metal pipes. During a thunderstorm contact with these should be avoided. It is safer to use mobile phones and cordless phones. However, it is not wise to call up a person who is receiving your phone  through  a wired phone.

Bathing should be avoided during thunderstorms to avoid contact with running water. Electrical appliances like computers, TVs, etc., should be unplugged. Electrical lights can remain on. They do not cause any harm.

28.

Solution (d)
Cabinet Ministers are usually top-level leaders of the ruling party or parties who are in charge of the major ministries. Since it is not practical for all ministers to meet regularly and discuss everything, the decisions are taken in Cabinet meetings. The cabinet works as a team.  The ministers may have different views and opinions, but everyone has to own up to every decision of the Cabinet. No minister can openly criticise any decision of the government, even if it is about another Ministry or Department.

Every ministry has secretaries, who are civil servants. The secretaries provide the necessary background information to the ministers to take decisions.

29.

Solution: d)

http://www.eastasiaforum.org/2013/07/30/india-asean-fta-in-services-good-for-the-region-very-good-for- india-2/

30.

Solution: c)





http://insightsonindia.com INSIGHTS                                                                                                        Page 11
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 2 - SOLUTIONS


http://www.thehindubusinessline.com/industry-and-economy/rangarajan-panel-proposes-new-gas- pricing-formula/article4264578.ece

31.

Solution: c)

The Himalaya consists of three parallel ranges in its longitudinal extent. A number of valleys lie between these ranges. The northern most range is known as the Great or Inner Himalayas or the
‘Himadri’. It is the most continuous range consisting of the loftiest peaks with an average height
of 6,000 metres. It contains all the prominent Himalayan peaks. The folds of Great Himalayas are asymmetrical in nature. The core of this part of Himalayas is composed of granite. It is
perennially snow bound,  and a number  of glaciers descend from this range.

The range lying to the south of the Himadri forms the most rugged mountain system and is known as Himachal or lesser Himalaya. The ranges are mainly composed of highly compressed and altered rocks. The altitude varies between  3,700 and 4,500 metres and the average width is of
50 Km. While the Pir Panjal range forms the longest and the most important range, the Dhaula Dhar and the Mahabharat ranges are also prominent ones. This range consists of the famous valley of Kashmir, the Kangra and Kullu Valley in Himachal Pradesh. This region is well known for its hill stations.

The outer most range of the Himalayas is called the Shiwaliks. They extend over a width of 10-50
Km and have an altitude varying between  900 and 1100 metres. These ranges are composed  of unconsolidated sediments brought down by rivers from the main Himalayan ranges located farther north. These valleys are covered with thick gravel and alluvium.  The longitudinal valley lying between lesser Himalaya and the Shiwaliks are known as Duns. Dehra Dun, Kotli Dun and Patli Dun are some of the well-known Duns.


32.

Solution: b)

Bhagirathi-Hooghly river is a distributary, not a tributary.

The headwaters of the Ganga, called the ‘Bhagirathi’ is fed by the Gangotri Glacier and joined by the Alaknanda at Devaprayag  in Uttaranchal. At Haridwar the Ganga emerges from the mountains on to the plains.

The main tributaries, which come from the peninsular uplands, are the Chambal, the Betwa and the Son. These rise from semi arid areas, have shorter courses and do not carry much water in them. Find out where and how they ultimately join the Ganga. Enlarged with the waters from its right and left bank tributaries,  the Ganga flows eastwards till Farakka in West Bengal. This is the
northernmost point of the Ganga delta. The river bifurcates here; the Bhagirathi-Hooghly (a


http://insightsonindia.com INSIGHTS                                                                                                        Page 12
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 2 - SOLUTIONS


distributary) flows southwards through the deltaic plains to the Bay of Bengal. The mainstream, flows southwards into Bangladesh and is joined by the Brahmaputra. Further down stream, it is known as the Meghna. This mighty river, with waters from the Ganga, and the Brahmaputra, flows into the Bay of Bengal. The delta formed by these rivers is known as the Sunderban delta.


33.


Solution: c)

El Nino: This is a name given  to the periodic development of a warm  ocean current along the coast of Peru as a temporary replacement of the cold Peruvian current. ‘El Nino’ is a Spanish word meaning ‘the child’, and refers to the baby Christ, as this current starts flowing during Christmas. The presence of the El Nino leads to an increase in sea-surface temperatures and weakening of
the trade winds in the region.

The ENSO is known to have  a pronounced effect on the strength of SW Monsoon over India with the Monsoon being weak (causing droughts in India) during the El Niño years whereas La Niña years had particularly good Monsoon strength over India

ENSO

Apart from this, it has also been noticed that changes in the pressure conditions over the southern oceans also affect the monsoons. Normally when the tropical eastern south Pacific Ocean experiences high pressure, the tropical eastern Indian Ocean experiences low pressure. But in certain years, there is a reversal  in the pressure conditions and the eastern Pacific has lower pressure in comparison to the eastern Indian Ocean. This periodic change in pressure conditions is known as the Southern Oscillation or SO. The difference in pressure over Tahiti (Pacific Ocean,
18°S/149°W) and Darwin in northern Australia (Indian Ocean, 12°30’S/131°E) is computed to
predict the intensity of the monsoons. If the pressure differences were negative, it would mean below average and late monsoons. A feature connected with the SO is the El Nino, a warm  ocean current that flows past the Peruvian Coast, in place of the cold Peruvian current, every  2 to 5 years. The changes in pressure conditions are connected  to the El Nino. Hence, the phenomenon
is referred to as ENSO (El Nino Southern Oscillations).


34.

Solution: c

Pg 12: On hearing the news of the fall of Calcutta, Company officials in Madras sent forces under the command of Robert Clive, reinforced by naval fleets. Prolonged negotiations with the Nawab followed. Finally, in 1757, Robert Clive led the Company’s army against Sirajuddaulah at Plassey.
One of the main reasons for the defeat of the Nawab was that the forces led by Mir Jafar, one of


http://insightsonindia.com INSIGHTS                                                                                                        Page 13
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 2 - SOLUTIONS


Sirajuddaulah’s commanders, never fought the battle. Clive had managed to secure his support by promising to make him nawab after crushing Sirajuddaulah. The Battle of Plassey became famous because it was the first major victory the Company won in India.


35.

Solution  : a

How was indigo cultivated?

There were two main systems of indigo cultivation – nij and ryoti. Within the system of nij cultivation, the planter produced indigo in lands that he directly controlled. He either bought the land or rented it from other zamindars and produced indigo by directly employing hired labourers.

The problem with nij cultivation

The planters found it difficult to expand the area under nij cultivation. Indigo could be cultivated only on fertile lands, and these were all already densely populated. Only small plots scattered over the landscape could be acquired. Planters needed large areas in compact blocks to cultivate indigo in plantations. Where could they get such land from? They attempted to lease in the land around the indigo factory, and evict the peasants from the area. But this always led to conflicts and tension.


36.

Solution: c)

Traffic emissions – such as from trucks, buses, and automobiles – also contribute. Airborne by- products from vehicle exhaust systems cause air pollution and are a major ingredient in the creation of smog in some large cities.

The major culprits are from transportation sources are carbon monoxide (CO), nitrogen oxides (NO and NOx), volatile organic compounds, sulfur dioxide, and hydrocarbons. These molecules react with sunlight, heat, ammonia, moisture, and other compounds to form the noxious vapors, ground level ozone, and particles that comprise smog.

Photochemical smog was first described in the 1950s. It is the chemical reaction of sunlight, nitrogen oxides and volatile organic compounds  in the atmosphere, which
leaves airborne particles and ground-level ozone.[14]  This noxious mixture of air pollutants can
include the following:

Aldehydes
Nitrogen oxides, such as nitrogen dioxide
Peroxyacyl nitrates
Tropospheric ozone


http://insightsonindia.com INSIGHTS                                                                                                        Page 14
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 2 - SOLUTIONS


Volatile organic compounds

All of these harsh chemicals are usually highly reactive and oxidizing. Photochemical smog is therefore considered to be a problem  of modern industrialization. It is present in all modern cities, but it is more common in cities with sunny, warm, dry climates and a large number of motor vehicles. Because it travels with the wind, it can affect sparsely populated areas as well.


37.

Solution (c)
Men and women under MGNERGA program get the same salary- Right to Equality, the government shall not discriminate  against any citizen on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth. All citizens have equality of opportunity in matters relating to employment or
appointment to any position in the government. No citizen shall be discriminated  against or made
ineligible for appointment.

Parents property inherited by their children is not a fundamental  right.

Workers from Bihar go to the Maharashtra in search of job comes under right to freedom. As citizens we have the freedom to travel to any part of the country. We are free to reside and settle in any party of the territory of India.

Christian missions can set up a chain of missionary schools (this comes under Right to Freedom of Religion) but cannot allure other persons to convert to Christianity. Every person has a right to profess, practice  and propagate the religion he or she believes in. Every religious group or sect is free to manage its religious affairs. A right to propagate one’s religion, however, does not mean
that  a person has right to compel another person to convert into his religion by means of force, fraud, inducement or allurement. Of course, a person is free to change religion on his or her own will.

38.

Solution:  a)

http://www.gktoday.in/national-manufacturing-policy-india/

39.

Solution: d)
http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/2013-07-08/news/40443725_1_pma-policy-preferential-
market-access-policy-private-sector

40.

Solution : c)

The Munro system



http://insightsonindia.com INSIGHTS                                                                                                        Page 15
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 2 - SOLUTIONS


In the British territories in the south there was a similar move away from the idea of Permanent Settlement. The new system that was devised came to be known as the ryotwar (or ryotwari ). It was tried on a small scale by Captain Alexander Read in some of the areas that were taken over by the Company after the wars with Tipu Sultan. Subsequently developed by Thomas Munro, this system was gradually extended all over south India. Read and Munro felt that in the south there were no traditional zamindars. The settlement, they argued, had to be made directly with the cultivators (ryots) who had tilled the land for generations. Their fields had to be carefully and separately surveyed before the revenue assessment was made. Munro thought that the British should act as paternal father figures protecting the ryots under their charge.


41.

Solution (d)

Freedom of speech and expression is one of the essential features of any democracy. Our ideas and personality develop only when we are able to freely communicate with others. You may think differently from others. Even if a hundred people think in one way, you should have the freedom to think differently and express your views accordingly. You may disagree with a policy of government or activities of an association.

You are free to criticize the government or the activities of the association in your conversations with parents, friends and relatives. You may publicise your views through  a pamphlet, magazine or newspaper. You can do it through paintings, poetry or songs. However, you cannot use this freedom to instigate violence against others. You cannot use it to incite people to rebel against government.

Freedom to start  a movement to change the government is available. For instance, Anna Hazare’s movement on corruption. The prisoners have the right to oppose torture, in this direction National Human Rights Commission has played a major  role.

42.

Solution: c)

WATER POLLUTION

Water dissolves the fertilisers and pesticides that we use on our farms. So some percentage of these substances  are washed into the water bodies. Sewage from our towns and cities and the waste from factories are also dumped into rivers or lakes. Specific industries also use water for cooling in various operations and later return this hot water to water-bodies. Another manner in which the temperature of the water in rivers can be affected is when water is released from dams. The water inside the deep reservoir would be colder than the water at the surface which gets
heated by the Sun.





http://insightsonindia.com INSIGHTS                                                                                                        Page 16
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 2 - SOLUTIONS


All this can affect the life-forms that are found in these water bodies in various ways. It can encourage the growth of some life-forms and harm some other life-forms. This affects the balance between various organisms which had been established in that system. So we use the term water- pollution to cover the

following effects:

1. The addition of undesirable substances to water-bodies. These substances could be the
fertilisers and pesticides used in farming or they could be poisonous substances, like mercury salts which are used by paper-industries. These could also be disease-causing organisms, like the bacteria which cause cholera.

2. The removal of desirable substances from water-bodies. Dissolved oxygen is used by the animals and plants that live in water. Any change that reduces the amount of this dissolved oxygen would adversely affect these aquatic organisms. Other nutrients could also be depleted from the water bodies.

3. A change in temperature. Aquatic organisms are used to a certain  range of temperature in the water-body where they live, and a sudden  marked change in this temperature would be dangerous for them or affect their breeding. The eggs and larvae of various animals are particularly susceptible to temperature changes.


43.

Solution: d)

Nitrogen gas makes up 78% of our atmosphere and nitrogen is also a part  of many molecules essential to life like proteins, nucleic acids (DNA and RNA) and some vitamins. Nitrogen is found in other biologically important compounds such as alkaloids and urea too. Nitrogen is thus
an essential  nutrient for all life-forms and life would be simple if all these life-forms could use the
atmospheric nitrogen directly. However, other than a few forms of bacteria, life-forms are not able to convert the comparatively inert nitrogen molecule into forms like nitrates and nitrites which can be taken up and used to make the required molecules.

Apart from bacteria, nitrogen is converted by a physical process. During lightening, the high temperatures and pressures created in the air convert nitrogen into oxides of nitrogen. These oxides dissolve in water to give nitric and nitrous acids and fall on land along with rain. These are then utilized by life forms on the earth.

44.

Solution: d)

A striking feature of the hot weather season is the ‘loo’. These are strong, gusty, hot, dry winds
blowing during the day over the north and northwestern India. Sometimes they even continue

http://insightsonindia.com INSIGHTS                                                                                                        Page 17
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 2 - SOLUTIONS


until late in the evening. Direct exposure to these winds may even prove to be fatal. Dust storms are very common during the month of May in northern India. These storms bring temporary relief as they lower the temperature and may bring light rain and cool breeze. This is also the season for localised thunderstorms, associated with violent winds, torrential downpours, often accompanied by hail. In West Bengal, these storms are known as the ‘Kaal Baisakhi’ calamity for the month of Baisakh.


45.

Solution (c)

Every citizen has the right to freedom mentioned under Article 19. But one cannot exercise his/her freedom in such amanner that it violates others’ right to freedom. Your freedoms should not cause public nuisance or disorder.You are free to do everything which injures no one else. Freedom is not unlimited license to do what one wants. Accordingly, the government can impose certain reasonable restrictions on our freedoms in the larger interests of the society.

All citizens of India enjoy the freedom to move freely throughout the country. But under certain circumstances, due to security reasons the freedom can restricted. For instance, entry in border areas or army cantonment is restricted to ordinary citizens as it can be dangerous for the security of India.

Outsiders are not allowed to buy property in some areas to protect the interest of the local population. According to article 370, outsiders are not allowed to buy property  and settle permanently in the State of Jammu & Kashmir and also in tribal areas it is restricted inorder to protect the ethnic and cultural identity of the tribal people.

The government banning publication of book motivated by political reasons is a violation of freedom of expression (Article 19(1)).



46.

Solution (d)

The constitution is the supreme law of the land, it not only determines the powers of the government but also lays down certain limitations on the powers of the government by providing Fundamental rights to the citizens of India. It determines how a government  should function and generates  a degree  of trust and coordination  that is necessary for different kind of people to live together.










http://insightsonindia.com INSIGHTS                                                                                                        Page 18
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 2 - SOLUTIONS


47.

Solution:  a)

Desirable characters can be introduced by genetically modifying the crops too.

One way of incorporating desirable characters into crop varieties is by hybridisation. Hybridisation refers to crossing between genetically dissimilar plants. This crossing may be intervarietal (between different varieties), interspecific (between two different species of the same genus) or intergeneric  (between different genera). Another way of improving the crop is by introducing a gene that would provide the desired characteristic. This results in genetically modified crops.


48.

Solution: c

The iris is a thin, circular structure in the eye, responsible for controlling the diameter and size of the pupil and thus the amount of light reaching the retina.

The cornea is the transparent front part of the eye that covers the iris, pupil, and anterior chamber. The cornea, with the anterior chamber and lens, refracts light, with the cornea accounting for approximately two-thirds of the eye's total optical power.

The pupil is a hole located in the center of the iris of the eye that allows light to enter the retina


49.

Solution: c)

The Himalayas  harbour  a hardy range of animals, which survive in extreme cold. Ladhak’s freezing high altitudes  are a home to yak, the shaggy horned wild ox weighing around one tonne, the Tibetan antelope, the bharal (blue sheep), wild sheep, and the kiang (Tibetan wild ass). Furthermore, the ibex, bear, snow-leopard and very rare red panda are found in certain pockets.


50.

Solution: d)

Reference:  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biosphere_reserves_of_India








http://insightsonindia.com INSIGHTS                                                                                                        Page 19
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 2 - SOLUTIONS


51.

Solution:  a)

Coriolis force: An apparent force caused by the earth’s rotation. The Coriolis force is responsible for deflecting winds towards the right in the northern hemisphere  and towards the left in the southern hemisphere. This is also known as ‘Ferrel’s Law’.

Jet stream: These are a narrow belt of high altitude (above 12,000 m) westerly winds in the troposphere. Their speed varies from about 110 km/h in summer to about 184 km/h in winter. A number of separate jet streams have been identified. The most constant are the mid-latitude and the sub tropical jet stream. These play an important role in bringing monsoon rains to India.

Western disturbances  are different from Jet Streams. These are extratropical storms and are non- monsoonal.


52.

Solution: b)

The Centrally sponsored Scheme of National River Conservation Plan  (NRCP) is being implemented by the central Government jointly with the State Government on a  cost-sharing basis. The pollution abatement works under NRCP presently cover identified polluted stretches of 39 major rivers in 185 towns spread over 20 States in the country. The sanctioned cost of the projects  under NRCP  is  Rs  . 8100.48 crore (including  Rs.433 crore incurred under GAP-I).  A sewage treatment capacity of 4417 mld has been created under River Action Plans.

Pollution Abatement Works So far

The following pollution abatement works are taken up:

1.   Interception and Diversion  works  to capture the raw sewage flowing  into  the river through open drains and divert them for treatment . (I&D)
2.    Sewage  Treatment Plants for treating the diverted sewage. (STP)
3.   Low Cost Sanitation works to prevent open defecation on river banks .(LCS)
4.   Electric Crematoria and Improved Wood Crematoria and Improved Wood Crematoria to conserve the use of wood and help in ensuring proper cremation of bodies brought to the buring ghats. (EC&IWC)
5.   River Front Development works such as improvement of bathing ghatsetc. (RED)
6.   Other Measures like plantation, public awareness etc.



53.

Solution: d)





http://insightsonindia.com INSIGHTS                                                                                                        Page 20
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 2 - SOLUTIONS


54.

Solution (b)

As far back as in 1928, Motilal Nehru and eight other Congress leaders drafted a constitution for
India.  In 1931, the resolution at the Karachi session of the Indian National Congress dwelt on
how Independent India’s constitution should look like. Both these documents were committed to the inclusion of universal adult franchise, right to freedom and equality and to protecting the rights of minorities in the constitution of independent India.



55.

Solution: c)

A 2007 study finds that discharge of untreated sewage is the single most important cause for pollution of surface and ground water in India. There is a large gap between  generation and treatment of domestic waste water in India. The problem is not only that India lacks sufficient treatment capacity but also that the sewage treatment plants that exist do not operate and are not maintained.

In 2008, the water quality monitoring found almost all rivers with high levels of  BOD. The worst pollution, in decreasing order, were found in river Markanda (590 mg O/l), followed by river Kali (364), river Amlakhadi (353), Yamuna canal (247), river Yamuna at Delhi (70) and river Betwa (58). For context, a water sample with a 5 day BOD between 1 and 2 mg O/L  indicates a very clean water, 3 to 8 mg O/L  indicates a moderately  clean water, 8 to 20 indicates borderline  water, and greater than 20 mg O/L  indicates ecologically-unsafe polluted water.

The levels of BOD are severe near the cities and major towns. In rural parts of India, the river
BOD levels were sufficient to support aquatic life.
Biochemical oxygen demand or B.O.D is the amount of  dissolved oxygen needed by aerobic biological organisms in a body  of water to break down organic material present in a given  water sample at certain temperature over a specific time period. The term also refers to a chemical procedure for determining this amount.


56.

Solution (b)

The familiarity with political institutions of colonial rule also helped develop an agreement over the institutional design. The British rule had given voting rights only to a few. On that basis the British had introduced very weak legislatures.

Elections were held in 1937 to Provincial Legislatures and Ministries all over British India. These were not fully democratic governments. But the experience gained by Indians in the working of the legislative institutions proved to be very useful for the country in setting up its


http://insightsonindia.com INSIGHTS                                                                                                        Page 21
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 2 - SOLUTIONS


own institutions and working in them. That is why the Indian constitution adopted many institutional details and procedures  from colonial laws like the Government of India Act, 1935. Many of our leaders were inspired by the ideals of French Revolution, the practice of parliamentary democracy in Britain and the Bill of Rights in the US. The socialist revolution in Russia had inspired many Indians to think of shaping  a system based on social and economic equality.



57.

Solution: d)

All are correct.

58.


Solution:  a)

Some plants like sun hemp or guar are grown and then mulched by ploughing them into the soil which becomes green manure enriching the soil in nitrogen and phosphorus.

The process in which farm waste material like livestock excreta (cow dung etc.), vegetable waste, animal refuse, domestic waste, sewage waste, straw, eradicated weeds etc. is decomposed in pits is known as composting.


59.

Solution: d)

Climate refers to the sum total of weather conditions and variations over a large area for a long period of time (more than thirty years). Weather refers to the state of the atmosphere over an area at any point of time. The elements of weather and climate are the same, i.e. temperature, atmospheric pressure, wind, humidity and precipitation.  You may have observed  that the weather conditions fluctuate very often even within a day. But there is some common pattern
over a few weeks or months, i.e. days are cool or hot, windy or calm, cloudy or bright, and wet or
dry. On the basis of the generalised monthly atmospheric conditions, the year is divided into seasons such as winter, summer or rainy seasons.


60.

Solution (d)

Values that inspired and guided the freedom struggle and were in turn nurtured by it, formed the foundation for India’s democracy. These values are embedded in the Preamble of the Indian Constitution. They guide all the articles of the Indian Constitution.

http://insightsonindia.com INSIGHTS                                                                                                        Page 22
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 2 - SOLUTIONS



Taking inspiration from American model, most countries in the contemporary world have chosen to begin their constitutions with a preamble.

It contains the philosophy on which the entire Constitution has been built. It provides a standard to examine  and evaluate any law and action of government, to find out whether it is good or bad. It is the soul of the Indian Constitution.

61.

Solution: c)

Elemental oxygen is normally found in the form of a diatomic molecule. However, in the upper reaches of the atmosphere, a molecule containing three atoms of oxygen is found. This would mean  a formula of O3 and this is called ozone. Unlike the normal diatomic molecule of oxygen, ozone is poisonous and we are lucky that it is not stable nearer to the Earth’s surface. But it performs an essential  function where it is found. It absorbs harmful radiations from the Sun. This prevents those harmful radiations from reaching the surface of the Earth where they may damage many forms of life.


62.


Solution: b)



63.

Solution: b)

64.

Solution: d)

All statements  are correct; hence answer is (d) There are six major controls of the climate of any place. They are: latitude, altitude, pressure and wind system, distance from the sea (continentality), ocean currents and relief features.

Due to the curvature of the earth, the amount of solar energy received varies according to latitude. As a result, air temperature decreases from the equator towards the poles. As one goes from the surface of the earth to higher altitudes, the atmosphere becomes less dense and temperature decreases. The hills are therefore  cooler during summers. The pressure and wind system of any area depend on the latitude and altitude of the place. Thus it influences the temperature and rainfall pattern. The sea exerts a moderating  influence on climate: As the distance from the sea increases, its moderating influence decreases  and the people experience
extreme weather conditions. This condition is known as continentality (i.e. very hot during

http://insightsonindia.com INSIGHTS                                                                                                        Page 23
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 2 - SOLUTIONS


summers and very cold during winters). Ocean currents along with onshore winds affect the climate of the coastal areas, For example, any coastal area with warm or cold currents flowing past it, will be warmed or cooled if the winds are onshore.


65.

Solution (a)

While WPI (Wholesale Price Index) represents the wholesale prices of goods, CPI indicates the average price paid by households for a basket  of goods and services.

Central Statistics Office (CSO), Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation  releases CPI with base year 2010 for all India and States/UTs separately for rural, urban and combined(rural+urban)every month with effect from January, 2011.

These indices are available for five major groups namely Food, beverages and tobacco; Fuel and light; Housing (Only for Urban; Rural areas are not included); Clothing, bedding and footwear, and Miscellaneous.

Approximately 50% weightage is given to food items and total number of commodities in the index is 200.



66.

Solution (b)

Bitcoin is a consensus network that enables a new payment system and a completely digital money. It is the first decentralized peer-to-peer payment network that is powered by its users with no central authority or middlemen.

While bitcoins are not illegal in India, the RBI is “watching and learning about the developments in bitcoin” even though it has no intention of regulating it right now. But the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) seems to have put a damper  on things with its recent press release cautioning against the use of virtual currencies. Since then, a number  of bitcoin operators have shut shop. Although the central bank has not established any regulatory framework applicable to bitcoins, it has repeatedly stated that it is examining the issue.

Within Bitcoin network people can trade without actually disclosing who they are in real lives.It is just like cash where nobody needs to disclose identity (ex. bank account details) , unlike in other options like paypal or e-cheques where one needs to tie bank account details while transacting.

It’s not an income-generating asset class suitable for most investors. Its value, in dollars, fluctuates wildly from one minute to the next. And while it can be a cheap  way of transferring money,
there are too many glitches in its emerging network for bitcoin to be entirely reliable.



http://insightsonindia.com INSIGHTS                                                                                                        Page 24
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 2 - SOLUTIONS


67.

Solution:  a

The Doctrine of Lapse - The final wave of annexations occurred under Lord Dalhousie who was the Governor-General from 1848 to 1856. He devised  a policy that came to be known as the Doctrine of Lapse. The doctrine declared that if an Indian ruler died without a male  heir his kingdom would “lapse”, that is, become part of Company territory. One kingdom after another was annexed simply by applying this doctrine: Satara (1848), Sambalpur (1850), Udaipur (1852), Nagpur (1853) and Jhansi (1854).


68.

Solution: b)

Western Disturbance is the term used in India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Nepal to describe
an extratropical storm originating in the Mediterranean, that brings sudden winter rain and snow to the northwestern parts of the Indian subcontinent. This is a non-monsoonal precipitation pattern driven by the Westerlies. The moisture in these storms usually originates over the Mediterranean Sea and the Atlantic Ocean. Extratropical storms are a global, rather  than a localized, phenomena with moisture usually carried in the upper atmosphere (unlike tropical storms where it is carried in the lower atmosphere). In the case of the subcontinent, moisture is sometimes shed as rain when the storm system encounters the Himalayas.

Western Disturbances are important to the development of the Rabi crop in the northern subcontinent, which includes the locally important staple wheat.

Western Disturbance causes winter and pre monsoon season rainfall across northwest India. Winter months Rainfall has great importance in agriculture, particularly for the rabi crops. Wheat among them is one of the most important crops, which helps to meet India’s food security.
During the season, normally 4-5 western disturbances in a month can be seen over northwest India. Some of the western disturbances bring well-distributed and good rainfall, while some pass with negligible rain or sometimes no rain. The Western disturbance affects day-to-day weather of northwest India especially during winter season. It is usually associated with cloudy sky, higher night temperatures, unusual rain etc. Over the Indo-Gangetic plains, it brings cold wave conditions and occasionally  dense fog and cold day conditions. These conditions remain stable until it is disturbed by another Western Disturbances.


69.
Solution (d)

Hot money is a term that is most commonly used in financial markets to refer to the flow of
funds (or capital) from one country to another in order to earn  a short-term profit on interest rate differences and/or anticipated exchange rate shifts. These speculative capital flows are called "hot money" because they can move very quickly in and out of markets, potentially leading to market instability.


http://insightsonindia.com INSIGHTS                                                                                                        Page 25
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 2 - SOLUTIONS





70.

Solution (a)

Currency swaps were an important part of the policy response to the 2007-09 financial crisis, keeping a lid on funding costs, which had spiralled due to fear over counter-party risk.
A currency swap is an exchange  that occurs between two individuals or entities holding set
currencies for a specified period of time after which, they will be exchanged back.This can occur between two or more parties. Upon the maturity of the exchange, each party returns to the other the original amount of currency traded.

Due to laws of international accounting, currency swaps are not considered to be loans, and are thus not required to be documented on a company’s balance sheet. Instead of being considered a loan, currency swaps are treated as foreign exchange transactions with the maturity date closed as a forward  contract,  which is a simple agreement ensuring the date on which the amounts will be repaid. The entirety of the cash flow contained within the swap is repaid upon maturity. This includes the initial principal amount exchanged, the receipt or payment of interest in the same currency, and the eventual return of the amount exchanged when the deal matures.

However, this investment also has some drawbacks. The first and foremost drawback can be that the other party may fail to meet the obligation during the period of swap or upon maturity. The parties exposed to the risk either one or both have chances to default on principal payment as well as interest. The other drawback could be devaluation in the domestic currency, which can happen when huge foreign debts are acquired. India has currency swap arrangement with Japan.

71.

Solution: b)

A meandering river across a flood plain forms cut-offs that later develop into ox-bow lakes. Spits and bars form lagoons in the coastal areas, eg the Chilika lake, the Pulicat lake, the Kolleru lake. Lakes in the region of inland drainage are sometimes seasonal; for example, the Sambhar lake in Rajasthan, which is a salt water lake. Its water is used for producing salt.

Most of the fresh water lakes are in the Himalayan region. They are of glacial origin. In other words, they formed when glaciers dug out a basin,  which was later filled with snowmelt. The Wular lake in Jammu and Kashmir, in contrast, is the result of the tectonic activity. It is the largest freshwater lake in India. The Dal lake, Bhimtal, Nainital, Loktak and Barapani are some other important fresh water lakes.

72.

Solution (b)





http://insightsonindia.com INSIGHTS                                                                                                        Page 26
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 2 - SOLUTIONS


RBI in India is incharge of the Monetary Policy and the Finance Ministry (Government of India) is incharge of the Fiscal Policy. Increasing interest rates and Introduction of Inflation-Indexed National Saving Securities (IINSSs)  for retail investors are the steps taken by RBI.

RBI on consultation with the government plans to launch a 10-year savings instrument- ‘Inflation- Indexed National Saving Securities (IINSSs) for retail investors’ that will offer inflation-linked returns to small investors as an alternative to investing in gold. IINSS will be linked to the new (combined) Consumer Price Index (CPI). The interest on these securities would comprise a fixed rate plus inflation.

Interest would be compounded half-yearly and paid cumulatively  at redemption. These securities will be distributed through banks to reach out to the masses( Eligible investors : individuals, Hindu Undivided Families, trusts and charitable institutions)
Whereas, increasing or decreasing taxes, duties, permitting FDI in retail are the steps taken by the
Finance Ministry (not RBI)to curb inflation.



73.

Solution (d)

The leaders of the freedom movement were clear in their mind that their country should be a democracy. The different members had different views on different points, but ultimately they resolved their differences.

All countries that have a constitution are not necessarily democratic but all countries which are democratic must have their constitutions. The Constitution is amended by two-third majority of the members of the Parliament if any change was required.



74.

Solution: d)

BRIEF PROVISIONS OF INDUS WATERS TREATY 1960

The Indus Waters Treaty is a water-sharing  treaty between  Pakistan and India, brokered by the World Bank (then the International  Bank for Reconstruction and Development).

i. The Indus system of rivers comprises three Eastern Rivers (Ravi, Beas and Sutlej and their tributaries)  and three Western Rivers (Indus, Jhelum and Chenab and their tributaries).

ii. The Indus Waters Treaty 1960 was signed on 19.09.1960 between India and Pakistan. It is however effective from 01.04.1960.

iii. Under the Treaty, the waters of Eastern Rivers are allocated to India. India is under obligation to let flow the waters of the Western Rivers except for the following uses:



http://insightsonindia.com INSIGHTS                                                                                                        Page 27
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 2 - SOLUTIONS


(a) Domestic Use,

(b) Non-consumptive use,

(c) Agricultural use as specified,

(d) Generation of hydro-electric power as specified

iv. India has been permitted to construct storage of water on Western Rivers upto 3.6 MAF for various purposes. No storage has been developed so far.

v. India has been permitted Agricultural Use of 7, 01,000 acres over and above the Irrigated Cropped Area (ICA) as on 1.4.60. Out of this additional ICA of  7,01,000 acres, only 2,70,000 can be developed (i.e. a total  ICA of 9,12,477 acres including that on 1.4.1960) till storages are constructed and 0.5 MAF of  water is released there from every year. ICA during 2008-09 was 7,
92,496 Acres.

vi. Under the Treaty, India and Pakistan have each created a permanent  post of Commissioner for Indus Waters. They together constitute the Permanent Indus Commission (PIC), which is entrusted with the implementation of the Treaty. The PIC is required to hold meetings and tours and submit report on its work to the two Governments every year. It has held 111 tours and 106 meetings so far.

vii. Both sides are required to exchange information related to river flows observed by them, not later than three months of their observation  and to exchange specified information on Agricultural Use every year.

viii. India is under obligation to supply information of its storage and hydroelectric projects as specified.

viii. India communicates as a gesture  of goodwill, flood data to Pakistan from 1st July to 10th October every year, to enable them to undertake advance flood relief measures. The arrangement is reviewed every year.

ix. The Commissioners may discuss the questions arising under the Treaty under Article IX of the Treaty related to Settlement of Differences and Disputes and in the case of non-resolution, take further action under this Article for resolution through  a Neutral  Expert, negotiators or Court of Arbitration. [A  Neutral Expert appointed by World Bank on Pakistan’s request delivered Expert Determination on Baglihar Hydroelectric Project in Feb. 2007. To resolve the issues of Kishenganga H.E. Project, Pakistan has initiated proceedings for setting up a Court of
Arbitration.








http://insightsonindia.com INSIGHTS                                                                                                        Page 28
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 2 - SOLUTIONS


75.

Solution: d) Drainage Patterns
The streams within a drainage basin  form certain patterns, depending on the slope of land, underlying rock structure as well as the climatic conditions of the area. These are dendritic, trellis, rectangular,  and radial patterns. The dendritic pattern develops where the river channel follows the slope of the terrain. The stream with its tributaries resembles the branches of a tree, thus the name dendritic. A river joined by its tributaries,  at approximately right angles, develops a trellis pattern. A trellis drainage pattern develops where hard and soft rocks exist parallel to each other. A rectangular drainage pattern develops on a strongly jointed rocky terrain. The radial pattern develops when streams flow in different directions from a central  peak or dome like structure.

A combination of several patterns may be found in the same drainage basin


76.

Solution (b)

The Constitution of India has provisions for Powers of the legislature, Name of the country, Powers of the head of the state but not the Name of the head of the state.

77.

Solution:  a)

The Lakshadweep Islands group lying close to the Malabar coast of Kerala is composed of small coral isalnds. Earlier they were known as Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindive. In 1973 these were named as Lakshadweep. It covers small area of 32 sq km. Kavaratti island is the administrative headquarters of Lakshadweep. This island group has great diversity of flora and fauna. The Pitli island, which is uninhabited, has a bird sanctuary.


78.

Solution:  a)

http://www.thehindu.com/business/Economy/nonfarm-jobs-to-shrink-by-25-pc-in-7-years- crisil/article5550168.ece

79.

Solution: c)




http://insightsonindia.com INSIGHTS                                                                                                        Page 29
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 2 - SOLUTIONS


http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2011_census_of_India



80.

Solution (b)

Elections can be held in many ways. All democratic countries hold elections. But most non- democratic countries also hold some kind of elections.

Sometimes election is held only for one constituency to fill the vacancy caused by death or
resignation of a member.  This is called a ‘by-election’.

In India we follow a system of territorial representation/ area-based representation for the election of members of Lok Sabha. And in Rajya Sabha we follow proportional representation One of thefeatures of a democratic election is that every vote should have equal value. That is why our Constitution requires that each constituency should have a roughly  equal population living within it.



81.

Solution (c)

In our country we follow an area based system of representation. The country is divided into different areas for purposes of elections. These areas are called electoral constitutencies. The voters who live in an area elect one representative.
Each Parliamentary constituency has within it several assembly constituencies. The same principle
applies for Panchayat and Municipal elections. Each village or town is divided into several ‘wards’ that are like constituencies. Each ward elects one member of the village or the urban local body. Currently, in the Lok Sabha, 84 seats are reserved for the Scheduled Castes and 47 for the Scheduled Tribes (as on 1 September 2012). This number is in proportion to their share in the total population.

Thus the reserved seats for SC and ST do not take away the legitimate share of any other social
group. Seats are not reserved for OBC’s & Minorities in Parliament.



82.

Solution:  b)

One of the distinct features of the peninsular plateau is the black soil area known as Deccan Trap. This is of volcanic origin hence the rocks are igneous. Actually these rocks have denuded over
time and are responsible for the formation of black soil.

Barchans (crescent shaped dunes) cover larger areas of the Thar Desert but longitudinal dunes become more prominent near the Indo-Pakistan boundary


http://insightsonindia.com INSIGHTS                                                                                                        Page 30
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 2 - SOLUTIONS



83.

Solution: b)
http://www.thehindubusinessline.com/features/investment-world/market-watch/fundamentals-of-
forward-and-futures-contract/article3588996.ece

84.

Solution: c

From the late eighteenth century the Company also sought to curb and eventually destroy Maratha power. With their defeat in the Third Battle of Panipat in 1761,  the Marathas’ dream of ruling from Delhi was shattered. They were divided into many states under different chiefs (sardars) belonging to dynasties such as Sindhia, Holkar, Gaikwad and Bhonsle. These chiefs were held together in a confederacy under a Peshwa (Principal Minister) who became its effective military and administrative head based in Pune. Mahadji Sindhia and Nana Phadnis were two famous Maratha soldiers and statesmen of the late eighteenth century.


85.

Solution: c

After the Battle of Buxar (1764), the Company appointed Residents in Indian states. They were political or commercial agents and their job was to serve and further the interests of the Company. Through the Residents, the Company officials began interfering in the internal affairs of Indian states. They tried to decide who was to be the successor to the throne, and who was to
be appointed in administrative posts. Sometimes the Company forced the states into a “subsidiary alliance”. According to the terms of this alliance, Indian rulers were not allowed to have their independent armed forces. They were to be protected by the Company, but had to pay for the “subsidiary forces” that the Company was supposed to maintain for the purpose of this
protection. If the Indian rulers failed to make the payment, then part of their territory was taken away as penalty.

For example, when Richard Wellesley was Governor- General (1798-1805), the Nawab of Awadh was forced to give over half of his territory to the Company in 1801, as he failed to pay for the “subsidiary forces”. Hyderabad was also forced to cede territories on similar grounds.


86.

Solution:  a)

The Deccan Plateau is a triangular landmass that lies to the south of the river Narmada. The
Satpura range flanks its broad base in the north while the Mahadev, the Kaimur hills and the


http://insightsonindia.com INSIGHTS                                                                                                        Page 31
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 2 - SOLUTIONS


Maikal range form its eastern extensions. Locate these hills and ranges in the physical map of India. The Deccan Plateau is higher in the west and slopes gently eastwards. An extension of the Plateau is also visible in the northeast– locally known as the Meghalaya and Karbi-Anglong Plateau. It is separated by a fault from the Chotanagpur Plateau. Three Prominent hill ranges from the west to east are the Garo, theKhasi and the Jaintia Hills.

The Western Ghats and the Eastern Ghats mark the western and the eastern edges of the Deccan Plateau respectively. Western ghats lie parallel to the western coast. They are continuous and can be crossed through passes only. Locate the Thal, Bhor and the Pal Ghats in the Physical map of India. The Western Ghats are higher than the Eastern Ghats. Their average elevation  is 900–
1600 metres as against 600 metres of the Eastern Ghats.


87.

Solution (a)

Our Constitution entitles every citizen to elect her/his  representative  and to be elected as a representative. The Constitution makers, however, were worried that in an open electoral competition, certain weaker sections may not stand a good chance to get elected to the Lok Sabha and the state Legislative Assemblies. They may not have the required resources, education and contacts to contest and win elections against others.

The system of reservation was extended to other weaker sections at the district and local level. In many states, seats in rural (panchayat) and urban (municipalities and corporations)  local bodies
are now reserved for Other Backward Classes (OBC) as well. However, the proportion of seats reserved varies from state to state. Similarly, one-third of the seats are reserved in rural and urban local bodies for women candidates. But not mandatory for disabled.

88.
Solution: c)

89.

Solution: d)

Given below are the important changes that were introduced by the British.

1. The British Parliament passed  a new Act in 1858 and transferred the powers of the East India Company to the British Crown in order to ensure a more responsible management of Indian affairs. A member of the British Cabinet was appointed Secretary of State for India and made responsible for all matters related to the governance of India. He was given  a council to advise him, called the India Council. The Governor-General of India was given the title of Viceroy, that is, a personal representative of the Crown. Through these measures the British government accepted direct responsibility for ruling India.




http://insightsonindia.com INSIGHTS                                                                                                        Page 32
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 2 - SOLUTIONS


2. All ruling chiefs of the country were assured that their territory would never be annexed in future. They were allowed to pass on their kingdoms to their heirs, including adopted sons. However, they were made to acknowledge the British Queen as their Sovereign Paramount. Thus the Indian rulers were to hold their kingdoms as subordinates of the British Crown.
3. It was decided that the proportion of Indian soldiers in the army would be reduced and the
number of European soldiers would be increased. It was also decided that instead of recruiting soldiers from Awadh, Bihar, central India and south India, more soldiers would be recruited from among the Gurkhas, Sikhs and Pathans.
4. The land and property of Muslims was confiscated on a large scale and they were treated with suspicion and hostility. The British believed that they were responsible for the rebellion in a big way.
5. The British decided to respect the customary religious and social practices of the people in
India.

90.

Solution (b)
In a democratic election, the list of those who are eligible to vote is prepared much before the election and given to everyone. This list is officially called the Electoral Roll and is commonly known as the Voters’ List.

Anyone who can be a voter can also become  a candidate in elections. The only difference is that in order to be a candidate the minimum age is 25 years, while it is only 18 years for being  a voter. There are some other restrictions on criminals etc. but these apply in very extreme cases.

91.

Solution: c)

It is not if ‘fertilized egg’ doesn’t ‘develop’ – if fertilization doesn’t occur at all, then the egg and
the thickened lining of the uterus along with its blood vessels are shed off. This causes bleeding in women which is called menstruation.

Menstruation occurs once in about 28 to 30 days. The first menstrual flow begins at puberty and
is termed menarche. At 45 to 50 years of age, the menstrual cycle stops. Stoppage of menstruation is termed menopause. Initially, menstrual cycle may be irregular. It takes some time to become regular.

92.
Sorry – repeat question 

93.

Solution: d)

94.

Solution: d)

http://insightsonindia.com INSIGHTS                                                                                                        Page 33
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 2 - SOLUTIONS



In 1600, the East India Company acquired a charter  from the ruler of England, Queen Elizabeth I, granting it the sole right to trade with the East. This meant that no other trading group in England could compete with the East India Company. With this charter the Company could venture across the oceans, looking for new lands from which it could buy goods at a cheap  price, and
carry them back to Europe to sell at higher  prices. The Company did not have to fear competition from other English trading companies. Mercantile trading companies in those days made profit primarily by excluding competition, so that they could buy cheap and sell dear. The royal charter, however, could not prevent other European powers from entering the Eastern markets.

By the time the first English ships sailed down the west coast of Africa, round the Cape of Good Hope, and crossed the Indian Ocean, the Portuguese had already established their presence in the western coast of India, and had their base in Goa. In fact, it was Vasco da Gama, a Portuguese explorer, who had discovered  this sea route to India in 1498. By the early seventeenth century, the Dutch too were exploring the possibilities of trade in the Indian Ocean. Soon the French traders arrived on the scene. The problem was that all the companies were interested in buying the same things. The fine qualities of cotton and silk produced in India had a big market in Europe. Pepper, cloves, cardamom and cinnamon  too were in great demand. Competition amongst the European companies inevitably pushed up the prices at which these goods could be
purchased,  and this reduced the profits that could be earned. The only way the trading companies
could flourish was by eliminating rival competitors. The urge to secure markets therefore led to fierce battles between the trading companies. Through the seventeenth  and eighteenth centuries they regularly sank each other’s ships, blockaded routes, and prevented  rival ships from moving with supplies of goods. Trade was carried on with arms and trading posts were protected through fortification. This effort to fortify settlements  and carry on profitable trade also led to intense conflict with local rulers. The company therefore found it difficult to separate trade from politics.

95.

Solution: b)
Finally, in 1765 the Mughal emperor appointed the Company as the Diwan of the provinces of
Bengal. The Diwani allowed the Company to use the vast revenue resources of Bengal. This
solved a major problem  that the Company had earlier faced. From the early eighteenth century its trade with India had expanded. But it had to buy most of the goods in India with gold and silver imported from Britain. This was because  at this time Britain had no goods to sell in India. The outflow of gold from Britain slowed after the Battle of Plassey, and entirely stopped after the assumption of Diwani. Now revenues from India could finance Company expenses. These revenues could be used to purchase cotton and silk textiles in India, maintain Company troops, and meet the cost of building the Company fort and offices at Calcutta.

96.
Solution: c)

The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and
Flora (CITES)  entered into force in 1975, and became the only treaty to ensure that international trade in plants and animals does not threaten their survival in the wild. Currently 179 countries
(called Parties), including the United States, implement CITES.

http://insightsonindia.com INSIGHTS                                                                                                        Page 34
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 2 - SOLUTIONS


The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, also known as the Washington Convention

97.

Solution: d)
Just as victories against the British had earlier encouraged rebellion, the defeat of rebel forces encouraged desertions. The British also tried their best to win back the loyalty of the people. They announced rewards for loyal landholders would be allowed to continue to enjoy traditional rights over their lands. Those who had rebelled were told that if they submitted to the British,
and if they had not killed any white people, they would remain safe and their rights and claims to land would not be denied. Nevertheless, hundreds of
sepoys, rebels, nawabs and rajas were tried and hanged.

98.

Solution  – d)

According to the variations in relief features, the Northern plains can be divided into four regions. The rivers, after descending from the mountains deposit pebbles in a narrow  belt of about 8 to 16 km in width lying parallel to the slopes of the Shiwaliks. It is known as bhabar. All the streams disappear in this bhabar belt. South of this belt, the streams and rivers re-emerge  and create a
wet, swampy and marshy region known as terai. This was a thickly forested region full of wildlife.
The forests have been cleared to create agricultural land and to settle migrants from Pakistan after partition. Locate Dudhwa National  Park in this region.

The largest part of the northern plain is formed of older alluvium. They lie above the flood plains of the rivers and present  a terrace  like feature. This part is known as bhangar. The soil in this region contains calcareous deposites locally known as kankar. The newer, younger deposits of the flood plains are called khadar. They are renewed almost every year and so are fertile, thus, ideal for intensive agriculture.

99.

Solution: d)
Dargah –    The tomb of a Sufi saint
Khanqah – A sufi lodge, often used as a rest house for travellers and a place where people come to discuss spiritual matters, get the blessings of saints, and hear sufi music
Idgah –         An open prayer place of Muslims primarily meant for id prayers
Cul-de-sac – Street with a dead end

100.

Solution: d)






http://insightsonindia.com INSIGHTS                                                                                                        Page 35
