INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS


1.     Solution: d)

Factors affecting ocean salinity are mentioned  below:

(i) The salinity of water in the surface layer of oceans depend mainly on evaporation and precipitation.

(ii) Surface salinity is greatly influenced in coastal regions by the fresh water flow from rivers, and in polar regions by the processes of freezing and thawing of ice.

(iii) Wind, also influences salinity of an area by transferring water to other areas.

(iv) The ocean currents contribute to the salinity variations. Salinity, temperature  and density of water are interrelated. Hence, any change in the temperature or density influences the salinity of an area.

2.     Solution: c)

Macroeconomics, as a separate branch  of economics, emerged after the British economist John Maynard Keynes published his celebrated book The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money in 1936. The dominant thinking in economics before Keynes was that all the labourers
who are ready to work will find employment and all the factories will be working  at their full capacity. This school of thought is known as the classical tradition. However, the Great Depression of 1929 and the subsequent years saw the output and employment levels in the countries of Europe and North America fall by huge amounts. It affected other countries of the world as well. Demand for goods in the market was low, many factories were lying idle, workers were thrown out of jobs. In USA, from 1929 to 1933, unemployment  rate rose from 3 per cent to
25 per cent (unemployment  rate may be defined as the number of people who are not working
and are looking for jobs divided by the total number of people who are working or looking for jobs). Over the same period  aggregate output  in USA fell by about 33 per cent. These events made economists think about the functioning of the economy in a new way. The fact that the economy may have long lasting unemployment  had to be theorised about and explained. Keynes’ book was an attempt in this direction. Unlike his predecessors, his approach was to examine the working of the economy in its entirety and examine  the interdependence of the different sectors. The subject of macroeconomics was born.

3.    Solution: c)

Why does the earth shake?

The release of energy occurs along a fault. A fault is a sharp  break in the crustal rocks. Rocks along a fault tend to move in opposite directions. As the overlying rock strata press them, the friction locks them together. However, their tendency to move  apart at some point of time overcomes the friction. As a result, the blocks get deformed and eventually, they slide past one
another abruptly. This causes a release  of energy, and the energy waves travel in all directions.


http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 1
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS


The point where the energy is released is called the focus of an earthquake, alternatively,  it is called the hypocentre. The energy waves travelling in different directions reach the surface. The point on the surface, nearest to the focus, is called epicentre. It is the first one to experience the waves. It is a point directly above the focus.



4.    Solution (b)

Most Ashokan inscriptions were in the Prakrit language
Reference:  Page No.32(THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY PART I)


5.  Solution:  A

A National Environmental  Appraisal and Monitoring Authority will be created before March 31,
2014 following a Supreme  Court order on Monday. The industry would be soon queuing up before  a new autonomous agency to seek environment clearances under the Environment Protection Act, 1986.

Under the Environment Protection Act, 1986 almost all kind of projects require environment clearance at the state or central level. These are at present processed for recommendation by state or central level appraisal committees and then cleared by the state or central environment ministries.

The projects coming up in forest areas require a forest clearance too under the Forest
Conservation Act, 1980. The Supreme Court’s orders on Monday would not take away the
powers of the Ministry’s forest bureaucracy to clear such proposals but the implementation of the
forest policy would come under the new authority’s domain.

The proposal is to make it operationally independent from the government.




6.    Solution: b)

Wegener suggested that the movement responsible for the drifting of the continents was caused by pole-fleeing force and tidal force. The polar-fleeing force relates to the rotation of the earth. You are aware of the fact that the earth is not a perfect sphere; it has a bulge at the equator. This bulge is due to the rotation of the earth. The second force that was suggested by Wegener—the tidal force—is due to the attraction of the moon and the sun that develops tides in oceanic waters. Wegener believed that these forces would become effective when applied over many million years. However, most of scholars considered these forces to be totally inadequate.

7.   Solution (d)



http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 2
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS


Powers of Rajya Sabha: Considers and approves  non money bills and suggests amendments to money bills. Approves constitutional amendments. Exercises control over executive by asking questions, introducing motions and resolutions. It can alone initiate the procedure for removal of Vice President. It can give the Union parliament power to make laws on matters included in the State list.

Reference : Page 109(Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)

8.   Solution: c)

Of the final goods, we can distinguish between consumption goods and capital goods. Goods like food and clothing, and services like recreation that are consumed  when purchased by their ultimate consumers are called consumption goods or consumer goods. (This also includes services which are consumed  but for convenience we may refer to them as consumer goods.)

Then there are other goods that are of durable character which are used in the production process. These are tools, implements  and machines. While they make production of other commodities feasible, they themselves don’t get transformed in the production process. They are also final goods yet they are not final goods to be ultimately consumed. Unlike the final goods
that we have considered  above, they are the crucial backbone of any production  process, in aiding and enabling the production to take place. These goods form a part of capital, one of the crucial factors of production in which a productive enterprise has invested, and they continue to enable the production process to go on for continuous cycles of production. These are capital goods and they gradually undergo wear and tear, and thus are repaired or gradually replaced over time.

9. Solution:  C

The Central Government, by a notification dated 20.2.2009, as set up ‘National GangaRiver Basin Authority’ (NGRBA)as an empowered planning, financing, monitoring and coordinating authority for the Ganga River, in exercise of the powers conferred under the Environment (Protection) Act,1986. The Prime Minister is ex-officio Chairperson of the Authority, and it has as its members, the Union Ministers Concerned and the Chief Ministers of states through which Ganga flows, viz., Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand and West Bengal, among others. The objective of the Authority is to ensure effective abatement of pollution and conservation  of the river Ganga by adopting  a holistic approach with the river basin as the unit of planning. The functions of the Authority include all measures necessary for planning and execution of programmes for abatement of pollution in the Ganga in keeping with sustainable development needs. It is supported by the World Bank.

Functions of NGRBA


* The NGRBA would be responsible for addressing the problem of pollution in Ganga in a holistic and comprehensive  manner. This will include water quality, minimum ecological flows,
sustainable access and other issues relevant to river ecology and management.


http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 3
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS


* The NGRBA will not only be regulatory body but will also have developmental role in terms of planning & monitoring of the river conservation  activities and ensuring  that necessary resources are available.
* The NRGBA would work for maintaining the water quality of the river Ganga upto
acceptable standards. The pollution abetment activities will be taken through the existing implementation mechanisms in the State and also through special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs0 at the pollution hotspots.
* The NGRBA    will ensure minimum ecological flow in the Ganga by regulating water
abstraction  and by promoting water storage projects.
* The NGRBA will plan and monitor programmes for cleaning of Ganga and its tributaries. To being with, it will concentrate on Ganga main stream.



10.  Solution (d)

The chief instrument through which judicial activism has flourished in India is Public Interest Litigation (PIL) or Social Action Litigation (SAL). PIL has become the most important vehicle of judicial activism. It has expanded the scope of Article 21. In the first place it has overburdened the courts.
A PIL may be introduced in a court of law by the court itself (suo motu), rather than the aggrieved party or another third party.
A Public Interest Litigation (PIL) can be filed in any High Court or directly.

Reference : Pages 135, 136 (Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)




11.   Solution: b) Types of Droughts
Meteorological Drought : It is a situation when there is a prolonged period of inadequate rainfall marked with mal-distribution of the same over time and space.

Agricultural Drought : It is also known as soil moisture drought, characterised by low soil moisture that is necessary to support the crops, thereby resulting in crop failures. Moreover, if an area has more than 30 per cent of its gross cropped  area under irrigation, the area is excluded from the drought-prone category.

Hydrological Drought : It results when the availability of water in different storages and reservoirs like aquifers, lakes, reservoirs, etc. falls below what the precipitation can replenish.

Ecological Drought : When the productivity of a natural  ecosystem fails due to shortage of water and as a consequence of ecological distress, damages are induced in the ecosystem. Various parts



http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 4
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS


of India experience these droughts recurrently which result in some serious socio-economic and ecological problems.


12.   Solution: d)

Apart from GDP deflator, there is another way to measure change of prices in an economy  which is known as the Consumer Price Index (CPI). This is the index of prices of a given basket of commodities which are bought by the representative consumer. CPI is generally expressed in percentage terms. We have two years under consideration – one is the base year, the other is the current year. We calculate the cost of purchase of a given basket of commodities in the base year. We also calculate the cost of purchase of the same basket in the current year. Then we express the latter as a percentage  of the former. This gives us the Consumer Price Index of the current year vis-´a-vis the base year. For example let us take an economy  which produces two goods, rice and cloth. A representative consumer buys 90 kg of rice and 5 pieces of cloth in a year.  Suppose
in the year 2000 the price of a kg of rice was Rs 10 and a piece of cloth was Rs 100. So the consumer had to spend a total  sum of Rs 10 × 90 = Rs 900 on rice in 2000. Similarly, she spent Rs 100 × 5 = Rs 500 per year on cloth. Summation of the two items is, Rs 900 + Rs 500 = Rs
1,400.

13.  Solution (b)

Most of the inscriptions mentioned the king referred to as Piyadassi – meaning “pleasant to behold”; there were a few inscriptions which also referred to the king as Asoka.
Asoka was the first ruler who inscribed his messages to his subjects and officials on stone surfaces
– natural rocks as well as polished pillars. He used the inscriptions to proclaim what he understood to be dhamma.
Reference:  Page No.32, 47 (THEMES  IN INDIAN HISTORY PART I)

14.  Solution: b) Clouds
Cloud is a mass of minute water droplets or tiny crystals of ice formed by the condensation of the water vapour in free air at considerable  elevations.  As the clouds are formed  at some height over the surface of the earth, they take various shapes. According to their height, expanse, density and transparency or opaqueness clouds are grouped under four

types : (i) cirrus; (ii) cumulus; (iii) stratus; (iv) nimbus.

Cirrus

Cirrus clouds are formed  at high altitudes (8,000 - 12,000m). They are thin and detatched clouds having a feathery  appearance.  They are always white in colour.

Cumulus



http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 5
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS


Cumulus clouds look like cotton wool. They are generally formed  at a height  of 4,000 - 7,000 m. They exist in patches and can be seen scattered here and there. They have  a flat base.

Stratus

As their name implies, these are layered clouds covering large portions of the sky. These clouds are generally formed either due to loss of heat or the mixing of air masses with different temperatures.

Nimbus

Nimbus clouds are black or dark gray. They form at middle levels or very near to the surface of the earth. These are extremely dense and opaque to the rays of the sun. Sometimes, the clouds are so low that they seem to touch the ground. Nimbus clouds are shapeless  masses of thick vapour.

15.     Solution (c)

Sikandar Hayat Khan, Punjab Premier and leader of the Unionist Party, who had drafted the resolution, declared in a Punjab assembly  speech on 1 March 1941 that he was opposed to a Pakistan that would mean “Muslim Raj here and Hindu Raj elsewhere ... If Pakistan means unalloyed Muslim Raj in the Punjab then I will have nothing to do with it.” Also the party remained consistently loyal to the British.
Reference:  Page No.386, 388(THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY PART III)


16.  Solution (a)

What is an urban area? It is very easy to identify a big city like Mumbai or Kolkata, but it is not so easy to say this about some very small urban areas that are somewhere  between a village and a town.
The Census of India defines an urban area as having:
(i) a minimum population of 5000; (ii) at least 75 per cent of male working population engaged
in non agricultural occupations  and (iii) a density of population of at least 400 persons per sq. km.
As per the 2001 census, nearly 28% of India’s population lives in urban areas.

Reference : Page 187 (Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)

17.  Solution:  A

As per the Forest (Conservation) Act 1980, as far as possible, the non-forest land for Compensatory Afforestation (CA) was to be identified contiguous to or in the proximity of Reserved Forest or Protected Forest. In case, non-forest land of CA was not available in the same district, non-forest land for CA was to be identified anywhere else in the State/Union  Territory. If non forest land was unavailable in the entire State/ UT, funds for raising CA in double the area in extent of the forestland diverted had to be provided by the user agency. The non-availability of
suitable non-forest land for CA in the State / Union Territory would be accepted by the Central


http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 6
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS


Government only on the Certificate of the Chief Secretary to the State/Union Territory
Government to that effect.

Based on the recommendations of the CEC, the Supreme Court of India in October 2002 directed the creation of a ‘Compensatory Afforestation Fund’in which all the monies received from the user agencies towards compensatory afforestation, additional compensatory afforestation, penal compensatory afforestation, net present value (NPV) of forest land, Catchment Area Treatment Plan Funds, etc. were to be deposited.



18.  Solution:  a)

Distance  from the sea : Another factor that influences the temperature is the location of a place with respect to the sea. Compared to land, the sea gets heated slowly and loses heat slowly. Land heats up and cools down quickly. Therefore, the variation in temperature over the sea is less compared to land. The places situated near the sea come under the moderating influence of the sea and land breezes which moderate the temperature.

19.   Solution (a)

Swami  Dayananda Saraswati founded  of Arya Samaj in 1875.  The Shuddhi professed by Arya Samajists angered the muslims. This can also be said to be one of the causes of rise of Communalism in India post 1920s.
Reference:  Page No.383, Internet(THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY PART III)

20.  Solution: c)

Can the GDP of a country be taken as an index of the welfare of the people of that country? If a person has more income he or she can buy more goods and services and his or her material well- being improves. So it may seem reasonable to treat his or her income level as his or her level of well-being. GDP is the sum total of value of goods and services created within the geographical boundary of a country in a particular year. It gets distributed among the people as incomes
(except for retained earnings). So we may be tempted to treat higher level of GDP of a country as
an index of greater well-being of the people of that country (to account for price changes, we
may take the value of real GDP instead of nominal GDP). But there are at least three reasons why this may not be correct

1. Distribution of GDP – how uniform is it: If the GDP of the country is rising, the welfare may not rise as a consequence. This is because the rise in GDP may be concentrated in the hands of very few individuals or firms. For the rest, the income may in fact have fallen. In such a case  the welfare of the entire country cannot be said to have increased. For example, suppose in year
2000, an imaginary country had 100 individuals each earning Rs 10. Therefore the GDP of the country was Rs 1,000 (by income method). In 2001, let us suppose the same country had 90
individuals earning Rs 9 each, and the rest 10 individual earning Rs 20 each. Suppose there had


http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 7
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS


been no change in the prices of goods and services between these two periods. The GDP of the country in the year 2001 was 90 × (Rs 9) + 10 × (Rs 20) = Rs 810 + Rs 200 = Rs 1,010. Observe that compared to 2000, the GDP of the country in 2001 was higher by Rs10. But this has happened when 90 per cent of people of the country have seen a drop in their real income by 10 per cent (from Rs 10 to Rs 9), whereas only 10 per cent have benefited by a rise in their income by 100 per cent (from Rs 10 to Rs 20). 90 per cent of the people are worse off though the GDP
of the country has gone up. If we relate welfare improvement in the country to the percentage of
people who are better off, then surely GDP is not a good  index.

2. Non-monetary  exchanges:  Many activities in an economy  are not evaluated in monetary terms. For example, the domestic services women perform at home are not paid for. The exchanges which take place in the informal sector without the help of money are called barter exchanges. In barter exchanges goods (or services) are directly exchanged against each other. But since money is not being used here, these exchanges  are not registered as part of economic activity. In developing countries, where many remote regions are underdeveloped,  these kinds of exchanges do take place, but they are generally not counted in the GDPs of these countries. This is a case  of underestimation of GDP. Hence GDP calculated in the standard manner may not give us a clear indication of the productive activity and well-being of a country.

3. Externalities: Externalities refer to the benefits (or harms)  a firm or an individual causes to another for which they are not paid (or penalised). Externalities do not have any market in which they can be bought and sold. For example, let us suppose there is an oil refinery which refines crude petroleum and sells it in the market. The output of the refinery is the amount of oil it refines. We can estimate the value added of the refinery by deducting the value of intermediate goods used by the refinery (crude oil in this case) from the value of its output. The value added
of the refinery will be counted as part of the GDP of the economy. But in carrying out the production the refinery may also be polluting the nearby river. This may cause harm to the people who use the water of the river. Hence their utility will fall. Pollution may also kill fish or other organisms of the river on which fish survive. As a result the fishermen of the river may be losing their income and utility. Such harmful effects that the refinery is inflicting on others, for
which it does not have to bear any cost, are called externalities. In this case, the GDP is not taking
into account such negative externalities. Therefore, if we take GDP as a measure  of welfare of the economy we shall be overestimating the actual welfare. This was an example of negative externality. There can be cases of positive externalities as well. In such cases GDP will underestimate the actual welfare of the economy.

21.   Solution (c)

The structure of the judiciary in India is pyramidal with the Supreme Court at the top, High Courts below them and district and subordinate courts at the lowest level (see the diagram below). The lower courts function under the direct superintendence of the higher courts. Supreme Court of India:
Its decisions ‘are’ binding on all courts.  Can transfer Judges of High Courts. Can move cases from any court to itself.

http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 8
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS


It can transfer cases from one High Court to another High Court
Can deal with cases within the jurisdiction of the State.

Reference : Pages 130 (Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)

22.    Solution (d)

The goal of Muslim League at the time of its creation was to define and advance Muslim agendas
& protect the position of upper class Muslims in India. The demand for separate Muslim state came later in the 1940s. The name Pakistan or Pak-stan (from Punjab, Afghan, Kashmir, Sind and Baluchistan) was coined by a Punjabi Muslim student at Cambridge, Choudhry Rehmat Ali, who, in pamphlets written in 1933 and 1935, desired a separate national status for this new entity. Reference:  Page No.386,Wikipedia(THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY PART III)

23.  Solution: C

Many plant communities are not self-sustaining. A field in the temperate deciduous forest biome will remain  a field only as long as it is grazed by animals or mowed regularly. If these factors are eliminated, the balance tips in favor of other species. The newcomers will, in turn, establish conditions that no longer favor them but promote the growth of still other species. The revered naturalist and writer, Henry David Thoreau, called this process succession.

Primary Plant Succession

The process of plant succession begins just as soon as a land area capable of supporting plant life is formed. Some examples:

accumulation of sand dunes at the edge of the ocean or a lake

cooling of a lava flow

exposure of rock by a retreating  glacier

Secondary  Plant Succession

Lumbering, farming, fires, and hurricanes interrupt the process of succession by removing the dominant plants in the community. Their elimination sets the stage for a new succession to begin.

The many abandoned farms in New England (I live on one) illustrate this. People often wonder why our pioneers built stone walls through the woods. The answer is that they did not. The walls in the woods today once marked the boundaries of fields and pastures, but when cultivation and
grazing ceased,  a secondary succession began. Where I live,

the grass of abandoned fields soon became invaded by low-growing, herbaceous species like plantains, and golden rods.





http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 9
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS


These were quickly followed by woody shrubs like the common juniper, blueberries and gray-stemmed dogwood

Soon sun-loving gray birch, poplars, and Eastern  red cedar ("old-field cedar") became established.

White pines or, in sandy well-drained locations, oaks have followed.

These will persist until some disturbance such as fire, hurricanes, or lumbering open up the land, and the process of secondary succession begins again.

In general, plant succession is a reflection of the increasing efficiency of the community at intercepting the energy of the sun and converting  it into chemical energy. As one stage of
succession follows another,

the biomass of the community increases. This is the outcome of the increasing amount of

net productivity — calories stored by the plant community.

This, in turn, provides calories for a larger community of consumers.

As succession continues, the diversity of species in the community increases — at least for a time.

When the system approaches its climax, the rate of increase in net productivity of the
plants is consumed by its own heterotrophs.

The system comes into equilibrium and reaches peak efficiency at channeling the energy of the sun into the food web of the community.



24.   Solution (d)

Reference:  Page No.154(THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY PART II)

25.  Solution: c)

Consequences of Tropical Cyclones

The energy to the tropical cyclone comes from the latent heat released by the warm moist air. Hence, with the increase in distance from the sea, the force of the cyclone decreases. In India, the force of the cyclone decreases with increase in distance from the Bay of Bengal and the Arabian Sea. So, the coastal areas are often struck by severe cyclonic storms with an average velocity of
180 km/h. Often, this results in abnormal rise in the sea level known as Storm Surge.





http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 10
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS


26.   Solution (c)

Dalhousie followed the policy of Annexation through Doctrine of Lapse. Lord Dalhousie’s annexations created disaffection in all the areas and principalities that were annexed. Also Awadh was annexed under the pretext of maladministration.
Note: Read in detail about various reforms and policies of Dalhousie
Reference:  Page No.296(THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY PART III), Internet.


27. Solution:  B

Throughout the study of geography, there have been a number  of different approaches to explaining the development of the world's societies and cultures. One that received much prominence in geographic history but has declined in recent decades of academic study is environmental determinism.

Environmental determinism is the belief that the environment (most notably its physical factors such as landforms and/or climate) determines the patterns of human culture and societal development. Environmental determinists believe that it is these environmental, climatic, and geographical factors alone that are responsible for human cultures and individual decisions and/or social conditions have virtually no impact on cultural development.

The main argument of environmental determinism  states that an area's physical characteristics like climate have a strong impact on the psychological outlook of its inhabitants. These varied outlooks then spread throughout a population and help define the overall behavior and culture of a society. For instance it was said that areas in the tropics were less developed than higher latitudes because the continuously warm weather there made it easier to survive and thus, people living there did not work as hard to ensure their survival.

Another example of environmental determinism would be the theory that island nations have unique cultural traits solely because of their isolation from continental societies.

Possibilism in cultural geography is the theory that the environment sets certain constraints or limitations, but culture is otherwise determined by social conditions. In Cultural ecology Marshall Sahlins used this concept in order to develop alternative approaches to the environmental determinism  dominant at that time in ecological studies. Theory by Strabo in 64 BC that we, humans, can make things happen by our own intelligence over time. Strabo cautioned against the assumption that nature and actions of humans were determined by the physical environment
they inhabited. He observed that humans were the active elements in a human-environmental partnership.

The controversy between geographical possibilism and determinism  might be considered  as one of (at least) three dominant epistemologic controversies of contemporary geography. The other two controversies are the "debate between neopositivists and neokantians about the



http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 11
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS


"exceptionalism" or the specificity of geography  as a science the contention between Mackinder  and Kropotkin about what is - or should be - geography."

Possibilism in geography is, thus, considered as a distinct approach to geographical knowledge, directly opposed to geographical determinism.






28. Solution:  (a)

District Court deals with cases arising in the District. Considers appeals on decisions given by lower courts. Decides cases involving serious criminal offences. Subordinate Courts consider cases of civil and criminal nature.
Decisions made by the Supreme Court are binding on all other courts within the territory of India. Orders passed by it are enforceable throughout  the length and breadth of the country. The Supreme Court itself is not bound by its decision and can at any time review it. Besides, if there is a case  of contempt of the Supreme Court, then the Supreme Court itself decides such a case.
The Supreme Courts and High Courts can hear appeals from lower courts and exercises
superintendence and control over courts below it. Both enjoy appellate jurisdiction. Only Supreme Court has Advisory jurisdiction.

Reference : Pages 130, 134 (Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)


29.  Solution: b)

In a modern economy money consists mainly of currency notes and coins issued by the monetary authority of the country. In India currency notes are issued by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), which is the monetary authority in India. However, coins are issued by the Government of India. Apart from currency notes and coins, the balance in savings, or current account deposits, held by the public in commercial banks is also considered money since cheques drawn on these accounts are used to settle transactions. Such deposits are called as demand deposits. Other deposits, e.g. fixed deposits, have  a fixed period to maturity and are referred to as time deposits.



30. Solution: c) Composite Volcanoes
These volcanoes are characterised by eruptions of cooler and more viscous lavas than basalt. These volcanoes often result in explosive eruptions. Along with lava, large quantities of pyroclastic material and ashes find their way to the ground. This material accumulates in the vicinity of the vent openings leading to formation of layers, and this makes the mounts appear as
composite volcanoes.



http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 12
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS


31.  Solution:  a)

Keeping reserves is costly for banks, as, otherwise, they could lend this balance to interest earning investment projects. However, RBI requires commercial banks to keep reserves in order to ensure that banks have a safe cushion of assets to draw on when account holders want to be paid. RBI uses various policy instruments to bring forth a healthy  rdr in commercial banks. The first instrument is the Cash Reserve Ratio which specifies the fraction of their deposits that banks
must keep with RBI. There is another tool called Statutory Liquidity Ratio which requires the
banks to maintain a given fraction  of their total demand and time deposits in the form of specified liquid assets. Apart from these ratios RBI uses a certain  interest rate called the Bank
Rate to control the value of rdr. Commercial banks can borrow money from RBI at the bank rate
when they run short of reserves. A high bank rate makes such borrowing from RBI costly and, in effect, encourages the commercial banks to maintain  a healthy  rdr.


32.  Solution (c)

It was remarkable that during the uprising religious divisions between Hindus and Muslim were hardly noticeable despite British attempts to create such divisions. In Bareilly in western Uttar Pradesh, in December 1857, the British spent Rs 50,000 to incite the Hindu population against the Muslims. The attempt failed. There was a widespread fear that the British were bent on destroying the caste and religions of Hindus and Muslims and converting  them to Christianity
– a fear that led people to believe many of the rumours that circulated at the
time. People were urged to come together and fight to save their livelihood, their faith, their honour, their identity – a fight which was for the “greater public good”.
Reference:  Page No.301,304(THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY PART III)


33.  Solution (d)

The Prayaga Prashasti (also known as the Allahabad Pillar Inscription) composed by Harisena. Harisena was the court poet of Samudragupta while Banabhatta was the court poet of Harshavardhana. The Prayaga Prashasti was composed in praise of SamudraGupta in Sanskrit. Reference:  Page No.36 (THEMES  IN INDIAN HISTORY PART I)


34.  Solution (a)

According to Article 370, the concurrence of the State is required for making any laws in matters mentioned in the Union and Concurrent lists. This is different from the position of other States
The remaining differences between the other States and the Stateof J&K are that no emergency due to internal disturbances can be declared in J&K without the concurrence of the State. The union government cannot impose a financial  emergency  in the State andthe Directive Principles do not apply in J&K. Finally, amendments to the Indian Constitution (under Art. 368) can only apply in concurrence with the government of J&K.



http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 13
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS


Reference : Pages 170, 171 (Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)

35. Solution: B

Many plant communities are not self-sustaining. A field in the temperate deciduous forest biome will remain  a field only as long as it is grazed by animals or mowed regularly. If these factors are eliminated, the balance tips in favor of other species. The newcomers will, in turn, establish conditions that no longer favor them but promote the growth of still other species. The revered naturalist and writer, Henry David Thoreau, called this process succession.

Primary Plant Succession

The process of plant succession begins just as soon as a land area capable of supporting plant life is formed. Some examples:

accumulation of sand dunes at the edge of the ocean or a lake

cooling of a lava flow

exposure of rock by a retreating  glacier

Secondary  Plant Succession

Lumbering, farming, fires, and hurricanes interrupt the process of succession by removing the dominant plants in the community. Their elimination sets the stage for a new succession to begin.

The many abandoned farms in New England (I live on one) illustrate this. People often wonder why our pioneers built stone walls through the woods. The answer is that they did not. The walls in the woods today once marked the boundaries of fields and pastures, but when cultivation and
grazing ceased,  a secondary succession began. Where I live,

the grass of abandoned fields soon became invaded by low-growing, herbaceous species like plantains, and golden rods.

These were quickly followed by woody shrubs like the common juniper, blueberries and gray-stemmed dogwood

Soon sun-loving gray birch, poplars, and Eastern  red cedar ("old-field cedar") became established.

White pines or, in sandy well-drained locations, oaks have followed.

These will persist until some disturbance such as fire, hurricanes, or lumbering open up
the land, and the process of secondary succession begins again.






http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 14
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS


In general, plant succession is a reflection of the increasing efficiency of the community at intercepting the energy of the sun and converting  it into chemical energy. As one stage of
succession follows another,

the biomass of the community increases. This is the outcome of the increasing amount of

net productivity — calories stored by the plant community.

This, in turn, provides calories for a larger community of consumers.

As succession continues, the diversity of species in the community increases — at least for a time.

When the system approaches its climax, the rate of increase in net productivity of the
plants is consumed by its own heterotrophs.

The system comes into equilibrium and reaches peak efficiency at channeling the energy of the sun into the food web of the community.



36. Solution (c)

Provisions under 73rd Amendment Act-
All States now have a uniform three tier Panchayati Raj structure. At the base is the ‘Gram
Panchayat‘. A Gram Panchayat covers a village or group of villages. The intermediary level is the Mandal (also referred to as Block or Taluka). These bodies are called Mandal or Taluka
Panchayats. The intermediary level body need not be constituted in smaller States. At the
apex is the Zilla Panchayat covering  the entire rural area of the District.
The amendment also made  a provision for the mandatory creation of the Gram Sabha. The Gram Sabha would comprise of all the adult members registered as voters inthe Panchayat area. Its role and functions are decided by State legislation.
All the three levels of Panchayati Raj institutions are elected directly by the people. The term of each Panchayat body is five years.

Reference : Pages 183 (Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)


37.  Solution:  a)

Refer to Page No. 18, Fundamentals of Physical Geography class XI

38. Solution (c)

None of the Buddha’s speeches were written down during his lifetime. After his death ( fifth- fourth century BCE) his teachings were compiled by his disciples at a council of “elders” or senior monks at Vesali (Pali for Vaishali in present-day Bihar). These compilations were known as Tipitaka – literally, three baskets to hold different types of texts. They were first transmitted orally and then written and classified according to length as well as subject matter. The Vinaya

http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 15
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS


Pitaka included rules and regulations for those who joined the sangha or monastic order; the Buddha’s teachings were included in the Sutta Pitaka; and the Abhidhamma Pitaka dealt with philosophical matters.

Reference:  Page No.86 (THEMES  IN INDIAN HISTORY PART I)


39. Solution:  C

Microplastics which are produced  either for direct use, such as for industrial abrasives, exfoliants, cosmetics or roto milling or for indirect use as precursors (so called resin pellets or nurdles) for the production of manifold consumer products ("primary microplastics").

Approximately half of the plastic material introduced to the marine environment is buoyant, but fouling by organisms can induce the sinking of additional plastic debris to thesea floor, where it may interfere with sediment-dwelling species and sedimental gas exchange processes. However, this is of more importance for larger plastic debris.

Furthermore, plastic particles may highly concentrate and transport synthetic organic compounds (e.g. persistent organic pollutants, POPs) commonly present in the environment  and ambient sea water on their surface through adsorption. It still remains unknown if microplastics can act as agents for the transfer of POPs from the environment to organisms in this way, but
evidence suggest this to be a potential  portal for entering food webs. Of further concern, additives
added to plastics during manufacture may leach out upon ingestion, potentially causing serious harm to the organism. Endocrine disruption by plastic additives may affect the reproductive health of humans and wildlife alike.



40. Solution  (b)

One-third Reservations for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes are also provided for at all the three levels, in proportion to their population. If the States find it necessary, they can also provide for reservations for the backward castes (OBCs).
The provisions of the 73rd amendment were not made applicable to the areas inhabited by
the Adivasi populations in many States of India. In 1996, a separate  act was passed extending the provisions of the Panchayat system to these areas. Many Adivasi communities have their traditional customs of managing common resources such as forests and small water reservoirs, etc. For this purpose, more powers are given to the Gram Sabhas of these areas and elected village panchayats have to get the consent of the Gram Sabha in many respects. The idea behind this act is that local traditions of self government should be protected while introducing modern elected bodies.
A minimum age of 21 years is necessary to become  a member  of a Panchayat.
The power to appoint the State Finance commissioner is vested in the Governor, but the power to remove can be done only by the President of India.

Reference : Pages 184 (Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)

http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 16
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS




41.  Solution:  a)

In our modern economic setting this flow of production arises out of production of commodities
– goods and services by millions of enterprises large and small. These enterprises range from giant corporations employing a large number of people to single entrepreneur enterprises. But what happens to these commodities after being produced? Each producer of commodities intends to sell her output. So from the smallest items like pins or buttons to the largest ones like aeroplanes, automobiles, giant machinery or any saleable service like that of the doctor, the lawyer or the financial consultant – the goods and services produced  are to be sold to the consumers. The consumer may, in turn, be an individual or an enterprise  and the good or service purchased by that entity might be for final use or for use in further production. When it is used in further production it often loses its characteristic as that specific good and is transformed through a productive process into another good. Thus a farmer producing cotton sells it to a spinning mill where the raw cotton undergoes transformation to yarn; the yarn is, in turn, sold to a textile mill where, through the productive process, it is transformed into cloth; the cloth is, in turn, transformed through another productive process into an article of clothing which is then ready to be sold finally to the consumers for final use. Such an item that is meant for final use and will not
pass through any more stages of production or transformations is called  a final good.

Why do we call this a final good? Because once it has been sold it passes out of the active economic flow. It will not undergo any further transformation  at the hands of any producer. It may, however, undergo transformation by the action of the ultimate purchaser. In fact many such final goods are transformed during their consumption. Thus the tea leaves purchased by the consumer are not consumed in that form – they are used to make drinkable tea, which is consumed. Similarly most of the items that enter our kitchen are transformed through the process of cooking. But cooking at home is not an economic activity, even though the product involved undergoes transformation. Home cooked food is not sold to the market. However, if the same cooking or tea brewing was done in a restaurant  where the cooked product would be sold to customers, then the same items, such as tea leaves, would cease to be final goods and would be counted as inputs to which economic value addition can take place. Thus it is not in the nature of the good but in the economic nature of its use that a good  becomes a final good.




42.  Solution: b)

Apart from acting as a banker  to the commercial banks, RBI also acts as a banker to the Government of India, and also, to the state governments. It is commonly held that the government, sometimes, ‘prints money’ in case of a budget deficit, i.e., when it cannot meet its expenses (e.g. salaries to the government employees, purchase of defense equipment from a manufacturer of such goods etc.) from the tax revenue it has earned. The government, however,
has no legal authority to issue currency in this fashion. So it borrows money by selling treasury


http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 17
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS


bills or government securities to RBI, which issues currency to the government in return. The government then pays for its expenses with this money. The money thus ultimately comes into the hands of the general public (in the form of salary or sales proceeds of defense items etc.) and becomes a part  of the money supply. Financing of budget deficits by the governments in this fashion is called Deficit Financing through Central Bank Borrowing.



43.  Solution (b)

The Khilafat Movement,(1919-1920) was a movement of Indian Muslims, led by Muhammad Ali and Shaukat Ali, that demanded the following: The Turkish Sultan or Khalifa must retain control over the
Muslim sacred places in the erstwhile Ottoman empire; the jazirat-ul-Arab (Arabia, Syria, Iraq,
Palestine) must remain under Muslim sovereignty;  and the Khalifa must be left with sufficient territory to enable him to defend the Islamic faith The Congress supported the movement and Mahatma Gandhi sought to conjoin it to the Non-cooperation Movement. Sir Syed Ahmed Khan was an Indian Muslim philosopher and social activist of nineteenth century India.
Sir Syed founded the Muhammedan Anglo-Oriental College (Aligarh Muslim University) in 1875.

Reference:  Page No.350(THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY PART III)


44. Solution (d)

Judiciary has defined which aspects of the Constitution can be termed as the basic structure and which cannot.
This theory found its first expression in the Kesavananda Bharati case and has been discussed in subsequent judgments.
It has increased the powers of the judiciary and has come to be accepted by different political parties and the government.
Though Federal system and social justice forms the basic structure of the Constitution,
fundamental duties does not.

Reference : Chapter 9 (Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)


45.  Solution: d) Indirect Sources
Analysis of properties of matter indirectly provides information about the interior. We know through the mining activity that temperature and pressure increase with the increasing distance from the surface towards the interior in deeper depths. Moreover, it is also known that the density of the material also increases with depth. It is possible to find the rate of change of these characteristics. Knowing the total thickness of the earth, scientists have estimated the values of temperature, pressure and the density of materials at different depths. The details of these
characteristics with reference to each layer of the interior are discussed later in this chapter.

http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 18
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS


Another source of information  are the meteors that at times reach the earth. However, it may be noted that the material that becomes available for analysis from meteors, is not from the interior of the earth. The material and the structure observed in the meteors are similar to that of the earth. They are solid bodies developed out of materials same as, or similar to, our planet. Hence, this becomes yet another source of information about the interior of the earth.

The other indirect sources include gravitation, magnetic field, and seismic activity. The gravitation force (g) is not the same at different latitudes on the surface. It is greater near the poles and less at the equator. This is because of the distance from the centre at the equator being
greater than that at the poles. The gravity values also differ according to the mass of material. The uneven distribution of mass of material within the earth influences this value. The reading of the gravity at different  places is influenced by many other factors. These readings differ from the expected values. Such a difference is called gravity anomaly. Gravity anomalies give us
information about the distribution of mass of the material in the crust of the earth. Magnetic
surveys also provide information about the distribution of magnetic materials in the crustal portion, and thus, provide information about the distribution of materials in this part. Seismic activity is one of the most important sources of information about the interior of the earth.

46.  Solution:  B

A group of organisms having the same genotype or identical genetic constitution. Organisms having same genotype can be utilized in fighting against pests biologically.

47. Solution:  C

The Ocean Health Index is a valuable tool for the ongoing assessment of ocean health. By providing a means to advance comprehensive  ocean policy and compare future progress, the Index can inform decisions about how to use or protect marine ecosystems.


The Index is a collaborative effort, made possible through contributions from more than 65 scientists/ocean experts and partnerships between organizations including the National Center for Ecological Analysis and Synthesis, Sea Around Us, Conservation International, National Geographic,  and the New England Aquarium. It is a multi-dimensional too measuring across biological, social, economic and physical dimensions.

48. Solution: c)

Sterilisation by RBI: RBI often uses its instruments of money creation for stabilising the stock of money in the economy from external shocks. Suppose due to future growth prospects in India investors from across the world increase their investments in Indian bonds which under such circumstances, are likely to yield a high rate of return. They will buy these bonds with foreign currency. Since one cannot purchase goods in the domestic market with foreign currency, a person who sells these bonds to foreign investors will exchange her foreign currency holding into
rupee  at a commercial bank. The bank, in turn, will submit this foreign currency to RBI and its


http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 19
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS


deposits with RBI will be credited with equivalent sum of money. What kind of adjustments take place from this entire transaction? The commercial bank’s total reserves and deposits remain unchanged (it has purchased the foreign currency from the seller using its vault cash, which, therefore, goes down; but the bank’s deposit with RBI goes up by an equivalent amount – leaving its total reserves unchanged). There will, however, be increments in the assets and liabilities on
the RBI balance sheet. RBI’s foreign exchange holding goes up. On the other hand, the deposits of
commercial banks with RBI also increase by an equal amount. But that means an increase in the stock of high powered money – which, by definition, is equal to the total liability of RBI. With money multiplier in operation, this, in turn, will result in increased money supply in the economy.

This increased money supply may not altogether be good for the economy’s health. If the volume of goods and services produced in the economy remains unchanged, the extra money will lead to increase in prices of all commodities. People have more money in their hands with which they compete each other in the commodities market for buying the same old stock of goods. As too much money is now chasing the same old quantities of output, the process ends up in bidding up prices of every commodity – an increase in the general price level, which is also known as inflation.

RBI often intervenes with its instruments to prevent such an outcome. In the above example, RBI
will undertake an open market sale of government securities of an amount equal to the amount of foreign exchange inflow in the economy, thereby keeping the stock of high powered money
and total money supply unchanged. Thus it sterilises the economy against adverse external shocks.
This operation of RBI is known as sterilisation.




49. Solution:  A

The profundal zone is a very cold zone, such as an ocean or a lake, located below the range of effective light penetration. This is typically below the thermocline, the vertical zone in the water through which temperature drops rapidly. The lack of light in the profundal zone determines the type of biological community that can live in this region, which is distinctly different from the community in the overlying waters. The profundal zone is part of the aphotic zone.


50. Solution (d)

Purusha sukta is a hymn in the Rigveda
Reference:  Page No.61(THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY PART I)








http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 20
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS


51.  Solution  (a)

The Governor has the power to recommend the dismissal of the State government and suspension or dissolution of State assembly.
The Lok Sabha consists of elected representatives and also the President can nominate two
members to the Lok Sabha from the Anglo-Indian Community.
The Vice President should not be member of either House of the Parliament or State
Legislature.
73rd and 74th amendments have created uniformity in the structures of Panchayati Raj and
Nagarpalika institutions across the country.

Reference : Page 16, Chapter 4,Chapter 5, Chapter 8  (Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)

52.  Solution (c)

Standing Committees not only supervise the work of various departments but also their budget, their expenditure  and bills that come up in the house relating to the department.
It is a permanent  and regular committee which is constituted from time to time according to
the provisions of an Act of Parliament or Rules of Procedure  and Conduct of Business. The work done by the Indian Parliament is not only voluminous but also of a complex nature, hence a good deal of its work is carried out in these Parliamentary Committees. There are two types of Parliamentary Committee, the Standing Committee and the Ad hoc Committee. Public Accounts Committee is an example of Standing Committee. Members of the Standing committees are selected from both Houses, except for Estimates Committee where all the members  are from Lok Sabha Only.

Reference : Page 118, 119 (Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)& Wikipedia.

53.  Solution: b)

It is worth noting that many commodities have two sets of prices. One is the retail price which the consumer actually pays. The other is the wholesale price, the price at which goods are traded in bulk. These two may differ in value because of the margin kept by traders. Goods which are traded in bulk (such as raw materials or semi-finished goods) are not purchased by ordinary consumers. Like CPI, the index for wholesale prices is called Wholesale Price Index (WPI). In countries like USA it is referred to as Producer Price Index (PPI). Notice CPI (and analogously WPI) may differ from GDP deflator because

1. The goods purchased by consumers do not represent all the goods which are produced  in a country. GDP deflator takes into account all such goods and services.

2. CPI includes prices of goods consumed by the representative consumer, hence it includes prices of imported goods. GDP deflator does not include prices of imported goods.

3. The weights are constant in CPI – but they differ according to production level of each good in
GDP deflator.



http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 21
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS


54. Solution: A




55. Solution: (c)

The British would be responsible for protecting their ally from external and internal threats to their power. In the territory of the ally, a British armed contingent would be stationed  and not the contingent of the ally. The ally would have to provide the resources for maintaining this
contingent. The ally could enter into agreements with other rulers or engage in warfare only with
the permission of the British.
Reference:  Page No.296(THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY PART III)


56. Solution: d)

The present composition of earth’s atmosphere is chiefly contributed by nitrogen and oxygen. You will be dealing with the composition and structure of the earth’s atmosphere in Chapter 8.

There are three stages in the evolution of the present atmosphere. The first stage is marked by
the loss of primordial atmosphere. In the second stage, the hot interior of the earth contributed to the evolution of the atmosphere. Finally, the composition of the atmosphere was modified by the living world through the process of photosynthesis.

The early atmosphere, with hydrogen and helium, is supposed to have been stripped off as a result of the solar winds. This happened not only in case of the earth, but also in all the terrestrial planets, which were supposed to have lost their primordial atmosphere through the impact of solar winds.

During the cooling of the earth, gases and water vapour were released from the interior solid earth. This started the evolution of the present atmosphere. The early atmosphere largely contained water vapour, nitrogen, carbon dioxide, methane, ammonia and very little of free oxygen. The process through which the gases were outpoured from the interior is called degassing.

57. Solution: C

In ecology, edge effects refer to the changes in population or community structures that occur at the boundary of two habitats. Areas with small habitat fragments exhibit especially pronounced edge effects that may extend throughout the range. As the edge effects increase, the boundary habitat allows for greater biodiversity.

58. Solution (b)

The Lingayats challenged the idea of caste and the “pollution” attributed to certain groups by Brahmanas. They also questioned the theory of rebirth. These won them followers amongst those who were marginalised within the Brahmanical social order. The  Lingayats also encouraged

http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 22
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS


certain practices disapproved in the Dharmashastras,
such as post-puberty  marriage and the remarriage of widows.

Reference:  Page No.147(THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY PART II)


59. Solution: c)

Earthquake waves are basically of two types — body waves and surface waves. Body waves are generated due to the release of energy at the focus and move in all directions travelling through the body of the earth. Hence, the name body waves. The body waves interact with the surface rocks and generate new set of waves called surface waves. These waves move along the surface. The velocity of waves changes as they travel through materials with different densities. The denser the material, the higher is the velocity. Their direction also changes as they reflect or refract when coming across materials with different densities.

60. Solution (c)



The legislature is not involved in the process of appointment of judges. Thus, it was believed that party politics would not play a role in the process of appointments. But the judges of the
Supreme Court and High Court are appointed by the President in consultation with the members
of the Judiciary. It should also be noted that while in making appointments, the executive plays a crucial role; the legislature has the powers of removal. Hence the first statement is wrong.

In order to be appointed as a judge,  a person must have experience as a lawyer and/or must be well versed in law. Political opinions of the person or his/her  political loyalty should not be the criteria for appointments to judiciary.

The judges  have a fixed tenure. They hold office till reaching the age of retirement. Only in exceptional cases, judges may be removed. But otherwise, they have security of tenure. Security of tenure ensures that judges could function without fear or favour.

The Constitution prescribes a very difficult procedure (special majority is required) for removal of judges. The removal of judges of the Supreme Court and the High Courts is also extremely difficult. A judge of the Supreme Court or High Court can be removed only on the ground of proven misbehaviour or incapacity. A motion containing the charges against the judge must be approved by special majority in both Houses of the Parliament.

The Constitution makers believed that a difficult procedure of removal would provide security of office to the members of judiciary.

The judiciary is not financially dependent on either the executive or legislature. The Constitution provides that the salaries and allowances of the judges are not subjected to the approval of the legislature.


http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 23
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS


The actions and decisions of the judges are immune from personal criticisms. The judiciary has the power to penalise those who are found guilty of contempt of court. This authority of the court is seen as an effective protection to the judges from unfair criticism. Parliament cannot discuss the conduct of the judges except when the proceeding toremove a judge  is being carried out. This gives the judiciary independence to adjudicate without fear of being criticised.
Reference : Pages 125- 129 (Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)

61. Solution:  A

Eutrophication is when the environment becomes enriched with nutrients. This can be a problem in marine habitats such as lakes as it can cause algal blooms.

Fertilisers are often used in farming, sometimes these fertilisers run-off into nearby water causing an increase in nutrient levels.

This causes phytoplankton to grow and reproduce  more rapidly, resulting in algal blooms.

This bloom of algae disrupts normal ecosystem functioning  and causes many problems.

The algae may use up all the oxygen in the water, leaving none for other marine life.
This results in the death of many aquatic organisms such as fish, which need the oxygen in the water to live.

The bloom of algae may also block sunlight from photosynthetic marine plants under the water surface.

Some algae even produce  toxins that are harmful to higher forms of life. This can cause problems along the food chain and affect any animal that feeds on them.

Zooplankton levels do not increase, but phytoplankton does suffer from rapid turnovers.






62.  Solution (c)

He attended only the second RTC. At the Round Table Conference Mahatma Gandhi stated his arguments against separate electorates for the Depressed Classes: Separate electorates to the “Untouchables” will ensure them bondage in perpetuity.

Reference:  Page No.360(THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY PART III)







http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 24
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS


63. Solution: C

An epiphyte is a plant that grows non-parasitically upon another plant (such as a tree), and derives its moisture and nutrients from the air, rain, and sometimes from debris accumulating around it instead of the structure it is fastened to. An epiphytic organism that is not a plant  is not called an epiphyte. Epiphytes are usually found in the temperate zone (e.g.,
many mosses, liverworts, lichens, and algae) or in the tropics (e.g., many ferns, cacti, orchids,
and bromeliads).] Epiphytes provide  a rich and diverse habitat for other organisms including animals, fungi, bacteria, and myxomycetes. They do not harm trees instead support them.

64.  Solution.(a)

After the failure of the Cripps Mission, Mahatma Gandhi decided to launch his third major movement against British rule. This was the “Quit India” campaign, which began in August 1942. Although Gandhiji was jailed at once  (many other Congress leaders were also remained in the jail for most part of the movement) , younger activists organised strikes and acts of sabotage all over the country. Particularly active in the underground resistance were socialist members of the Congress, such as Jayaprakash Narayan.

Reference:  Page No.363(THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY PART III)


65. Solution: d) Batholiths
A large body of magmatic material that cools in the deeper depth of the crust develops in the form of large domes. They appear on the surface only after the denudational processes remove the overlying materials. They cover large areas, and at times, assume depth that may be several km. These are granitic bodies. Batholiths are the cooled portion of magma chambers.

Lacoliths

These are large dome-shaped intrusive bodies with a level base and connected  by a pipe-like conduit from below. It resembles the surface volcanic domes of composite volcano, only these are located at deeper depths. It can be regarded as the localised source of lava that finds its way to the surface. The Karnataka plateau is spotted with domal hills of granite rocks. Most of these, now
exfoliated, are examples of lacoliths or batholiths.


66. Solution: c)

Nominal GDP is GDP evaluated  at current market prices. Therefore, nominal GDP will include all of the changes in market prices that have occurred during the current year due
to inflation or deflation. Inflation is defined as a rise in the overall price level, and deflation is
defined as a fall in the overall price level. In order to abstract from changes in the overall price level, another measure of GDP called real GDP is often used. Real GDP is GDP evaluated  at


http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 25
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS


the market prices of some base year. For example, if 1990 were chosen as the base year, then real GDP for 1995 is calculated by taking the quantities of all goods and services purchased in 1995 and multiplying them by their 1990 prices.

GDP deflator. Using the statistics on real GDP and nominal GDP, one can calculate an
implicit index of the price level for the year. This index is called the GDP deflator and is given by the formula







The GDP deflator can be viewed as a conversion  factor that transforms real GDP into nominal GDP. Note that in the base year, real GDP is by definition equal to nominal GDP so that the GDP deflator in the base year is always equal to 100.


67. Solution: B




68. Solution.(b)

The Lucknow Pact of December 1916  was an understanding between the Congress and the Muslim League (controlled by the UP-based “Young Party”) whereby the Congress accepted separate electorates. The Poona Pact was signed in 1932 between Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar  and Mahatma Gandhi by which seats were reserved for the Depressed Classes out of general electorate.
Reference:  Page No.383, Internet(THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY PART III)

69. Solution (c)

According to the Manusmriti, the paternal estate was to be divided equally amongst sons after the death of the parents, with a special share for the eldest. Women could not claim a share  of these resources. The Manusmriti laid down the “duties” of the chandalas. They had to live outside the village, use discarded utensils, and wear clothes of the dead and ornaments of iron. They could
not walk about in villages and cities at night. They had to dispose of the bodies of those who had no relatives  and serve as executioners.

Reference:  Page No.68 (THEMES  IN INDIAN HISTORY PART I)

70. Solution: d)

Macroeconomics deals with the aggregate economic variables of an economy.  It also takes into account various interlinkages which may exist between the different sectors of an economy.  This is what distinguishes it from microeconomics; which mostly examines the functioning of the particular sectors of the economy, assuming that the rest of the economy remains the same.


http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 26
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS


Macroeconomics emerged as a separate  subject in the 1930s due to Keynes. The Great Depression, which dealt  a blow to the economies of developed countries, had provided Keynes with the inspiration for his writings. In this book we shall mostly deal with the working of a capitalist economy. Hence it may not be entirely able to capture the functioning of a developing country. Macroeconomics sees an economy  as a combination of four sectors, namely households, firms, government and external sector.





71.  Solution (c)

Under the Advisory Jurisdiction the President of India can refer any matter that is of public importance or that which involves interpretation of Constitution to Supreme Court for advice. However, the Supreme Court is not bound to give advice on such matters and the President is not bound to accept such an advice.
Utility of the advisory powers of the Supreme Court- The utility is two-fold. In the first place, it allows the government to seek legal opinion on a matter  of importance before taking action on it. This may prevent unnecessary litigations later. Secondly, in the light of the advice of the Supreme Court, the government can make suitable changes in its action or legislations.

Reference : Pages 133 (Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)


72.  Solution: c)

CONCEPT OF SEA FLOOR SPREADING

a detailed analysis of magnetic properties of the rocks on either sides of the mid-oceanic ridge led Hess (1961) to propose his hypothesis, known as the “sea floor spreading”. Hess argued that constant eruptions at the crest of oceanic ridges cause the rupture of the oceanic crust and the new lava wedges into it, pushing the oceanic crust on either side. The ocean floor, thus spreads.

The younger  age of the oceanic crust as well as the fact that the spreading of one ocean does not cause the shrinking of the other, made Hess think about the consumption of the oceanic crust. He further maintained that the ocean floor that gets pushed due to volcanic eruptions at the crest, sinks down at the oceanic trenches and gets consumed.



73.  Solution: A

http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/2013-12-20/news/45418033_1_kasturirangan- panel-report-environment-ministry-western-ghats

http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/2013-12-20/news/45418033_1_kasturirangan- panel-report-environment-ministry-western-ghats


http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 27
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS





74. Solution (a)

The first gold coins were issued in India by the Kushanas. Punch-marked coins made
of silver and copper (c. sixth century BCE onwards) were amongst the earliest to be minted and used. These have been recovered from excavations at a number  of sites throughout the subcontinent. A punch-marked coin, so named because symbols were punched or stamped onto the metal surface.
Reference:  Page No.45 (THEMES  IN INDIAN HISTORY PART I)


75.  Solution: b)

Nazca plate is between South America and Pacific plate

76. Solution: d)

Inventories are treated as capital. Addition to the stock of capital of a firm is known as investment. Therefore change in the inventory of a firm is treated as investment. There can be three major categories of investment. First is the rise in the value of inventories of a firm over a year which is treated as investment expenditure undertaken by the firm. The second category of investment is the fixed business investment, which is defined as the addition to the machinery,
factory buildings, and equipments employed by the firms.

The last category of investment is the residential investment, which refers to the addition of housing facilities. Change in inventories may be planned or unplanned. In case of an unexpected fall in sales, the firm will have unsold stock of goods which it had not anticipated. Hence there will be unplanned accumulation of inventories. In the opposite case where there is unexpected
rise in the sales there will be unplanned decumulation of inventories.

77. Solution: c)

If we sum the gross value added of all the firms of the economy in a year,  we get a measure  of the value of aggregate amount  of goods and services produced by the economy in a year  (just as we had done in the wheat-bread example). Such an estimate is called Gross Domestic Product
(GDP). Thus GDP ≡ Sum total of gross value added of all the firms in the economy.

An alternative way to calculate the GDP is by looking at the demand side of the products. This method is referred to as the expenditure method.

78. Solution: B

The Deccan Traps are one of the largest volcanic provinces in the world. It consists of more than
6,500 feet (>2,000 m) of flat-lying basalt lava flows and covers an area of nearly 200,000 square


http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 28
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS


miles (500,000 square km) (roughly the size of the states of Washington and Oregon  combined)
in west-central India.




79. Solution: A

Agreements  at Warsaw included a significant set of decisions on ways to help developing countries reduce greenhouse gas emissions from deforestation  and the degradation of forests, which account for around one fifth of all human-generated emissions. The Warsaw Framework for REDD+ is backed by pledges of 280 million dollars financing from the US, Norway and the UK.

The other two initiatives have been signed quite earlier.

80. Solution (d)


81. Solution: C

The Government of India proposes to support setting up of ‘Plastic Parks’ for the promotion of downstream plastic processing industries in the 12th plan under the PPP mode.  The Scheme to be implemented by the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals  envisages setting up of a
‘Special Purpose Vehicle’ (SPV), which would provide infrastructure and common facilities for the industries. State Government  or its agency, which would set up such SPV, will have to mandatorily have equity participation in it.

The Scheme is aimed at increasing investment  in the sector for additions in capacity and for increased exports in the sector. Adopting a clustered development approach, the scheme aims to achieve environmentally sustainable growth through innovative methods of waste management, recycling etc.

Currently the share of India in world trade for plastics is very low. The industry in the country is very large but highly fragmented with the dominance of tiny, small and medium units.


82. Solution:  a)

We have already noted that a part of the capital gets consumed during the year due to wear and tear. This wear and tear is called depreciation. Naturally, depreciation does not become part of anybody’s income. If we deduct depreciation from GNP the measure of aggregate income that we obtain is called Net National Product (NNP). Thus

NNP ≡ GNP – Depreciation





http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 29
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS


It is to be noted that all these variables are evaluated at market  prices. Through the expression given above, we get the value of NNP evaluated at market prices. But market price includes indirect taxes. When indirect taxes are imposed on goods and services, their prices go up. Indirect taxes accrue to the government. We have to deduct them from NNP evaluated at market prices in order to calculate that part of NNP which actually accrues to the factors of production. Similarly, there may be subsidies granted by the government on the prices of some commodities (in India petrol is heavily taxed by the government, whereas cooking gas is subsidised). So we need to add subsidies to the NNP evaluated at market prices. The measure that we obtain by
doing so is called Net National Product at factor cost or National Income.

Thus, NNP at factor cost ≡ National Income (NI ) ≡ NNP at market  prices – (Indirect taxes – Subsidies) ≡ NNP at market  prices – Net indirect taxes (Net indirect taxes ≡ Indirect taxes – Subsidies)




83. Solution: B

The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs has approved the launching of a new Integrated Processing Development Scheme (IPDS) with a total  cost of Rs. 500 crore during the 12th Five Year Plan and to establish four to six brown field projects and three to five green field projects addressing the environmental issues faced by Textile Processing Units.


The eligible projects under the scheme would cover the following: (i) Common Effluent Treatment Plant (CETP),
(ii) Captive power generation on technology preferably renewable/green technology,


(iii) Infrastructure such as storm water management, necessary  roads and pipelines for water &
wastewater and


(iv) Facility for testing and R&D centres.


The Scheme will facilitate the textiles industry become globally competitive using environmentally friendly processing standards and technology and create new processing parks. This scheme will support the upgradation of existing processing clusters/centres  specifically in the area of water and waste water management and also encourage research and development
work in the textiles processing sector.


84. Solution: c)




http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 30
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS


Gross Domestic Product measures the aggregate production of final goods and services taking place within the domestic economy during a year.  But the whole of it may not accrue to the citizens of the country. For example, a citizen of India working in Saudi Arabia may be earning her wage and it will be included in the Saudi Arabian GDP. But legally speaking, she is an Indian. Is there a way to take into account the earnings made by Indians abroad or by the factors of production owned by Indians? When we try to do this, in order to maintain symmetry, we must deduct the earnings of the foreigners who are working within our domestic economy, or the payments to the factors of production owned by the foreigners. For example, the profits earned
by the Korean-owned Hyundai car factory will have to be subtracted from the GDP of India. The
macroeconomic variable which takes into account such additions and subtractions  is known as
Gross National Product (GNP). It is, therefore, defined as follows

GNP ≡ GDP + Factor income earned by the domestic factors of production employed in the rest of the world – Factor income earned by the factors of production of the rest of the world employed in the domestic economy

Hence, GNP ≡ GDP + Net factor income from abroad (Net factor income from abroad = Factor income earned by the domestic factors of production employed in the rest of the world – Factor income earned by the factors of production of the rest of the world employed in the domestic economy).

We have already noted that a part of the capital gets consumed during the year due to wear and tear. This wear and tear is called depreciation. Naturally, depreciation does not become part of anybody’s income. If we deduct depreciation from GNP the measure of aggregate income that we obtain is called Net National Product (NNP).

Thus NNP ≡ GNP – Depreciation

85. Solution (a)

Original jurisdiction means cases that can be directly considered by the Supreme Court without going to the lower courts before that. The Original Jurisdiction of the Supreme Court establishes it as an umpire in all disputes regarding federal matters. In any federal country, legal disputes are bound to arise between the Union and the States; and among the States themselves. The power to resolve such cases is entrusted to the Supreme Court of India. It is called original jurisdiction because the Supreme Court alone has the power to deal with such cases. Neither the High Courts nor the lower courts can deal with such cases. In this capacity, the Supreme Court not
just settles disputes but also interprets the powers of Union and State government  as laid down in the Constitution.( Court rejected the appeal by people against the eviction from the dam site, comes under original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court)

Writ Jurisdiction - any individual, whose fundamental right has been violated, can directly move the Supreme Court for remedy. The Supreme Court can give special orders in the form of writs. The High can also issue writs, but the persons whose rights are violated have the choice of either



http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 31
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS


approaching the High Court or approaching the Supreme Court directly. Through such writs, the
Court can give orders to the executive to act or not to act in a particular way.

Appellate Jurisdiction- the Supreme Court is the highest court of appeal. A person can appeal to the Supreme Court against the decisions of the High Court. However, High Court must certify that the case is fit for appeal, that is to say that it involves a serious matter of interpretation of law or Constitution. In addition, in criminal cases, if the lower court has sentenced a person to death then an appeal can be made to the High Court or Supreme Court. Of course, the Supreme Court holds the powers to decide whether to admit appeals even when appeal is not allowed by the High Court. Appellate jurisdiction means that the Supreme Court will reconsider the case and the legal issues involved in it. If the Court thinks that the law or the Constitution has a different meaning from what the lower courts understood, then the Supreme Court will change the ruling and along with that also give new interpretation of the provision involved.

The High Courts too, have appellate jurisdiction over the decisions given by courts below them.(Example- In order to resolve the dispute about river Cauvery the government of Tamil Nadu wants to approach the court)

Advisory jurisdiction – Under the Advisory Jurisdiction the President of India can refer any matter that is of public importance or that which involves interpretation of Constitution to Supreme Court for advice.

Example: The government wanted to know if it can pass a law about the citizenship status of residents of Pakistan occupied areas of Jammu and Kashmir. Then the executive (President) seeks advice of the Supreme Court.

Reference : Pages 132, 133 (Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)




86. Solution: c)

The Expenditure Method:
The expenditure approach measures national income as total spending on final goods and services produced within nation during an year: The expenditure  approach to measuring national income is to add up all expenditures made for final goods and services at current market prices by
households, firms and government during a year.  Total aggregate final expenditure on final output thus is the sum of four broad categories of expenditures (i) consumption (ii) Investment (iii) government and (iv) Net exports.
(i)     Consumption  expenditure: Consumption expenditure is the largest component of national
income. It includes expenditure on all goods and services produced  and sold to the final consumer during the year.
(ii)  Investment expenditure: Investment is the use of today’s resources to expand tomorrow’s
production or consumption. Investment expenditure is expenditure incurred on by business firms on(a) new plants, (b) adding to the stock of inventories and (c) on newly constructed houses.



http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 32
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS


(iii)      Government expenditure: (G) it is the second largest component of national income. It includes all government expenditure on currently produced goods and services but excludes transfer payments while computing national income.
(iv)      Net exports: Net exports are defined as total exports minus total imports.
National income calculated from the expenditure side is the sum of final consumption expenditure, expenditure by business on plants, government spending and net exports.


NI = C + 1 +G + (X – M)

Precautions
While estimating national income through expenditure method, the following -


precautions should be taken.


(i)      The expenditure on second hand goods should not be included as they do not contribute
to the current year’s production of goods.
(ii)  Similarly, expenditure on purchase of old shares and bonds is not included as these also do not represent expenditure on currently produced goods and
services.

(iii)          Expenditure on transfer payments by government such as unemployment benefit, old age pensions, interest on public debt should also not be included because no productive service is rendered in exchange by recipients of these payments.


87. Solution:  a) Youth
Streams are few during this stage with poor integration and flow over original slopes showing shallow V-shaped valleys with no floodplains or with very narrow floodplains along trunk streams. Streams divides are broad and flat with marshes, swamp and lakes. Meanders if present develop over these broad upland surfaces. These meanders may eventually entrench themselves into the uplands. Waterfalls and rapids may exist where local hard rock bodies are exposed.

Mature

During this stage streams are plenty with good integration. The valleys are still V-shaped but deep; trunk streams are broad enough to have wider floodplains within which streams may flow in meanders confined within the valley. The flat and broad inter stream areas and swamps and marshes of youth disappear and the stream divides turn sharp. Waterfalls and rapids disappear.

Old




http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 33
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS


Smaller tributaries during old age are few with gentle gradients. Streams meander freely over vast floodplains showing natural levees, oxbow lakes, etc. Divides are broad and flat with lakes, swamps and marshes. Most of the landscape is at or slightly above sea level.



88. Solution: d)

Stalactites, Stalagmites and Pillars

Stalactites hang as icicles of different diameters. Normally they are broad at their bases and taper towards the free ends showing up in a variety of forms. Stalagmites rise up from the floor of the caves. In fact, stalagmites form due to dripping water from the surface or through the thin pipe, of the stalactite, immediately below it.

Stalagmites may take the shape of a column, a disc, with either a smooth, rounded bulging end or a miniature crater like depression. The stalagmite and stalactites eventually fuse to give rise to columns and pillars of different diameters.

89. Solution:  a)

National Geophysical Laboratory, Geological Survey of India, Department of Meteorology, Government of India, along with the recently formed National Institute of Disaster Management, have made an intensive analysis of more than 1,200 earthquakes that have occurred in India in different years in the past, and based on these, they divided India into the following five earthquake zones:

(i) Very high damage risk zone

(ii) High damage risk zone

(iii) Moderate  damage risk zone

(iv) Low damage risk zone

(v) Very low damage risk zone.

Out of these, the first two zones had experienced  some of the most devastating earthquakes in India. areas vulnerable to these earthquakes are the North-east states, areas to the north of Darbhanga and Araria along the Indo-Nepal border in Bihar, Uttaranchal, Western Himachal Pradesh (around Dharamshala) and Kashmir Valley in the Himalayan region and the Kuchchh (Gujarat). These are included in the Very High Damage Risk Zone. Similarly, the remaining parts of Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Northern parts of Punjab, Eastern parts of Haryana, Delhi, Western Uttar Pradesh, and Northern Bihar fall under the High Damage Risk Zone. Remaining parts of the country fall under moderate to very Low Damage Risk Zone. Most of the
areas that can be considered  safe are from the stable landmass covered under the Deccan plateau.


http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 34
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS


90. Solution (a)

In this article (Article-368), there are two methods of amending the Constitution and they apply to two different sets of articles of the Constitution. One method is that amendment can be made by special majority of the two houses of the Parliament. The other method is more difficult: it requires special majority of the Parliament and consent of half of the State legislatures. Note that all amendments to the Constitution are initiated only in the Parliament. Besides the special majority in the Parliament no outside agency—like a constitution commission or a separate body—is required for amending the Constitution.

Similarly, after the passage in the Parliament and in some cases, in State legislatures, no referendum is required for ratification of the amendment.

After the passage in the Parliament and in some cases, in State legislatures, no referendum is required for ratification of the amendment.

Only elected representatives of the people are empowered to consider and take final decisions on the question of amendments. Thus, Sovereignty of elected representatives (parliamentary sovereignty) is the basis of the amendment procedure.

Reference : page 201, 202 (Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)


91. Solution (b)

Instruments of Parliamentary Control
The legislature in parliamentary system ensures executive accountability at various stages: policy making, implementation of law or policy and during and post implementation  stage. The legislature does this through the use of a variety  of devices:

1. Deliberation  and discussion- Zero Hour where members  are free to raise any matter that they think is important (though the ministers are not bound to reply), half-an – hour discussion on matters of public importance, adjournment motion etc. are some instruments of exercising control.
2. Approval or Refusal of laws
3. Financial control- before granting money the Lok Sabha can discuss the reasons for which the government requires money. It can enquire into cases of misuse of funds on the basis of the report of the Comptroller and Auditor General and Public Accounts committees.
4. No confidence motion: The most powerful weapon that enables the Parliament to ensure executive accountability is the no-confidence motion. As long as the government has the support of its party or coalition of parties  that have a majority  in the Lok Sabha, the power of the House to dismiss the government is fictional rather than real.

Reference : Page 116, 117 (Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)






http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 35
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS


92. Solution: c) Tsunami
Earthquakes  and volcanic eruptions that cause the sea-floor to move abruptly resulting in sudden displacement of ocean water in the form of high vertical waves are called tsunamis (harbour waves) or seismic sea waves. Normally, the seismic waves cause only one instantaneous vertical wave; but, after the initial disturbance, a series of after-waves are created in the water that oscillate between high crest and low trough in order to restore the water level.

The speed of wave in the ocean depends upon the depth of water. It is more in the shallow water than in the ocean deep. As a result of this, the impact of tsunami is less over the ocean and more near the coast where they cause large-scale devastations. Therefore, a ship at sea is not much affected by tsunami and it is difficult to detect  a tsunami  in the deeper parts of sea It is so
because over deep water the tsunami has very long wave-length and limited wave-height.





93. Solution (c)

Only Lok Sabha can initiate, reject or amend money bills. If it is a money  bill, the Rajya Sabha can either approve the bill or suggest changes but cannot reject it. If it takes no action within
14 days the bill is deemed to have been passed. Amendments  to the bill, suggested by Rajya
Sabha, may or may not be accepted by the Lok Sabha.

The Constitutional Amendment Bills can only be ratified i.e., it cannot be rejected or returned.

The President does not enjoy constitutional discretion, he/she enjoys only situational discretion like appointment of Prime Minister, dismissal of council of ministers. Directive Principles of State Policy are known as instrument of instructions in Indian administration.

Reference : Page 110, 113 (Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)


94. Solution: c)



Definition: The monetary value of an asset decreases over time due to use, wear and tear or obsolescence. This decrease is measured as depreciation.

Description: Depreciation, i.e. a decrease  in an asset's value, may be caused by a number  of other factors as well such as unfavorable market conditions, etc. Machinery, equipment, currency are
some examples of assets that are likely to depreciate over a specific period of time. Opposite of


http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 36
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS


depreciation is appreciation which is increase in the value of an asset over a period of time.


Accounting estimates the decrease in value using the information regarding the useful life of the asset. This is useful for estimation of property value for taxation purposes like property tax etc. For such assets like real estate, market and economic conditions are likely to be crucial such as in cases of economic downturn.

95. Solution (d)

In all other spheres, including passing of non-money bills, constitutional amendments, and impeaching the President and removing the Vice President the powers of Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha are co-equal. Participates  in the election and removal of the President, Vice President, Judges of Supreme Court and High Court.

Reference :Page 109,110  (Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)


96. Solution:  a)

We may note here that some commodities like television sets, automobiles or home computers, although they are for ultimate consumption, have one characteristic in common with capital goods – they are also durable. That is, they are not extinguished by immediate or even short period consumption; they have  a relatively long life as compared to articles such as food or even clothing. They also undergo wear and tear with gradual use and often need repairs and replacements of parts, i.e., like machines they also need to be preserved,  maintained and renewed. That is why we call these goods consumer durables.

Thus if we consider all the final goods and services produced in an economy  in a given period  of time they are either in the form of consumption goods (both durable and non-durable)  or capital goods. As final goods they do not undergo any further transformation in the economic process.

Of the total production taking place in the economy a large number of products don’t end up in final consumption and are not capital goods either. Such goods may be used by other producers as material inputs. Examples are steel sheets used for making automobiles and copper used for making utensils.

These are intermediate goods, mostly used as raw material or inputs for production of other commodities. These are not final goods.

97. Solution: c)

In a capitalist country production activities are mainly carried out by capitalist enterprises. A typical capitalist enterprise has one or several entrepreneurs (people who exercise control over major decisions and bear a large part of the risk associated with the firm/enterprise). They may
themselves supply the capital needed to run the enterprise, or they may borrow the capital. To


http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 37
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS


carry out production they also need natural resources – a part consumed in the process of production  (e.g. raw materials) and a part  fixed (e.g. plots of land). And they need the most important element of human labour to carry out production. This we shall refer to as labour. After producing output with the help of these three factors of production,  namely capital, land and labour, the entrepreneur sells the product in the market. The money that is earned is called revenue. Part of the revenue is paid out as rent for the service rendered by land, part of it is paid to capital as interest and part of it goes to labour as wages. The rest of the revenue is the earning of the entrepreneurs  and it is called profit. Profits  are often used by the producers in the next period to buy new machinery or to build new factories, so that production  can be expanded. These expenses which raise productive  capacity are examples of investment expenditure.

In short, a capitalist economy can be defined as an economy  in which most of the economic activities have the following characteristics  (a) there is private ownership of means of production (b) production takes place for selling the output in the market (c) there is sale and purchase of labour services at a price which is called the wage rate (the labour which is sold and purchased against wages is referred to as wage labour).

98. Solution: b) Tropical Cyclone
Tropical cyclones are intense low-pressure areas confined to the area lying between 30° N and
30° S latitudes, in the atmosphere around which high velocity winds blow. Horizontally, it extends up to 500-1,000 km and vertically from surface to 12-14 km. A tropical cyclone or hurricane is like a heat engine  that is energised by the release of latent heat on account of the condensation of moisture that the wind gathers after moving over the oceans and seas.

There are differences of opinion among scientists about the exact mechanism of a tropical cyclone. However, some initial conditions for the emergence of a tropical cyclone are:

(i) Large and continuous supply of warm and moist air that can release enormous  latent heat.

(ii) Strong Coriolis force that can prevent filling of low pressure at the centre (absence of Coriolis force near the equator prohibits the formation of tropical cyclone between 0°-5° latitude).

(iii) Unstable condition through the troposphere that creates local disturbances around which a cyclone develops.

(iv) Finally, absence of strong vertical wind wedge, which disturbs the vertical transport of latent heat.

Structure of Tropical Cyclone

Tropical cyclones  are characterised by large pressure  gradients. The centre of the cyclone is mostly a warm and low-pressure, cloudless  core known as eye of the storm. Generally, the isobars are closely placed to each other showing high-pressure gradients. Normally,  it varies

http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 38
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST 5 - SOLUTIONS


between 14-17mb/100 km, but sometimes  it can be as high as 60mb/100km. Expansion of the wind belt is about 10-150 km from the centre.

Spatio-temporal Distribution of Tropical Cyclone in India

Owing to its Peninsular shape surrounded  by the Bay of Bengal in the east and the Arabian Sea in the west, the tropical cyclones  in India also originate in these two important locations. Though most of the cyclones  originate between 10°-15° north latitudes during the monsoon  season, yet in case of the Bay of Bengal, cyclones mostly develop during the months of October  and
November. Here, they originate between 16°-2° N latitudes and to the west of 92° E. By July the place of origin of these storms shifts to around 18° N latitude and west of 90°E near the Sunderban Delta. Table 7.4 and Figure 7.4 show  the frequency and tracks of time of cyclonic storms in India.

99. Solution:  a)

An introduced, alien, exotic, non-indigenous, or non-native species, or simply anintroduction, is a species living outside its native distributional  range, which has arrived there by human activity, either deliberate or accidental. Some introduced species are damaging to the ecosystem they are introduced into, others have no negative effect and can, in fact, be beneficial as an alternative to pesticides in agriculture for example. In some instances the potential for being beneficial or detrimental in the long run remains unknown, for instance in New Zealand. A list of introduced species is given in a separate  article.

The effect of introduced species on natural environments  is a controversial subject, and one that has gained much scrutiny by scientists, governments,  farmers and others. Not all introduced species are problematic.  Those species that spread widely and create significant problems are known as invasive species.


100.             Solution: d)

Genetic Diversity

Genes are the basic building blocks of various life forms. Genetic biodiversity refers to the variation of genes within species. Groups of individual organisms having certain similarities in their physical characteristics  are called species. Human beings genetically belong to the homo sapiens group and also differ in their characteristics such as height, colour, physical appearance, etc., considerably. This is due to genetic diversity. This genetic diversity is essential for a healthy breeding of population of species.












http://insightsonindia.com                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 39
