INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


1.    Solution: c)

There are Five waterways in India. For complete details and Maps, click the link below.

http://iwai.nic.in/index1.php?lang=1&level=1&sublinkid=124&lid=143




2.   Solution: d)


Two different sets of reasons can be given in favour of power sharing. Firstly,
power sharing is good because it helps to reduce the possibility of conflict between social groups. Since social conflict often leads to violence and political instability, power sharing is a good way to ensure the stability of political order (so no arbitrariness, instability or divisiveness).


Power sharing is the very spirit of democracy. A democratic rule involves sharing power with those affected by its exercise, and who have to live with its effects. People have aright to be consulted on how they are to be governed. A legitimate government is one where citizens, through participation, acquire a stake in the system.


Reference: Page No. 6 (Democratic Politics Part 2)

3. Solution: b)

Chap14- page 243, NCERT 10th Science



4. Solution (d)


More than other forms of writing which came before, novels are about ordinary people. They do not focus on the lives of great people or actions that change the destinies of states and empires. Instead, they are about the everyday life of common people. In the nineteenth century, Europe entered the industrial age. Factories came up, business profits increased  and the economy grew. But at the same time, workers faced problems. Cities expanded in an unregulated  way and were filled with overworked  and underpaid workers. The unemployed poor roamed the streets for jobs, and the homeless were forced to seek shelter in workhouses. The growth of industry was accompanied by an economic philosophy which celebrated the
pursuit of profit and undervalued the lives of workers. Deeply critical of these


http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 1
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


developments, novelists such as Charles Dickens wrote about the terrible effects of industrialisation on people’s lives and characters. Dickens focused on the terrible conditions of urban life under industrial capitalism. His Oliver Twist (1838) is the tale of a poor orphan who lived in a world of petty criminals and beggars.


Reference : Page No. 181 (India and Contemporary World – II), Class X)






5. Solution: a)

Iron deficiency anaemia during adolescence can impair physical growth, cognitive development, reduce physical fitness and energy levels and can affect concentration  and work performance. Iron deficiency in girls has more serious health consequences. It can have impact on their entire life cycle. Anaemic girls have lower pre pregnancy stores of iron. Anaemic adolescent girls have a higher risk of preterm delivery and having babies with low weight. Anaemia in adolescent girls also increases the risk of maternal death. One third of all the material deaths take place in young women in the age group of 15 to 24 years.

Therefore regular consumption of iron folic acid supplements along with diet rich in micronutrients is essential for prevention of iron deficiency anaemia in adolescent girls and boys.

It is in this context that  a nation-wide Weekly Iron and Folic Acid Supplementation (WIFS) programme was launched in January this year to address this critical health issue.

The Weekly Iron and Folic Acid Supplementation (WIFS) programme is currently reaching out to 13 crore school-going girls and boys (class VI – XII) and out-of-school adolescent girls   in government/ aided and municipal  schools
and Anganwadi  Centres across all states in India.

There have been  a few reports of minor side affects like nausea and vomiting in the recent past although guidelines have been issued on the consumption of these iron folic acid tablets to prevent side affect like nausea.

When iron tablet is taken for the first time, the body may find it little difficult to digest and symptoms such as stomachache and nausea may occur. However, if
taken after food, the absorption will be little low but stomach ache and nausea will
not occur. These side effects will eventually disappear once the tablet is regularly



http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 2
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


taken for a few weeks as the body adjusts to the iron tablets. Hard stools after consuming iron-folic acid tablet are harmless.  The body takes the iron it needs and the extra iron is removed through faeces. To reduce side affects IFA tablets should be taken on full stomach. Taking any vitamin or nutrient is never restricted during an illness. In fact, it helps speedy recovery from illness by improving immunity of the body. Iron folic acid tablet can be taken during illness and even during menstruation




6.   Solution:  b)

In order to strengthen the Pahchayati Raj system and also to address critical gaps that constrain it, Ministry of Panchayati Raj has formulated the Scheme, Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikran Abhiyan (RGPSA) which will be implemented during the Twelfth Five Year Plan period. RGPSA aims to enable States to strengthen their Panchayati Raj systems in their context by choosing from among  a menu of activities. States would have access to funds on the basis of perspective
and annual plans prepared under the scheme. States would be required to fulfill the
following essential conditions for accessing to funds:

Regular elections to panchayats or urban local bodies under the superintendence of SEC
1/3 reservation for women in panchayats or other local bodies Constitution of State Finance Commission(SFC) every five years and placement of Action Taken Report (ATR)  on the recommendations of the SFC in the state Assembly
Constitution of District Planning Committees in all districts


RGPSA will provide performance linked funds from 2014-15 onwards. Activities that would be supported under RGPSA include: Strengthening of State Election Commission;  Administrative and Technical Support  at the Gram Panchayat level; Construction /renovation of Gram Panchayat Buildings; Capacity Building and Training of Elected Representatives and Functionaries;  Institutional Structure for Training at State, District & Block level;  E-enablement of Panchayats, etc.

The funding of RGPSA for State plans is envisaged on a 75:25  sharing basis by the
Central and State Governments respectively. For NE States, the ratio will be 90:10.




http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 3
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


7.  Solution (d)


Sarojini Naidu, also known by the sobriquet as The Nightingale of India. She was a child prodigy, Indian independence activist and poet. Sarojini Naidu was one of the framers of the Indian Constitution and the first Governor of the United Provinces from 1947 to 1949, the first woman to become the governor of an Indian state. Her birthday is celebrated as Women's Day all over India.


Reference: Wikipedia




8.  Solution (b)


Stories in prose were not new to India. Banabhatta’s Kadambari, written in Sanskrit in the seventh century, is an early example. The Panchatantra is another. There was also a long tradition of prose tales of adventure and heroism in Persian and Urdu, known as dastan. However, these works were not novels as we know them today. Prose is a form of language which applies ordinary grammatical structure and natural flow of speech rather than rhythmic structure (as in traditional
poetry).Prose benefits the more informal metrical structure of verse that is almost always found in traditional poetry. Poems usually involve a meter  and/or rhyme scheme. Prose, instead, comprises full, grammatical sentences, which then constitute paragraphs and overlook aesthetic appeal.




9.  Solution: c)

Resource planning is a complex process which involves : (i) identification and inventory of resources across the regions of the country. This involves surveying, mapping and qualitative and quantitative estimation  and measurement of the resources. (ii) Evolving a planning  structure endowed with appropriate technology, skill and institutional set up for implementing resource development plans. (iii) Matching the resource development plans with overall national development plans. India has made concerted efforts for achieving the goals of resource planning right from the First Five Year Plan launched after Independence.

The availability of resources is a necessary condition for the development of any region, but mere availability of resources in the absence of corresponding changes in


http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 4
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


technology  and institutions may hinder development. There are many regions in our country that are rich in resources but these are included in economically backward regions. On the contrary there are some regions which have  a poor resource base but they are economically developed.




10.  Solution: d)

The Limits to Growth is a 1972 book about the computer modeling of exponential economic and population growth with finite resource supplies. The purpose of The Limits to Growth was not to make specific predictions, but to explore how exponential growth interacts with finite resources. Because the size of resources is not known, only the general behavior can be explored.

The Club of Rome is a global  think tank that deals with a variety  of international political issues. The Club of Rome raised considerable public attention with its report Limits to Growth, which has sold 12 million copies in more than 30 translations, making it the best-selling environmental book in world history.




11.  Solution (a)


Power is shared among different organs of government, such as the legislature, executive and judiciary. This horizontal distribution of power because it allows different organs of government  placed at the same level to exercise different powers. Such a separation ensures that none of the organs can exercise unlimited power. Each organ checks the others. This results in a balance  of power among various institutions.


Reference: Page No. 8 (Democratic Politics Part 2)



12. Solution (a)


Power is shared among different organs of government, such as the legislature, executive and judiciary. This horizontal distribution of power because it allows different organs of government  placed at the same level to exercise different powers. Such a separation ensures that none of the organs can exercise unlimited


http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 5
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


power. Each organ checks the others. This results in a balance  of power among various institutions.
Even though ministers and government  officials’ exercisepower, they are
responsible to the Parliament or State Assemblies.
Similarly, although judges are appointed by the executive, they can check the functioning of executive or laws made by the legislatures. This arrangement is called  a system of checks and balances.
Power can be shared among governments at different levels – a general  government for the entire country and governments  at the provincial or regional level. Such a general government for the entire country is usually called federal
government.
Power may also be shared among different social groups, such as the religious and linguistic groups. ‘Community government’ in Belgium is a good  example of this arrangement.


Reference: Page No. 8, 9 (Democratic Politics Part 2)





13. Solution: d)

Concave mirrors converge the oncoming light beam to focus it on one point. It is important to focus all the energy on one single point for generating the maximum heat. Convex mirrors, on the other hand, diverge the energy beam. So, eneegy gets de-concentrated instead of getting concentrated. Plane mirrors simply reflect the energy beam without any divergence or convergence.






14. Solution: c)


Chap14- Page 250, NCERT 10th Science



15. Solution (c)


The modern novel form developed in India in the nineteenth century, as Indians became familiar with the Western novel. The development of the vernaculars, print and a reading  public helped in this process. Some of the earliest Indian novels

http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 6
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


were written in Bengali and Marathi. The earliest novel in Marathi was Baba Padmanji’s  Yamuna  Paryatan (1857), which used a simple style of storytelling to speak about the plight of widows.


Reference : Page No. 187 (India and Contemporary World – II, Class X)



16.  Solution (a)


Indian novelists of the nineteenth century wrote for a cause. Colonial rulers regarded the contemporary culture of India as inferior.
On the other hand, Indian novelists wrote to develop  a modern literature of the country that could produce  a sense of national belonging and cultural equality with their colonial masters.


Reference : Page No. 187(India and Contemporary World – II, Class X)




17.   Solution (d)


The modern novel form developed in India in the nineteenth century, as Indians became familiar with the Western novel; there was no fear of Western culture invading Indian culture which could hinder the development of novel in India. The development of the vernaculars, print and a reading  public helped in this process.
Translations of novels into different regional languages helped to spread the popularity of the novel and stimulated the growth of the novel in new areas.
In the north, Bharatendu Harishchandra, the pioneer of modern Hindi literature, encouraged many members of his circle of poets and writers to recreate and translate novels from other languages. Many novels were actually translated and adapted from English and Bengali under his influence.


Reference : Page No. 187, 188 (India and Contemporary World – II, Class X)



18. Solution: c)

Agenda 21 is a non-binding, voluntarily implemented action plan of the United Nationswith regard to sustainable development It is a product of the UN Conference on Environment  and Development  (UNCED) held in Rio de

http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 7
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


Janeiro, Brazil, in 1992. It is an action  agenda for the UN, other multilateral organizations, and individual governments around the world that can be executed
at local, national, and global levels. The "21" in Agenda 21 refers to the 21st Century. It has been affirmed  and modified  at subsequent  UN conferences.

In 2012, at the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development the attending members reaffirmed their commitment to Agenda 21 in their outcome document called "The Future We Want". 180 leaders from nations participated.




19.  Solution. (b)


Customs duties were raised and income tax introduced to finance the war.
People hoped that their hardships would end after the war was over. But that did not happen. In 1918-19 and 1920-21, crops failed in many parts of India, resulting in acute shortages of food. This was accompanied by an influenza epidemic.


Reference: Page 54 India and the Contemporary World – II 10th NCERT.





20.  Solution.(c)


Mahatma Gandhi first experimented with Satyagraha in South Africa in his fight against the racist regime. Satyagraha theory influenced Nelson Mandela's struggle in South Africa under apartheid, Martin Luther King, Jr.'s and James Bevel's
campaigns during the civil rights movement in the United States, and many other social justice and similar movements.


Reference: Page 55 India and the Contemporary World – II 10th NCERT.



21.    Solution. (d)


On that day a large crowd gathered in the enclosed ground of Jallianwalla Bagh. Some came to protest against the government’s new repressive measures. Others had come to attend the annual Baisakhi fair.
The Government held an inquiry, chaired by Lord Hunter. While it was not uncritical of Dyer, it held back from outright censure, and the Indian members of his commission issued a more critical minority report.


http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 8
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


British newspapers in India attacked the findings of the Hunter commission and dismissed as mere politicking the views of Indians demanding justice and compensation. The British media strongly defended General Dyer (Source:internet)

Reference: Page 56 India and the Contemporary World – II 10th NCERT.



22.    Solution (c)


The Fundamental Rights in the constitution are important because they are enforceable. We have a right  to seek the enforcement of the above mentioned rights. This is called the Right to Constitutional Remedies. This itself is a Fundamental Right. This right makes other rights effective. It is possible that sometimes our rights may be violated by fellow citizens, private bodies or by the government. When any of our rights are violated we can seek remedy through courts. If it is a Fundamental  Right we can directly approach the Supreme Court or the High Court of a state.
Courts also enforce the Fundamental Rights against private individuals and bodies.
The Supreme Court and High Courts have the power to issue directions, orders or writs for the enforcement of the Fundamental Rights. They can also award compensation to the victims and punishment to the violators.
Only the High Courts have the right to issue orders for the enforcement of both Fundamental Rights and Legal rights, Supreme Court can issue orders or writs only for the enforcement of the Fundamental right and not other rights.
Reference: Page No. 107, 108, 109 (Democratic Politics -I)




23. Solution: c

Sustainable development concept never says that the imperatives of economic growth be neglected altogether. What it says that the needs of the coming generation too should be taken care of in the allocation and use of resources.




24.  Solution: c

Chap-14- Page 252, NCERT 10th Science






http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 9
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


25.  Solution: d

Chap-14- Page 252, NCERT 10th Science




26. Solution: a)

Under the Special Industry Initiative of the Prime Minister, the National Skills Development Corporation (NSDC) and Ministry of Home Affairs have been mandated to work with the corporate sector in bringing  about a positive change in the employment  and skills space of Jammu and Kashmir. The Special Industry Initiative, known as “Udaan”, targets the youth of J&K, specifically graduates and postgraduates, who are seeking global and local opportunities. Udaan thereby aims to provide skills to 40 000 youth over a period of 5 years in high growth sectors.Udaan has two objectives :

To provide exposure to the graduates and post graduates of Jammu and Kashmir to the best of corporate India and
To provide corporate India with exposure to the rich talent pool available in the state



27. Solution: a)



I respect women campaign:

The Ministry of Tourism organized  a National  Conference of State Tourism
Ministers on 18th July, 2013 in New Delhi.

The meeting passed the unanimous Resolution that the Departments of Tourism of all States and Union Territories will work for ensuring safety and security of the tourists especially of women tourists.  Ministry of Tourism has also launched  a new campaign for the safety of women titled ‘I respect women’.



28. Solution: b)

The Eleventh Plan document  mentions that the Plan will aim for inclusive growth by introducing National Urban Health Mission (NUHM), which along with
National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) will form the Sarva Swasthya Abhiyan.



http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 10
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


The Union Cabinet  gave its approval to launch  a National  Urban Health Mission (NUHM) as a new sub-mission under the over-arching National Health Mission (NHM). Under the Scheme the following proposals have been approved :


1.        One Urban Primary Health Centre (U-PHC) for every fifty to sixty thousand population.
2.          One Urban Community Health Centre (U-CHC)  for five to six U- PHCs in big cities.
3.        One Auxiliary Nursing Midwives (ANM)  for 10,000 population.
4.        One Accredited Social Health Activist ASHA (community link worker) for 200 to 500 households.



29. Solution (c)


Concurrent List includes subjects of common interest to both the Union Government as well as the State Governments, such as education, forest, trade unions, marriage, adoption and succession. Union List includes subjects of national importance such as defence of the country, foreign affairs, banking, communications and currency. They are included in this list because we need  a uniform policy on these matters throughout the country. State List contains subjects of State and local importance such as police, trade, commerce, agriculture and irrigation.
The Constitution originally provided for a two-tier system of government, the Union Government or what we call the Central Government, representing the Union of India and the State governments. Later, a third tier of federalism was added in the form of Panchayats and Municipalities.
All States in the Indian Union do not have identical powers. Some States enjoy a
special status. Jammu and Kashmir has its own Constitution. Many provisions of the Indian Constitution are not applicable to this State without the approval of the State Assembly. Indians who are not permanent residents of this State cannot buy land or house here. Similar special provisions exist for some other States of India as well.
There are some units of the Indian Union which enjoy very little power.
These are areas which are too small to become an independent State but which could not be merged with any of the existing States. These areas, like Chandigarh, or Lakshadweep or the capital city of Delhi, are called Union Territories. These territories do not have the powers of a State.  The Central Government has special powers in running these areas.


Reference: Page No. 16, 17 (Democratic Politics Part 2)


http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 11
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS





30.  Solution (b)


Federalism is a system of government in which the power is divided between a central authority and various constituent units of the country.
Key features of federalism:
1 There are two or more levels (or tiers) of government.
2 Different tiers of government govern the same citizens, but each tier has its own jurisdiction in specific matters of legislation, taxation and administration.


3 The jurisdictions of the respective levels or tiers of government  are specified in the constitution. So the existence and authority of each tier of government is constitutionally guaranteed.


4 The fundamental provisions of the constitution cannot be unilaterally changed by one level of government. Such changes require the consent of both the levels of government.


5 Courts have the power to interpret the constitution and the powers of different levels of government. The highest court acts as an umpire if disputes arise between different levels of government in the exercise of their respective powers.
6 Sources of revenue for each level of government  are clearly specified to ensure its financial autonomy.


Reference: Page No. 15 (Democratic Politics Part 2)





31.   Solution (a)


Bankim read out Durgeshnandini (1865), his first novel, to such a gathering  of people who were stunned to realise that the Bengali novel had achieved excellence so quickly. Besides the ingenious twists and turns of the plot and the suspense, the novel was also relished for its language. The prose style became  a new object of enjoyment. Initially the Bengali novel used a colloquial style associated with urban life. It also used meyeli, the language associated with women’s speech. This style was quickly replaced by Bankim’s prose which was Sanskritised but also contained a more vernacular style. The novel rapidly acquired popularity in Bengal. By the twentieth century, the power of telling stories in simple language made Sarat


http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 12
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


Chandra Chattopadhyay (1876-1938) the most popular novelist in Bengal and probably in the rest of India.


Vandhe Mataram was taken from Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay’s Anandamath.


Reference : Page No. 190 (India and Contemporary World – II, Class X)



32.  Solution (c)


Colonial administrators found vernacular novels a valuable  source of information on native life and customs. Such information was useful for them in governing Indian society, with its large variety of communities and castes. As outsiders, the British knew little about life inside Indian households. The new novels in Indian languages often had descriptions of domestic life. They showed how people dressed, their forms of religious worship, their beliefs and practices, and so on. Some of these books were translated into English, often by British administrators or Christian missionaries. Indians used the novel as a powerful medium to criticise what they considered defects in their society and to suggest remedies. Writers like Viresalingam used the novel mainly to propagate their ideas about society among  a wider readership.


Novels also helped in establishing a relationship with the past. Many of them told thrilling stories of adventures and intrigues set in the past. Through glorified accounts of the past, these novels helped in creating  a sense of national pride among their readers. At the same time, people from all walks of life could read novels so long as they shared a common language. This helped in creating  a
sense of collective belonging on the basis of one’s language.


Reference : Page No. 191 (India and Contemporary World – II, Class X)




33.  Solution: c)

The Himalayan Yew in trouble

The Himalayan Yew (Taxus wallachiana) is a medicinal plant found in various parts of Himachal Pradesh and Arunachal  Pradesh. A chemical compound called
‘taxol’ is extracted from the bark, needles, twigs and roots of this tree, and it has
been successfully used to treat some cancers – the drug is now the biggest selling


http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 13
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


anti-cancer drug in the world. The species is under great threat due to over- exploitation. In the last one decade, thousands of yew trees have dried up in various parts of Himachal Pradesh and Arunachal  Pradesh.









34. Solution: c)

Habitat destruction, hunting, poaching, over-exploitation, environmental pollution, poisoning and forest fires are factors, which have led to the decline in India’s biodiversity. Other important causes of environmental destruction are unequal access, inequitable consumption of resources and differential sharing of responsibility for environmental well-being. Over-population in third world countries is often cited as the cause of environmental degradation. However, an average American consumes 40 times more resources than an average Somalian. Similarly, the richest five per cent of Indian society probably cause more ecological damage because of the amount they consume than the poorest 25 per cent. The former shares minimum responsibilities for environmental well-being.




35. Solution: b)

In India, much of its forest and wildlife resources are either owned or managed by the government through the Forest Department or other government departments. These are classified under the following categories.

(i) Reserved Forests: More than half of the total forest land has been declared reserved forests. Reserved forests are regarded as the most valuable as far as the conservation of forest and wildlife resources are concerned.

(ii) Protected Forests: Almost one-third of the total forest area is protected forest, as declared by the Forest Department. This forest land are protected from any further depletion.

(iii) Unclassed Forests: These are other forests and wastelands belonging to both government  and private individuals  and communities. Reserved  and protected

http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 14
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


forests are also referred to as permanent forest estates maintained for the purpose of producing timber and other forest produce, and for protective reasons.

Madhya Pradesh has the largest area under permanent  forests, constituting 75 per cent of its total forest area.

Jammu and Kashmir, Andhra Pradesh, Uttaranchal, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, and Maharashtra have large percentages of reserved forests of its total forest area whereas  Bihar, Haryana, Punjab, Himachal Pradesh, Orissa and Rajasthan have
a bulk of it under protected forests. All North-eastern  states and parts of Gujarat have  a very high percentage of their forests as un-classed forests managed by local communities.




36.  Solution (a)


The first proper modern novel was written by Srinivas Das of Delhi. Srinivas Das’s novel, published in 1882, was titled Pariksha-Guru (The Master Examiner). It cautioned young men of well-to-do families against the dangerous influences of bad company and consequent loose morals. Pariksha-Guru reflects the inner and outer world of the newly emerging middle classes. The characters in the novel are caught in the difficulty of adapting to colonised society and at the same time preserving their own cultural identity.


Reference : Page No. 188 (India and Contemporary World – II, Class X)





37. Solution: c

Chap-16- Page 275, NCERT 10th Science




38. Solution: b

Chap-16- Page 276 , NCERT 10th Science

( Groundwater sources can not always be free of contaminants. However, it usually contains lesser contaminants.)


http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 15
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS





39. Solution: d

Chap-16- Page 274-275,  NCERT 10th Science







40.   Solution.(a)


Explanation: Rowlatt Act gave the government enormous powers to repress political activities, and allowed detention of political prisoners without trial for two years.


Khilaf issue, the repressive Rowlatt act and the Jallianwalla Bagh massacre were the 3 important causes for the Non-Cooperation Movement.


Reference : page No.55-56  chapter 3 (India and the Contemporary World  II)





41.       Solution.(d)


Under the Inland Emigration Act of 1859, plantation workers were not permitted to leave the tea gardens without permission. When they heard of the Non-Cooperation Movement, thousands of workers defied the authorities, left the plantations and headed home. They believed that Gandhi Raj was coming and everyone would be given land in their own villages.


Tribal peasants interpreted the message of Mahatma Gandhi and the idea of swaraj in yet another way. In the Gudem Hills of Andhra Pradesh, for instance, a militant guerrilla movement spread in the early 1920s under the leadership of Alluri Sitaramaraju.


The movement drew into its fold the struggles of peasants and tribals.In Awadh, peasants were led by Baba Ramchandra a sanyasi led the movement against talukdars and landlords who demanded from peasants exorbitantly high rents and a variety of other cesses.


Reference  page 58, chapter 3 (India and the Contemporary World  II)

http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 16
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS





42. Solution: b)

The National e-Governance Plan (NeGP), being coordinated by
the Department of Electronics & Information Technology (DeitY), Ministry of Communications & Information Technology, was approved in May 2006 with a vision to “Make all Government services accessible to the common man in his locality, through common service delivery outlets and ensure efficiency, transparency & reliability of such services at affordable  costs to realise the basic needs of the common man.” Originally,  the NeGP comprised of 27 Mission Mode Projects (MMPs) and 8 components. However, in 2011 it was augmented by adding 4 more projects - Health, Education, PDS and Posts to increase the
list of 27 MMPs to 31 MMPs.

An MMP is an individual project within the NeGP that focuses on one aspect of electronic governance, such as banking, land records or commercial taxes etc. Within NeGP, ‘Mission Mode’ implies that projects have clearly defined objectives, scopes, and implementation timelines and milestones, as well as measurable outcomes and service levels.

The 31 MMPs comprising the NeGP are further classified as State,
Central or Integrated projects. Each state government can also define five MMPs specific to its individual needs.

The List of the 3 types of MMPs is as follows:


Central MMPs under NeGP

Banking
Central Excise & Customs Income Tax (IT) Insurance
MCA21
Passport
Immigration,Visa and Foreigners Registration& Tracking
Pension e-Office Posts UID




http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 17
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


State MMPs under NeGP


Agriculture Commercial Taxes e−District
Employment Exchange
Land Records(NLRMP) Municipalities
e-Panchayats Police(CCTNS) Road Transport
Treasuries Computerization
PDS Education
Health


Integrated MMPs under NeGP


CSC
e-Biz
e-Courts
e-Procurement
EDI For eTrade
National e-governance Service Delivery Gateway
India Portal





43. Solution: a)

The scheme of “Seekho aur Kamao” is the Skill Development initiative. It is a 100% Central Sector Scheme for “Skill Development of minorities” to be implemented from the current financial year onwards. It is being implemented by the ministry of minority affairs.




44.   Solution.(b).

http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 18
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS




Lord Irwin announced in October 1929, a vague  offer of  dominion status  for
India in an unspecified future.
All the political parties in India including the Muslim League participated in  Go back Simon demonstrations.


Reference: page 62, chapter 3 (India and the Contemporary World  II)




45.      Solution.(c)


Reference: page 96-97 chapter 4 (India and the Contemporary World  II)




46. Solution: a)

In India joint forest management (JFM) programme furnishes a good  example for involving local communities in the management and restoration  of degraded forests. The programme has been in formal existence since 1988 when the state of Orissa passed the first resolution for joint forest management. JFM depends on the formation of local (village) institutions that undertake protection activities mostly on degraded forest land managed by the forest department. In return, the members of these communities are entitled to intermediary benefits like non-timber forest produces and share in the timber harvested by ‘successful protection’.




47.    Solution.(a)


Dr B.R. Ambedkar, who organised the dalits into the Depressed Classes Association in 1930, clashed with Mahatma Gandhi at the second Round Table Conference
by demanding separate electorates for dalits. When the British government conceded Ambedkar s demand, Gandhiji began  a fast unto death. He believed that separate electorates for dalits would slow down the process of their integration into society. Ambedkar ultimately accepted Gandhiji s position and the result          was
the Poona Pact of September 1932.It gave the Depressed Classes (later to be known as the Schedule Castes) reserved seats in provincial and central legislative councils, but they were to be voted in by the general electorate.



http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 19
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


Reference:page 68 chapter 3 (India and the Contemporary World  II)




48. Solution: d)



http://pib.nic.in/newsite/erelease.aspx?relid=91316




49. Solution: d)


http://minorityaffairs.gov.in/sites/upload_files/moma/files/jiyoparsis_0.pdf


50. Solution: b)

http://articles.timesofindia.indiatimes.com/2013-01-
06/lucknow/36173792_1_minority-women-muslim-women-sachar-committee

http://minorityaffairs.gov.in/sites/upload_files/moma/files/Revised%20Leadership. pdf




51. Solution: c)

The NULM  is actually an improved  version of the earlier poverty alleviation programme for the urban poor titled Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) which was found to be wanting for a variety of reasons.


Having identified the problem areas in the implementation of the SJSRY and recognising the need to address the needs of the growing population flocking to cities in search of a better  livelihood, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation (HUPA)  restructured the old scheme and unveiled it in its new avatar as the NULM.


To begin with, the UPA government did not hold back on the funding. A budget of a whopping Rs. 6404 crore has been provided for the remaining period of the 12th five year plan for cities with a population of one lakh or more with Rs. 950 crore being allocated for 2013-2014.



http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 20
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


It has also expanded the beneficiaries of urban poor to include the homeless and street vendors who are invariably ignored in government programmes. A
special provision has been made for the funding of all-weather 24/7 shelters with all essential facilities for the urban homeless. In addition, up to five per cent of the NULM  budget has been earmarked to provide support to urban street vendors which will include skill upgradation and development  of vendor markets.






52. Solution: c)

The Programme is a joint initiative of the National Rural Health Mission and the State Departments  of Health and Education. The new initiative will complement a peer programme titled ‘Amrutham, Arogyam’ for adults in the State. About 70 lakh adults were screened as a part of ‘Amrutham, Arogyam’ programme.

Changing Lifestyle and its Multiple Effects

The World Health Assembly organized by World Health Organisation(WHO) in 2010 at Geneva cautioned in its report that non communicable diseases -mainly cardiovascular diseases, cancers, chronic respiratory diseases and diabetes, kill nearly 35 million people per year. The report also says that almost 90% of fatalities before the age of 60 occur in developing countries and are largely preventable. (Courtesy: WHO website)

Unhealthy diet, lack of exercise, stress and excess use of junk food are the main causes that lead to lifestyle diseases at an early age. The cut-throat competition in academics forces students to distance themselves from sporting activities in and outside the school premises. India with its majority young population is more vulnerable to such non-communicable diseases.

LEAP- An Introduction

The LEAP initiative will help educate teachers and students on lifestyle diseases. Continuous awareness campaigns will be conducted across the schools as
a part of this programme. Medical Officers, dietitians  and other health workers will
lead the classes which lay emphasis on healthy diet, exercise and good eating habits.

Main Objectives of LEAP:

Awareness classes for students and teachers on regular exercise and healthy diet.
Facilities for exercise at schools.

http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 21
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


Encourage students to reach schools either by walking or by cycling. Training for students in vegetable farm making and making healthy diet. Encourage Yoga and Sports in Schools.
Regular screening of school students to identify lifestyle diseases. Awareness among students regarding lifestyle disease control.









53.  Solution (a)


Indian Constitution did not give the status of national language to any one language. Hindi was identified as the official language. But Hindi is the mother tongue of only about 40 per cent of Indians. Therefore, there were many safeguards to protect other languages. Besides Hindi, there are 21 other languages recognized as Scheduled
Languages by the Constitution (8th Schedule contains a list of 22 languages recognized by the constitution).


According to the Constitution, the use of English for official purposes was to
stop in 1965. But the Central Government continues to use of English along with Hindi for official purposes. Promotion of Hindi continues to be the official policy of the Government of India. Promotion does not mean that the Central Government can impose Hindi on States where people speak a different language. Of the 22 languages that are included in the Eighth Schedule of the Indian
Constitution and are therefore called ‘Scheduled Languages’. Others are called ‘non-
Scheduled Languages’.


The States reorganization Commission under the chairmanship of Fazl Ali, which
created states on linguistic basis rejected the theory ‘one language- one state’

Reference: Page No. 20, 22 (Democratic  Politics Part 2)



54. Solution (d)


After 1990- This period saw the rise of regional political parties in many States of the country. This was also the beginning of the era of Coalition Governments at the Centre. Since no single party got a clear majority in the Lok Sabha, the major national parties had to enter into an alliance with many parties including several


http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 22
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


regional parties to form a government  at the Centre. This led to a new culture of power sharing and respect for the autonomy of State Governments. This trend was supported by a major judgement  of the Supreme Court that made it difficult for
the Central Government to dismiss state governments in an arbitrary manner. Thus, federal power sharing is more effective today than it was in the early years after the Constitution came into force.



Reference: Page No. 20, 21 (Democratic Politics Part 2)



55. Solution (b)


A major step towards decentralization was taken in 1992. The Constitution was amended to make the third-tier of democracy more powerful and effective. Now it is constitutionally mandatory to hold regular elections to local government bodies. Seats are reserved in the elected bodies and the executive heads of these
institutions for the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward
Classes.


At least one-third of all positions are reserved for women. No reservation for minorities.


An independent institution called the State Election Commission (SEC) has been created in each State to conduct panchayat and municipal  elections and though SEC is appointed by the Governor of the state, he can only be removed by the President of India.


The panchayat works under the overall supervision of the gram sabha.

Reference: Page No. 24, 25 (Democratic  Politics  Part 2)




56.  Solution: c)

The salient features of the Scheme of Tourist Visa on Arrival (TVOA) are:

The TVOA is allowed for a maximum validity of 30 days with single entry facility.




http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 23
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


The TVOA is available to foreign nationals arriving from Japan, Singapore, Finland, Luxembourg, New Zealand, Cambodia, Laos, Vietnam, Philippines, Myanmar  and Indonesia  at Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata
Airports.  With effect from August 15, 2013 it has also been introduced  at the
Kochi, Thiruvananthapuram, Hyderabad and Bangalore airports.
The fee for the TVOA is US $ 60/- or equivalent amount in Indian rupees per passenger (including children).
The TVOA is allowed for a maximum of two times in a calendar  year to a foreigner with a minimum gap of two months between each visit. TVOA is non-extendable and non-convertible.
Tourists from the above mentioned countries may also avail of TVOA for
up to 30 days for medical treatment, for casual business or to visit friends/relatives, etc.
The TVOA facility is not applicable to the holders of Diplomatic/Official Passports. Further, TVOA shall not be granted to the foreigners who have permanent residence or occupation in India. Such persons can visit India on normal visa, as applicable.



57. Solution: b)

Distinguishing Features of NPS -Swavalamban:

Voluntary - Open to eligible citizens of India, in the age group of 18–60 years. Subscriber is free to choose the amount he/she wants to invest every year.
Simple – Eligible individuals in the unorganized sector can open an account
through their Aggregator and get an Individual subscriber (NPS - Swavalamban) Account.
Safe - Regulated by Pension Fund Regulatory Development Authorities
(PFRDA), with transparent investment norms, regular monitoring and performance review of fund managers by NPS Trust.
Economical – Ultra-low cost structure with no minimum amount required per
annum or per contribution

"NPS -Swavalamban Model" is designed to ensure ultra-low administrative and transactional costs, so as to make small investments viable.
Swavalamban Yojana is a scheme announced by the Government of India
under which Government will contribute Rs. 1000 per year to each NPS – Swavalamban account opened in year 2010-11,2011-12 ,2012-13 for five years as under .


http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 24
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


Account opened in 2010-2011 will get the benefit till 2014-2015
Account opened in 2011-2012 will get the benefit till 2015-2016
Account opened in 2012-2013 will get the benefit till 2016-2017
NPS – Swavalamban account opened in the period 2013-2014 to 2016-2017 will get the Swavalamban benefit up to 2016-17.

NPS - Swavalamban is a pension product to ensure a monthly income after the retirement age has been attainted.
NPS - Swavalamban invests a portion of the contributions in the equity (stock) market and hence there are possibilities of returns much higher than what banks and similar financial institutions are able to offer. A portion of the corpus is invested in equity markets which enables the corpus to grow quickly. However, unlike other equity based investment schemes where risk of losing the money is high, in NPS - Swavalamban; the risk is reduced considerably as up to 55% of money is invested in Government securities and up to 40% in corporate bonds.




58. Solution: d)



The Minister of Petroleum & Natural Gas, Dr M. Veerappa Moily, has approved the launch of Portability of LPG connections from today onwards across Oil Marketing Companies/distributors covering 480 districts in the country. These districts cover all possible  LPG markets which have multiple LPG distributors of various ratings.


With this, an LPG consumer in these markets can now switch to the distributor of his/her  choice within a cluster of LPG distributors in the vicinity under the LPG Connection Portability Scheme. This measure will bring great relief to those LPG consumers who are unhappy with the services of their current distributor or want to move to an LPG distributor closer to their home.


As a pilot project, the Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs)  together launched
LPG connection portability scheme in 24 districts covering 13 States in October
2013. Today, this scheme is being launched on a full-fledged all-India basis by expanding its coverage to over 480 districts and a population of over 8.2 crore LPG consumers across the country.







http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 25
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


59. Solution: d)

Water scarcity is the lack of sufficient available water resources to meet the demands of water usage within a region.  It already affects every continent and around 2.8 billion people around the world at least one month out of every year. More than 1.2 billion people lack access to clean drinking water.

Water scarcity involves water stress, water shortage or deficits, and water crisis. While the concept of water stress is relatively new, it is the difficulty of obtaining sources of fresh water for use during  a period of time and may result in further depletion and deterioration of available water resources. Water shortages may be caused by climate change, such as altered weather patterns
including droughts or floods, increased pollution, and increased  human demand and
overuse of water. A water crisis is a situation where the available potable, unpolluted water within a region  is less than that region's demand. Water scarcity is being driven by two converging phenomena: growing freshwater use and depletion of usable freshwater resources.

The per capita availability of water in the country is 1545 cubic meters as per
the 2011 census. The average annual per capita availability of water in the country, taking into consideration the population of the country as per the 2001 census,was
1816  cubic meters which reduced to 1545 cubic meters as per the 2011
census,denoting  that the per capita water availability in the country is reducing progressively due to increase in population.Also there are reports that demand for water in India would rise dramatically to about 833 cubic kilometers in 2025 and
899 cubic kilometers in 2050 due to increase in population, rapid urbanization and
a growing  GDP with significant lifestyle changes



60. Solution: d)

Kharif crops are grown with the onset of monsoon in different parts of the country and these are harvested in September-October. Important crops grown during this season are paddy, maize, jowar, bajra, tur (arhar), moong, urad, cotton, jute, groundnut and soyabean. Some of the most important rice-growing regions are Assam, West Bengal, coastal regions of Orissa, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Maharashtra, particularly the (Konkan coast) along with Uttar Pradesh and
Bihar.






http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 26
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


Recently, paddy has also become an important crop of Punjab and Haryana. In
states like Assam, West Bengal and Orissa, three crops of paddy are grown  in a year. These are Aus, Aman and Boro.

In between the rabi and the kharif seasons, there is a short season during the summer months known as the Zaid season. Some of the crops produced during
‘zaid’ are watermelon, muskmelon,  cucumber, vegetables and fodder crops.









61. Solution: a)

Pulses: India is the largest producer as well as the consumer of pulses in the world. These are the major source of protein in a vegetarian  diet. Major pulses that are grown in India are tur (arhar), urad, moong, masur, peas and gram. Pulses need less moisture and survive even in dry conditions. Being leguminous crops, all these crops except arhar help in restoring soil fertility by fixing nitrogen from the air.
Therefore, these are mostly grown in rotation with other crops. Major pulse producing states in India are Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Maharashtra and Karnataka.




62.  Solution.(b)
The printing press first came to Goa with Portuguese missionaries in the mid- sixteenth century.


Reference: Page 168 India and the Contemporary World – II 10th NCERT



63. Solution: a)

Page no. 244, NCERT 10th Science




64. Solution: b)


http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 27
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


Cotton: India is believed to be the original home of the cotton plant. Cotton is one of the main raw materials for cotton textile industry. India is the third-largest producer of cotton in the world. Cotton grows well in drier parts of the black cotton soil of the Deccan plateau. It requires high temperature, light rainfall or irrigation, 210 frost-free days and bright sunshine for its growth. It is a kharif  crop and requires 6 to 8 months to mature.




65. Solution: c)

The newly launched Rashtriya Bal Swaasthya Karyakram of the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare assures a package  of health services for children up to 18 years of age. The initiative, which is part of the National Rural Health Mission, was launched on February 6, in Palghar, a tribal dominated  block of Thane district in Maharashtra. The programme will be extended to cover all districts of the country in a phased  manner.

Early Detection;  Early Intervention


Rashtriya Bal Swaasthya Karyakram, also known as Child Health Screening and Early Intervention Services aims at early detection  and management
of ‘4Ds’ prevalent in children. These are Defects at birth, Diseases in children,
Deficiency conditions and Developmental  delays including Disabilities. The health screening of children is a known intervention under School Health Programme. It is now being expanded to cover all children from birth to 18 years of age. The services aim to cover all children of 0-6 years of age group in rural areas and urban slums, in addition to children enrolled in classes 1st to 12th in Government  and Government aided schools.  A set of 30 common ailments / health conditions have been
identified for screening  and early intervention.





66. Solution: d

The Government of India is taking fresh measures to bolster the Jan
Aushadhi Campaign, as a public welfare programme, to supply quality medicines at affordable prices to the common man through dedicated outlets. It is also a part of direct market intervention  strategy by making generic medicines easily available and accessible in the market. A key initiative under the campaign is opening of ‘Jan Aushadhi Stores', where quality generic medicines, which are equivalent to the

http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 28
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


expensive branded drugs, in terms of their potency and efficacy, are sold at cheaper prices.

To know what these generic drugs are, we have the definition by the World Health Organization (WHO).  According to it, a generic  drug is a pharmaceutical product that is manufactured without a license from the innovator company and marketed after the expiry date of the patent or other exclusive rights. These Generic drugs
are subject to the same regulations over manufacturing, packaging, testing and quality standards, as their patented/branded equivalent. They have the same form, strength, dosages, intended use, safety, and route of administration, performance characteristics and quality on every count. Prices of the branded/patented drugs are generally quite high, due to the temporary monopoly over the product, bestowed
by the patent. Once available in the market, without a patent  right, they are normally then sold by various pharmacy companies under different brand or company given names. These are expected to be much cheaper due to the market competition as they are sold by various manufacturers. These are normally  referred by its chemical or its ‘salt name’ by the chemists/pharmacists.




67. Solution: c)

On 9th January 2013 the Prime Minister launched the National Electric Mobility Mission Plan (NEMMP) 2020 which is a roadmap  for progressive induction and expansion of efficient and environmentally  friendly electric and hybrid vehicles in the country.


The National Electric Mobility Mission Plan 2020 is a culmination of extensive and detailed exercise by the government  and the industry covering  a span of one and a half years; also involving an international knowledge, that carried out a primary  data based survey among seven thousand respondents, to understand the needs and aspirations of the Indian consumer with respect to clean, energy-efficient and affordable transportation,  and the state of preparedness of the Indian automobile industry in this regard. The study took into consideration the current international best practices, particularly in Europe, USA, Japan and China, and also recent developments within the country, particularly steps being taken by the government to encourage the use of electric and hybrid vehicles, for example the subsidy scheme for electric vehicles ran by the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy Resources.



http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 29
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


The National Electric Mobility Mission Plan 2020 emanates from the National Mission on Electric Mobility (NMEM)  which was approved by the Cabinet as the core vision document that has National energy security, mitigation of the adverse impact of vehicles on the environment and growth of domestic manufacturing capabilities as its principal end objectives.


The NEMMP 2020 is a well researched, comprehensive  action plan which indicates that high latent demand for environmentally friendly electric vehicle technologies exists in the country. As per these projections, co-ordinated efforts are required by the government  and industry which would eventually result, by the year 2020, 6-7 million units of new vehicle sales of the full range of electric vehicles, along with resultant liquid fuel savings of 2.2 – 2.5 million tones. This will also result in substantial lowering of vehicular emissions and decrease in carbon di-oxide emissions by 1.3% to 1.5% in 2020.




68. Solution: d)

Detailed guidelines were issued to the States/UTs for identification of the Antyodaya families under the AAY  and additional Antyodaya families under the expanded AAY. In order to identify the households criteria adopted:- Landless agriculture labourers, marginal farmers, rural artisans/craftsmen, such as potters, tanners, weavers, blacksmiths, carpenters, slum dwellers and persons earning their livelihood on daily basis in the informal sector like porters, coolies, rickshaw pullers, hand cart pullers, fruit and flower sellers, snake charmers, rag pickers, cobblers, destitute  and other similar categories in both rural and urban areas.


Households headed by widows or terminally ill persons/disabled persons/persons aged 60 years or more with no assured means of subsistence or societal support.


Widows or terminally ill persons or disabled persons or persons aged 60 years or more or single women or single men with no family or societal support or assured means of subsistence.


All primitive tribal households.







http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 30
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


The above guidelines have further been amended vide letter dated 3rd June, 2009 to include all eligible BPL, families of HIV  positive persons in the AAY  list of on priority.




69. Solution: d)

Government believes that the Direct Cash Transfer or Direct Benefits
Transfer is likely to be a game-changer  in more than one way.

The Centre releases as much as Rs 2, 00,000 crore as subsidies under various schemes for the targeted sections across the country. Therefore it is within its right to devise methods to reach beneficiaries the way it wants.

Firstly, the Direct Benefits Transfer (DBT) scheme is aimed at cutting  the bloated subsidy bill of Rs.1, 64,000 crore. India’s budget deficit was 5.8 per cent of gross domestic product in the financial year ending 2012 March.

Secondly, unlike other welfare scheme launched so far by the Centre, DBT
helps in timely and quick transfer to intended beneficiaries.

Thirdly, the transfer of direct cash into account of targeted beneficiary  is a winning proposition for  the recipients as it aims to eliminate middlemen in various government sponsored welfare schemes and subsidized food, fuel and fertiliser schemes. Take for instance, it's estimated that public coffers can be richer by
several crore yearly just by switching to cash handouts for LPG and kerosene, a proposed move that would also curb diversion of subsidised cylinders for commercial use and diesel adulteration with inexpensive kerosene. Bringing all subsidies under DBT's ambit can be the major fiscal game-changer the economy needs very much.

Fourthly, the Direct Benefits Transfer scheme is likely to be simple and error free. On the basis of Aadhar cards money is deposited in beneficiaries’ accounts.

Fifthly indirect transfers are more prone to leakages than direct cash transfers. So, that is why the Central Government has put in a mechanism of direct cash transfer. According to Planning Commission the Public Distribution System has become so inefficient that 58 per cent of the subsidized grains do not reach targeted beneficiaries while one-third of it siphoned from the system.

Sixthly, the Aadhar based DBT helps eliminate duplicate cards and cards for non-existent persons or ghost beneficiaries often found in schemes such as the PDS and MNREGS.

http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 31
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


Seventhly, with the actual transfer of cash taking place with the help of micro automated teller machines (ATMs) it would infuse financial inclusion on a greater scale in rural India. Quoting a World Bank Study the Reserve Bank of India last year in its annual report has said, in India only 35 per cent have formal accounts versus an average of 41 per cent in developing economies. With the implementation of DBT, it could fuel financial inclusion.

Eighthly, aided by Aadhar technology Direct Benefits Transfer will not be a mere welfare scheme but also the world's largest experiment in administrative reform. It will revolutionise the delivery of welfare measures in world’s populous democracy.






70. Solution: c)

It was to involve the youth in constructive activities, enable them to get employment  that a major initiative Youth Employment and Guidance Node (YEGN)  programme was launched  a few years back in border  and remote  areas of Jammu and Kashmir .

The YEGN   guidance and training to young men and women in various skills to equip them to either get a job or start their own  enterprise ,  prepare
them for recruitment in the army and other security agencies including paramilitary
forces and help them acquire some expertise for self employment .

Thanks to the YEGN   under the Sadbhawna programme today many a youth have been recruited in army, paramilitary forces, railways, banks and many trained to earn  a livelihood on their own.

The YEGN  centres have computer training facilities, facilities for training in different skills and competent  personnel and expertees to guide the youth in getting gainful employment or seeking higher education or sitting for exams for
recruitment in bank, railways and other fields.

The youth that include a large number  of students have also access to magazines and journals on general knowledge and competitive  exams in various sectors besides Employment News magazine.




71. Solution: d)



http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 32
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


The denudation of the soil cover and subsequent washing down is described as soil erosion. The processes of soil formation  and erosion, go on simultaneously and generally there is a balance between  the two. Sometimes, this balance is disturbed due to human activities like deforestation, over-grazing, construction and mining etc., while natural forces like wind, glacier and water lead to soil erosion.

The running water cuts through the clayey soils and makes deep channels as gullies. The land becomes unfit for cultivation and is known as bad land. In the Chambal basin such lands are called ravines. Sometimes water flows as a sheet over large
areas down a slope. In such cases the top soil is washed away. This is known as sheet erosion. Wind blows loose soil off flat or sloping land known as wind erosion. Soil erosion is also caused due to defective methods of farming. Ploughing in a wrong way i.e. up and down the slope form channels for the quick flow of water leading to soil erosion.




72. Solution: a)

The  Leatherback turtle is a critically endangered  species.

The Leatherback Turtle (Dermochelys  coriacea) is the largest of the living sea turtles, weighing as much as 900 kg. Adult leatherback turtles are excellent swimmers. They swim an average of  45-65 km a day, travel upto 15,000  km per year and can dive as deep as 1200 m. Jellyfish is their primary food.

The population spikes of leatherbacks coincide with abundance of jellyfish, making them important top-predators in marine environments.

Habitat: Tropical and subtropical oceans.

Distribution: Found  in tropical and temperate waters of the Atlantic, Pacific, and
Indian Oceans.

Threats: High sea fishing operations, harvesting of eggs, destruction of nests by wild predators  and domesticated  species such as cats, dogs and pigs. Artificial lighting disorients hatchlings and  adults and causes them to migrate inland rather

http://www.thehindubusinessline.com/news/15-bird-species-in-india-in-critically- endangered-list/article5393581.ece


http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 33
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


http://www.moef.nic.in/downloads/public-
information/critically_endangered_booklet.pdf







73. Solution: b)

Critically endangered is the highest risk category assigned by the IUCN (International  Union for Conservation of Nature) red lIst to wild species. There are five quantitative  criteria to determine whether a taxon is threatened. A taxon is critically endangered when the best availabile evidence indicates that it meets any
of the following criteria:

I. Populations have declined or will decrease, by greater than 80% over the last 10 years  or three generations.

II. Have a restricted geographical range.

III. Small population size of less than 250 individuals and continuing decline at 25%
in 3  years or one generation.

IV. Very small or restricted population of fewer than 50 mature individuals. V. High probability of extinction in the wild.


http://www.moef.nic.in/downloads/public- information/critically_endangered_booklet.pdf

Based on the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural
Resources (IUCN), we can classify as follows–

Normal Species: Species whose population levels are considered to be normal for their survival, such as cattle, sal, pine, rodents, etc.

Endangered Species: These are species which are in danger of extinction. The survival of such species is difficult if the negative factors that have led to a decline
in their population continue to operate. The examples of such species are black




http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 34
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


buck, crocodile, Indian wild ass, Indian rhino, lion tailed macaque, sangai (brow anter deer in Manipur), etc.

Vulnerable Species: These are species whose population has declined to levels from where it is likely to move into the endangered category in the near future if the negative factors continue to operate. The examples of such species are blue sheep, Asiatic elephant, Gangetic dolphin, etc.



Rare Species: Species with small population may move into the endangered or vulnerable category if the negative factors affecting them continue to operate. The examples of such species are the Himalayan brown bear, wild Asiatic buffalo, desert fox and hornbill, etc.

Endemic Species: These are species which are only found in some particular areas usually isolated by natural or geographical barriers. Examples of such species are the Andaman teal, Nicobar pigeon, Andaman wild pig, mithun in Arunchal Pradesh.

Extinct Species: These are species which are not found after searches of known or likely areas where they may occur. A species may be extinct from a local area, region, country, continent or the entire earth. Examples of such species are the Asiatic cheetah, pink head duck.




74.  Solution (a)


These social differences are mostly based on accident of birth. Normally we don’t choose to belong to our community. We belong to it simply because we were born into it. We all experience social differences based on accident of birth in our everyday lives. People around us are male or female, they are tall and short, have different kinds of complexions, or have different physical abilities or disabilities.
But all kinds of social differences are not based on accident of birth. Some of the differences are based on our choices. For example, some people are atheists. They don’t believe in God or any religion. Some people choose to follow a religion other than the one in which they were born. Most of us choose what to study, which occupation to take up and which games or cultural activities to take part in. All these lead to formation of social groups that are based on our choices.
Every social difference does not lead to social division. Social differences divide similar people from one another, but they also unite very different people.


http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 35
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


Democracy does ‘not always’ leads to disintegration of society on the basis of social divisions. Actually democracy is one of the best wayto accommodate social diversity (as in India).

Reference: Page No. 32, 33 and 34 (Democratic  Politics Part 2)




75.  Solution (b)


There are various kinds of social differences that can take the form of social divisions and inequalities.  These are social differences based on gender, religion, caste, wealth.


Women’s reservation Bill has not yet been passed by the parliament. Hence it
cannot be considered as a step to reduce social difference.


Our Constitution did not give the status of nationallanguage to any one language. Hindi was identified as the official language only and not National  language. Hindi as a national  language will only create more social difference in the society.


Constitution allows the state to intervene in thematters of religion in order to ensure equality within religious communities. For example, it bans untouchability. Enactment of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) would not only reduce the economic inequality but also social inequality.

Reference: Based on the concepts of Chapter 4(Democratic  Politics Part 2)



76. Solution (d)


Communalism involves thinking along the following lines. The followers of a particular religion must belong to one community. Their fundamental interests are the same. Any difference that they may have is irrelevant or trivial for community life. It also follows that people who follow different religions cannot belong to the same social community.


If the followers of different religion have some commonalities these are superficial and immaterial. Their interests are bound to be different and involve a conflict. In its extreme form communalism leads to the belief that people belonging to


http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 36
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


different religions cannot live as equal citizens within one nation. Either, one of them has to dominate the rest or they have to form different nations.

Reference: Page No. 47 (Democratic Politics Part 2)



77.   Solution (c)


The Constitution of India ensures equality of citizens within religious communities
(as provided under Fundamental Rights –Articles 25 to 28).


There is one respect in which democratic government is certainly better than its alternatives: democratic government is legitimate government. It may be slow, less efficient, not always very responsive or clean. But a democratic government is people’s own government. That is why there is an overwhelming  support for the idea of democracy all over the world.


The preamble is not an integral part of the Indian constitution was first decided by the Supreme Court of India in Beru Bari case therefore it is not enforceable in a court of law. However, Supreme Court of India has, in the Kesavananda case, recognised that the preamble may be used to interpret ambiguous areas of the constitution where differing interpretations present themselves. In the 1995 case of Union Government Vs LIC of India also the Supreme Court has once again held that Preamble is the integral part of the Constitution.


Democracy stands much superior to any other form of government in promoting dignity and freedom of the individual. Every individual wants toreceive respect from fellow beings. Often conflicts arise among individuals  because some feel that they are not treated with due respect. The passion for respect and freedom  are the basis of democracy.

Reference: Page No. 92, 97 (Democratic Politics Part 2)



78.  Solution (c)


Pressure groups are organisations that attempt to influence government policies. But unlike political parties, pressure groups do not aim to directly control or share political power. These organisations are formed when people with common occupation, interest, aspirations or opinions come together in order to achieve  a common objective. Their decision-making is more informal and flexible.


http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 37
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS




Usually interest groups seek to promote the interests of a particular  section or group of society. Trade unions, business associations  and professional (lawyers, doctors, teachers, etc.) bodies are some examples of this type. They are sectional because they represent a section of society: workers, employees, business persons, industrialists, followers of a religion, caste group, etc. Their principal concern is the betterment  and well being of their members, not society in general.


On balance, however, pressure groups and movements  have deepened democracy. Putting pressure on the rulers is not an unhealthy activity in a democracy as long as everyone gets this opportunity.


While interest groups and movements  do not directly engage in party politics, they seek to exert influence on political parties. Most of the movement groups take a political stance without being  a party. They have political ideology and political position on major issues. The relationship between political parties and pressure groups can take different forms, some direct and others very indirect.

Reference: Page No. 63, 64,67, 68 (Democratic Politics Part 2)




79. Solution: b

Chap-15, Pages  262, NCERT Class 10 Science

80.Solution: d



Chap-16, Page 266, 267 (Besides, acids have low pH value. Potable water has moderate pH value between 6.5-7.5. Also, no natural water source can be metal free. Metals like Iron, magnesium etc. are actually useful to the human body.)




81.  Solution: b

Chap-16, Pages  270, NCERT Class 10 Science




82. Solution: a

http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 38
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


Chap-16, Pages  273, NCERT Class 10 Science




83. Solution: d)

http://eands.dacnet.nic.in/PDF_LUS/Concepts_&_Definitions.pdf




84. Solution: d)

Page 8 and 10, Class X NCERT Geography.



85.  Solution (d)


The multi-party system often appears very messy and leads to political instability. At the same time, this system allows a variety of interests and opinions to enjoy political representation and thereby deepens democracy. Multi-party system creates a natural system of checks and balance, which helps to check the emergence of dictatorial tendencies (which may happen in single or a two-party  system). Since there is no real control or limited control of number of parties in India, no single party is able to get a majority  and leads to hung parliament (where no party wins the majority seats and thus cannot form a government).

Reference:Chapter 6 (Democratic Politics Part 2)



86. Solution (a)


The Answer is either the ‘First statement and Fourth Statement together’ (or) Second statement alone, but since the answer option does not have 2 Only, option (a) is correct.


Conditions for recognition as a National party:


A political party shall be treated as a recognised National party, if, and only if, either (A)(i) the candidates set up by it, in any four or more States, at the last general election to the House of the People, or to the Legislative Assembly of the State concerned,  have secured not less than six percent of the total valid votes
polled in their respective States at that general election; and (ii) in addition, it has


http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 39
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


returned at least four members to the House of the People at the aforesaid last general election from any State or States; or (B) (i) its candidates have been elected to the House of the People,  at the last general election to that House, from at least two percent of the total number of parliamentary constituencies in India, any
fraction exceeding one half being counted as one; and (ii) the said candidates have been elected to that House from not less than three State
Reference: Election commission website



87. Solution (c)


The Constitution was amended to prevent elected MLAs  and MPs from changing parties. This was done because many elected representatives were indulging in Defection in order to become ministers or for cash rewards. Now the law says that if any MLA or MP changes parties, he or she will lose the seat in the legislature.
This new law has helped bring defection down. At the same time this has made any dissent even more difficult. MPs and MLAs  have to accept whatever the party leaders decide.
The Supreme Court passed an order to reduce the influence of money and
criminals. Now, it is mandatory for every candidate who contests elections to file an
Affidavit giving details of his property  and criminal cases pending against him.
The new system has made a lot of information available to the public. But there is no system of check if the information given by the candidates is true.
The Election Commission passed an order making it necessary for political parties to hold their organizational elections and file their income tax returns.
The parties have started doing so but sometimes it is mere formality.
When Political parties are brought  under the ambit of Right to Information Act, there is transparency and is a measure of good governance.

Reference:Page No. 85, 86 (Democratic Politics Part 2)







88. Solution: b)

Sustainable development ties together concern for the carrying capacity of natural systemswith the social and economic challenges faced by humanity. As early as the
1970s, 'sustainability' was employed to describe an economy "in equilibrium with basic ecological support systems."[1]  Scientists in many fields have highlighted The


http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 40
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


Limits to Growth,[2]  and economists have presented alternatives, for example a
'steady state economy',[3]  to address concerns over the impacts of expanding human development on the planet.

The term 'sustainable development' rose to significance after it was used by
the Brundtland Commission in its 1987 report Our Common Future. In the report, the commission coined what has become the most often-quoted definition of sustainable development: "development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs."
The carrying capacity of a biological species in an environment is the maximum population size of the species that the environment can sustain indefinitely, given the food, habitat, water and other necessities available in the environment.
In population biology, carrying capacity is defined as the environment's maximal load,[1] which is different from the concept of population equilibrium.

The United Nations  2005 World Summit Outcome Document refers to the "interdependent  and mutually reinforcing pillars" of sustainable development as economic development, social development,  and environmental
protection.[10] Based on this 'triple bottom line', numerous sustainability standards
and certification systems have been established in recent years, in particular in the food industry.




89.  Solution: b



Chap-14, Pages  246, NCERT Class 10 Science




90. Solution: a

Chap-14, Pages  250, NCERT Class 10 Science






91. Solution: d




http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 41
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


Chap-15, Pages  259, NCERT Class 10 Science






92. Solution: a



Chap-15, Pages  260-61, NCERT Class 10 Science




93.  Solution (c)


A political party shall be treated as a recognised political party in a State,  if and only if either the conditions satisfy:
a)  A political party should secure at least six percent of the total valid votes
polled during general election to a State Legislative Assembly and should, in addition, win at least two seats in that Assembly, or the party should win at least three percent of the total number of seats or three seats in the Legislative Assembly, whichever is more;
(Or)
b) A political party should secure at least six percent of the total valid votes polled in a State during  a general election to Lok Sabha and win at least one seat in the Lok Sabha from that State, or the party should win at least one seat in the Lok Sabha for every 25 seats or any fraction  thereof allotted to that State(or, at least one member to the Legislative Assembly of that State for every 30 members of that Assembly or any fraction of that number)

Reference : Election Commission website




94. Solution (d)


Every party in the country has to register with the Election Commission. While the Commission treats all parties equally, it offers some special facilities to large and established parties. These parties  are given a unique  symbol – only the official candidates of that party can use that election symbol. Parties that get this privilege and some other special facilities are ‘recognised’ by the Election Commission for
this purpose. That is why these parties are called, ‘recognised political parties’. The


http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 42
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


Election Commission has laid down detailed criteria of the proportion of votes and seats that a party  must get in order to be a recognised party.


All political parties must register themselves with the EC. However, not all parties that are registered with the EC are 'recognised'  by it preference in the matter of allotment of free symbols. Further, registered political parties, in course of time, can get recognition  as `State Party’ or National Party’ subject to the fulfillment of the conditions prescribed by the Commission in the Election Symbols (Reservation and Allotment) Order, 1968, as amended from time to time.


Recognised  `State’ and `National’ parties need only one proposer for filing the nomination  and are also entitled for two sets of electoral rolls free of cost and broadcast/telecast facilities over Akashvani/Doordarshan during general elections.

Reference: Page No. 79, Election Commission website (Democratic Politics Part 2)





95. Solution: d,



Page no. 244, Chapter 14, NCERT 10th Science



96.Solution: a)



Page no 244-245, Chapter 14, NCERT 10th Science



97.  Solution. (c)


The members of the Constituent Assembly were notelected on the basis of universal franchise. In thewinter of 1945-46 provincial elections were held inIndia. The Provincial Legislatures then chose the representatives to the Constituent Assembly. The Constituent Assembly that came into being was dominated by one party: the Congress.The Congress however was not a party  with one voice. Its members differed in their opinion on critical issues. Some members were inspired by socialism while others were defenders of landlordism. Some were close to communal parties while others were assertively secular.



http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 43
INSIGHTS MOCK EXAM-3  SOLUTIONS


Reference: Page 407-408 HISTORY-III 11th NCERT




98. Solution: c


99. Solution. (a)

India had a very rich and old tradition of handwritten manuscripts –
in Sanskrit, Arabic, Persian, as well as in various vernacular languages. Manuscripts continued to be produced till well after the introduction of print, down to the late nineteenth century. Manuscripts, however, were highly expensive and fragile. They had to be handled carefully,  and they could not be read easily as the script was written in different styles.  So manuscripts were not widely used in everyday life.



100.    Solution. (d)


Painters like Raja Ravi Varma produced images for mass circulation. Poor wood engravers who made woodblocks set up shop near the letterpresses, and were employed by print shops. Cheap prints and calendars, easily available in the bazaar, could be bought even by the poor to decorate the walls of their homes or places of work. These prints began shaping popular ideas about modernity  and tradition, religion and politics, and society and culture.


Reference: Page 171 India and the Contemporary World – II 10th NCERT
























http://insightsonindia.com                                INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 44
