INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


1.    Solution: d)

The buffer stocks are required to (i) feed TPDS and other welfare schemes,  (ii) ensure food security during the periods when production is short of normal demand during bad agricultural years and (iii) stabilize prices during period of production shortfall through open market sales.

The total annual stock of food grains in the Central Pool is distributed over different quarters of the year depending upon offtake and procurement  patterns. The seasonality of production and procurement  is thus a decisive factor in determining the minimum norm of food grains stocks required in a particular quarter of the year. For working out buffer stocking norms and making recommendations for policy decisions, the Government has been setting up from time to time Technical Groups under the Chairmanship of Union Food Secretary.





2.   Solution: d)

All are correct.

In case of India we have unemployment in rural and urban areas. However, the nature of the unemployed differs in rural and urban areas. In case of rural areas, there is seasonal and disguised unemployment. Urban areas have mostly educated unemployment.

Seasonal unemployment happens when people  are not able to find jobs during
some months of the year. People dependant upon agriculture usually face such kind of problem. There are certain busy seasons when sowing, harvesting, weeding, threshing is done. Certain months do not provide much work to the people dependant on agriculture.

In case of disguised unemployment people appear to be employed. They have agricultural plot where they find work. This usually happens among family members  engaged in agricultural activity.

The work requires the service of five people but engages eight people. Three
people  are extra. These three people also work in the same plot as five people. The contribution made by the three extra people does not add to the contribution made

http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                    Page 1
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


by the five people. If three people are removed the productivity of the field will
not decline. The field requires the service of five people and the three extra people are disguisedly employed.

In case of urban areas educated unemployment has become  a common phenomenon. Many youth with matriculation, graduation and post graduation degrees are not able to find job. A study showed that unemployment  of graduate and post-graduate has increased faster than among matriculates. A paradoxical manpower situation is witnessed as surplus of manpower in certain categories coexist with shortage of manpower in others.

There is unemployment  among technically qualified person on one hand, while there is a dearth  of technical skills required for economic growth. Unemployment leads to wastage of manpower resource. People who are an asset for the economy turn into a liability.

There is a feeling  of hopelessness and despair among the youth. People do not have enough money to support their family. Inability of educated people who are willing to work to find gainful employment implies a great  social waste. Unemployment tends to increase economic overload. The dependence of the unemployed on the working population increases. The quality of life of an individual as well as of society is adversely affected. When a family has to live on a bare  subsistence level there is a general  decline in its health status and rising withdrawal from the school system.

Hence, unemployment has detrimental impact on the overall growth of an economy. Increase in unemployment is an indicator of a depressed economy. It also wastes the resource, which could have been gainfully employed. If people cannot
be used as a resource they naturally appear as a liability to the economy.

http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/business/india-business/Unemployment- levels-rising-in-India-experts-say/articleshow/29403619.cms




3.   Solution:  b)


The National Food for Work Programme(External website that opens in a new window) was launched in November,  2004 in 150 most backward districts of the


http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                    Page 2
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


country, identified by the Planning Commission in consultation with the Ministry of Rural Development  and the State governments.

The objective of the programme was to provide additional resources apart from the resources available under the Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY)(File referring to external site opens in a new window)  to 150 most backward districts
of the country so that generation of supplementary wage employment  and providing of food-security through creation of need based economic, social and community assets in these districts are further intensified. The scheme was 100 per cent centrally sponsored. The programme has since been subsumed in National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (External website that opens in a new
window) which has come in force in 200 identified districts of the country including 150 NFFWP districts. The Act provides 100 days of work guarantee to every rural household whose members volunteer to do unskilled manual work.

4.   Solution: c)

Social exclusion

According to this concept, poverty must be seen in terms of the poor having to live only in a poor surrounding with other poor people, excluded from enjoying social equality of better-off people in better surroundings. Social exclusion can be both a cause as well as a consequence of poverty in the usual sense. Broadly, it is a process through which individuals or groups are excluded from facilities, benefits and opportunities that others (their “betters”) enjoy. A typical example is the working
of the caste system in India in which people belonging to certain castes are
excluded from equal opportunities. Social exclusion thus may lead to, but can cause more damage than, having a very low income.

Vulnerability

Vulnerability to poverty is a measure,  which describes the greater probability of certain communities (say, members of a backward  caste)  or individuals (such as a widow or a physically handicapped person) of becoming, or remaining, poor in the coming years. Vulnerability is determined by the options available to different communities for finding an alternative living in terms of assets, education, health and job opportunities. Further, it is analysed on the basis of the greater risks these groups face at the time of natural disasters (earthquakes, tsunami), terrorism etc. Additional analysis is made of their social and economic ability to handle these
risks. In fact, vulnerability describes the greater probability of being more adversely

http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                    Page 3
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


affected than other people when bad time comes for everybody, whether a flood or an earthquake or simply a fall in the availability of jobs!




5.   Solution: d)

http://dfpd.nic.in/?q=node/101




6.   Solution: d)




Jet stream: These are a narrow  belt of high altitude (above 12,000 m) westerly winds in the troposphere. Their speed varies from about 110 km/h in summer to about 184 km/h in winter. A number of separate jet streams have been identified. The most constant are the mid-latitude  and the sub tropical jet stream.

The pressure and wind conditions over India are unique. During winter, there is a high-pressure area north of the Himalayas. Cold dry winds blow from this region to the low-pressure areas over the oceans to the south. In summer, a low-pressure area develops over interior Asia as well as over northwestern India. This causes a complete reversal of the direction of winds during summer. Air moves from the high-pressure area over the southern Indian Ocean, in a south-easterly direction, crosses the equator, and turns right towards the low-pressure areas over the Indian subcontinent. These are known as the Southwest Monsoon winds. These winds blow over the warm oceans, gather moisture and bring widespread rainfall over the mainland of India.

The upper air circulation in this region is dominated by a westerly flow. An important component of this flow is the jet stream. These jet streams are located approximately over 27°-30° north latitude, therefore, they are known as subtropical westerly jet streams.

Over India, these jet streams blow south of the Himalayas, all through the year except in summer. The western cyclonic disturbances experienced in the north and north-western parts of the country are brought  in by this westerly flow. In summer,
the subtropical westerly jet stream moves north of the Himalayas with the


http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                    Page 4
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


apparent movement of the sun. An easterly jet stream, called the tropical easterly jet stream blows over peninsular India, approximately over 14°N during the summer months.




7.  Solution: d)

Assam and most of the Peninsular states have moderate population densities. Hilly, dissected and rocky nature of the terrain, moderate to low rainfall, shallow and less fertile soils have influenced population densities in these areas.

The Northern Plains and Kerala in the south have high to very high population densities because of the flat plains with fertile soils and abundant rainfall. Identify the three states of the Northern Plains with high population densities.

http://censusindia.gov.in/2011-prov- results/data_files/india/Final_PPT_2011chapter7.pdf




8.  Solution: a)

Tropical Deciduous Forests

These are the most widespread forests of India. They are also called the monsoon forests and spread over the region receiving rainfall between 200 cm and 70 cm. Trees of this forest-type shed their leaves for about six to eight weeks in dry summer.

On the basis of the availability of water, these forests are further divided into moist and dry deciduous. The former is found in areas receiving rainfall between 200 and
100 cm. These forests exist, therefore, mostly in the eastern part of the country –
northeastern states, along the foothills of the Himalayas, Jharkhand, West Orissa
and Chhattisgarh, and on the eastern slopes of the Western Ghats. Teak is the most dominant species of this forest. Bamboos, sal, shisham, sandalwood, khair, kusum, arjun, mulberry are other commercially important species.

The dry deciduous forests are found in areas having rainfall between 100 cm and 70 cm. These forests are found in the rainier parts of the peninsular plateau and the plains of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh. There are open stretches in which Teak, Sal,

http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                    Page 5
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


Peepal, Neem grow. A large part of this region has been cleared for cultivation and some parts are used for grazing.

In these forests, the common animals found are lion, tiger, pig, deer and elephant. A
huge variety of birds, lizards, snakes, and tortoises are also found here.




9.  Solution: a)

It is a broad trough  of LOW pressure in equatorial latitudes. This is where the northeast and the southeast trade winds converge. This convergence zone lies more or less parallel to the equator but moves north or south with the apparent movement of the sun.



10. Solution: b)

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biosphere_reserves_of_India







11.  Solution: a)

Broadly, independent India faced three kinds of challenges. The first  and the immediate challenge was to shape a nation  that was united, yet accommodative of the diversity in our society. India was a land of continental size and diversity. Its people spoke different languages  and followed different cultures and religions. At that time it was widely believed that a country full of such kinds of diversity could not remain together for long. The partition of the country appeared to prove everyone’s worst fears. There were serious questions about the future of India: Would India survive as a unified country? Would it do so by emphasising national unity at the cost of every other objective? Would it mean rejecting all regional and sub-national identities? And  there was an urgent question:  How was integration of the territory of  India to be achieved?

The second challenge was to establish democracy. You know that the Constitution granted fundamental rights and extended the right to vote to every citizen. India adopted representative democracy based on the parliamentary form of

http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                    Page 6
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


government. These features ensure that  the political competition would take place in a democratic framework. A democratic constitution is necessary but not sufficient for  establishing a democracy.  The challenge was to develop democratic practices in accordance with the Constitution.

The third challenge was to ensure the development  and well-being of the entire society and not only of some sections. Here again the Constitution clearly laid down the principle of equality and special protection to socially disadvantaged groups
and religious and cultural communities. The Constitution also set out in the Directive  Principles of State Policy the welfare goals that democratic politics  must achieve. The real challenge now was to evolve effective policies  for economic development  and eradication of poverty.




12. Solution: c) Whips
In the parliamentary form of Government, a  party has its own internal organisation inside  Parliament and is served by a number  of officials  known as the Whips, chosen from members of  the party itself. The main function of the Whips is  to keep members of their party within sound of  the Division Bell whenever any important business is under consideration in the House.

During sessions, the Whips of different parties send to their supporters periodic notices, also sometimes called 'Whips', apprising them when important Divisions are expected, telling them the hour when a vote will probably take place, and requesting them to be in attendance at  that time. Realizing the vital role played by the Chief Whips  and leaders of parties and groups in Parliament  as important
party functionaries, an Act namely the Leaders and Chief Whips of Recognized Parties and Groups in Parliament (Facilities) Act  {Act 5 of 1999) was passed during the Twelfth  Lok Sabha. The Act inter alia provides additional Secretarial
assistance and telephone facilities  to the Leaders and Chief Whips.

Government Chief Whip: The Chief Whip of  the Government  Party in the Lok Sabha is the Minister of Parliamentary Affairs. In the Rajya Sabha, the Minister of State for  Parliamentary Affairs holds this position. The  Chief Whip is directly
responsible to the Leader of the House. It is part of his duties to advise the

http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                    Page 7
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


Government on parliamentary  business and to maintain  a close liaison with  the Ministers in regard to parliamentary business  affecting their Departments. The Chief Whip is  assisted by one or two Ministers of State and at  times by Deputy Ministers also.



For extra information: http://archive.indianexpress.com/news/the-whip- hand/589000/0




13. Solution: b) Dravidian movement
‘Vadakku Vaazhkirathu; Therkku Thaeikirathu’ [The north thrives even as the south decays]. This popular slogan sums up the dominant sentiments of one of India’s most effective regional movements, the Dravidian movement, at one point of time. This was one of the first  regional movements in Indian politics. Though some sections of this movement  had ambitions  of creating  a Dravid nation, the movement did not take to arms. It used democratic means like public debates and the electoral platform to achieve its ends. This strategy paid off as the movement acquired political power in  the State and also became influential at the national level.

The Dravidian movement led to the formation of  Dravida Kazhagam [DK] under the leadership of Tamil social reformer E.V. Ramasami  ‘Periyar’. The organisation strongly opposed the Brahmins’ dominance and affirmed regional pride against the political, economic and cultural domination of the North. Initially,  the Dravidian movement spoke in terms of  the whole of south India; however lack of support from other States limited the movement to Tamil Nadu.




14. Solution: b)




Internally, there is a dispute about the status of Kashmir within the Indian  union. Article 370 gives greater autonomy to Jammu and Kashmir compared to other


http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                    Page 8
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


States of India. The State has its  own Constitution. All provisions of the Indian Constitution are not applicable to the State. Laws passed by the Parliament apply to J&K only if the State agrees.

This special status has provoked two  opposite reactions. There is a section  of people outside of J&K that believes that the special status of the State  conferred by Article 370 does not allow full integration of the State with India.  This section feels that Article 370 should therefore be revoked and J&K should be like any other State in India.



Another section, mostly Kashmiris,  believe that the autonomy conferred by Article 370 is not enough. A section of  Kashmiris have expressed at least three major grievances. First, the promise that  Accession would be referred to the people of the State after the situation created  by tribal invasion was normalised, has not been fulfilled. This has generated  the demand for a ‘Plebiscite’. Secondly,
there is a feeling  that the special federal status guaranteed by Article 370, has been
eroded in practice. This has led to the demand for restoration of autonomy or
‘Greater State Autonomy’. Thirdly, it  is felt that democracy which is practiced in the rest of India has not been similarly  institutionalised in the State of Jammu  and Kashmir.




15. Solution: c)

In the North-East, regional aspirations reached a turning  point in  1980s. This region now consists of seven States, also referred to as the ‘seven sisters’. The region has only 4 per cent of the country’s population but about twice as much share of its area. A small corridor  of about  22 kilometers connects the region to the rest of the country. Otherwise the region shares boundaries with China, Myanmar and Bangladesh and serves as India’s gateway to South East Asia.

The region has witnessed a lot of change since 1947. Tripura,  Manipur and Khasi Hills of Meghalaya were erstwhile Princely States  which merged with India after Independence. The entire region of  North-East has undergone considerable political reorganisation.  Nagaland State was created in 1960; Meghalaya, Manipur
and Tripura  in 1972 while Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram became separate


http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                    Page 9
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


States only in 1986. The Partition of India in 1947 had reduced the North-East to a land locked region and affected its economy. Cut off  from the rest of India, the region suffered neglect in developmental  terms. Its politics too remained insulated. At the same time, most States in this region underwent major demographic changes due to influx of migrants from neighbouring States and countries.

The isolation of the region, its complex social character and its backwardness compared to other parts of the country have all resulted in the complicated set of demands from different states of the North-East. The vast international border and weak communication between the North-East  and the rest of India have further added to the delicate nature of politics  there. Three issues dominate the politics of North-East: demands for autonomy, movements for  secession, and opposition to ‘outsiders’. Major initiatives on the first issue in the 1970s set the stage  for some dramatic developments on the second and the third in the 1980s.




16. Solution: a)

Goa’s liberation

Although the British empire in India came to an end in 1947, Portugal refused to withdraw from the territories of Goa, Diu and Daman which were under its colonial rule since the sixteenth  century. During their long rule, the Portuguese suppressed the people of Goa, denied them civil rights, and carried out forced religious conversions. After India’s Independence, the Indian  government tried very patiently to persuade the Portuguese government to withdraw. There  was also a strong popular movement within Goa for freedom. They were strengthened by socialist satyagrahis from Maharashtra. Finally, in December 1961, the Government of India  sent the army which liberated these territories after barely two days of action. Goa, Diu and Daman became Union Territory.

Another complication arose soon. Led by the Maharashtrawadi Gomanatak Party (MGP)  one section desired that Goa, as a Marathi speaking area should merge with Maharashtra.  However, many Goans were keen to retain  a separate Goan identity and culture, particularly the Konkani language. They were led by the United Goan Party (UGP). In January 1967, the Central Government held a special ‘opinion poll’
in Goa asking people to decide if they wanted to be part of Maharashtra or remain


http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 10
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


separate. This was the only time in independent India  that  a referendum-like procedure was used to ascertain people’s wishes on a subject. The  majority voted in favour of remaining outside of Maharashtra. Thus, Goa continued as a Union Territory. Finally, in 1987, Goa became  a State of the Indian Union.



17. Solution: d)

Phase I : The period from 1901-1921 is referred to as a period of stagnant or stationary phase of growth of India’s population, since in this period growth rate was very low, even recording a negative growth  rate during 1911-1921. Both the birth rate and death rate were high keeping the rate of increase low. Poor health and medical services, illiteracy of people  at large and inefficient distribution system of food and other basic necessities were largely responsible for a high birth and death rates in this period.

Phase II : The decades 1921-1951 are referred  to as the period of steady population growth. An overall improvement in health and sanitation throughout the country brought down the mortality rate. At the same time better transport and communication system improved distribution system. The crude birth rate remained high in this period leading to higher growth rate than the previous phase.
This is impressive at the backdrop of Great Economic Depression, 1920s and World
War II.

Phase III : The decades 1951-1981 are referred  to as the period of population explosion in India, which was caused by a rapid  fall in the mortality rate but a high fertility rate of population in the country. The average annual growth  rate was as high as 2.2 per cent. It is in this period, after the Independence, that developmental activities were introduced through a centralised planning process and economy started showing up ensuring the improvement of living condition of people  at large. Consequently, there was a high natural increase and higher growth rate. Besides, increased international migration bringing in Tibetans, Bangladeshis, Nepalies and even people from Pakistan contributed to the high growth rate.

Phase IV : In the post 1981 till present, the growth rate of country’s population
though remained high, has started slowing down gradually (Table 1.1). A downward trend of crude birth rate is held responsible for such a population growth. This was,



http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 11
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


in turn, affected by an increase  in the mean age at marriage,  improved quality of life particularly education of females in the country.

The growth rate of population is, however, still high in the country, and it has been projected by World Development Report that population of India will touch 1,350 million by 2025.




18. Solution: c)

Refer page no. 10, India – People and Economy, 12th NCERT




19. Solution: d)

Data from Indian Remote Sensing satellites are used for various applications of resources survey and management under the National Natural Resources Management System (NNRMS).  Following is the list of those applications:

Preharvest crop area and production estimation of major crops. Drought monitoring and assessment based on vegetation condition. Flood risk zone mapping and flood damage assessment.
Hydro-geomorphological  maps for locating underground water resources for drilling well.
Irrigation command  area status monitoring
Snow-melt run-off estimates for planning water use in down stream projects
Land use and land cover mapping
Urban planning Forest survey Wetland mapping
Environmental impact analysis
Mineral Prospecting
Coastal studies
Integrated Mission for Sustainable Development (initiated in 1992) for generating locale-specific prescriptions for integrated land and water resources development in 174 districts.







http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 12
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


20. Solution: c)

Mumbai is a natural harbour  and the biggest port of the country. The port is situated closer to the general routes from the countries of Middle East, Mediterranean countries, North Africa, North America and Europe where the major share of country’s overseas trade is carried out. The port is 20 km long and 6-
10 km wide with 54 berths and has the country’s largest oil terminal. M.P., Maharashtra, Gujarat, U.P. and parts of Rajasthan constitute the main hinterlands of Mumbai ports.
Mumbai Port, earlier known as Bombay Port, lies midway (Latitude 18° 56.3' N, Longitude 72° 45.9' E) on the West coast of India, on the natural deep- waterharbour of Mumbai. The harbour spread over 400 square kilometres
(150 sq mi) is protected by the mainland of Konkan to its east and north and by the island city of Mumbai to its west.The harbour opens to the south to the Arabian Sea.
The port is administered by the Mumbai Port Trust (MbPT), an autonomous corporation wholly owned by the Government of India. The port is primarily used for bulk cargo, while most container traffic is directed to Nhava Sheva port across the harbour.




21. Solution: c)

Total dissolved solids (TDS) is the term used to describe the inorganic salts and small amounts of organic matter present in solution in water. The principal constituents are usually calcium, magnesium, sodium, and potassium  cations and carbonate, hydrogencarbonate, chloride, sulfate, and nitrate anions.

The method of determining TDS in water supplies most commonly used is the measurement of specific conductivity with a conductivity probe that detects the presence of ions in water. Conductivity measurements are converted into TDS values by means of a factor  that varies with the type of water (2,3). The practical quantitation limit for TDS in water by this method is 10 mg/litre (M. Forbes, personal communication, 1988). High TDS concentrations can also be measured gravimetrically, although volatile organic compounds are lost by this method (4). The constituents of TDS can also be measured individually.

Primary sources for TDS in receiving waters are agricultural and residential  runoff, leaching of soil contamination and point source water pollution discharge from industrial or sewage treatment plants.


http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 13
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS





22. Solution: d)

http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/undp-brackets-india-with-equatorial- guinea-in-human-development-index/article4510390.ece




23. Solution: d)

All are correct.




24. Solution: d)

India has undergone major changes within the economy over the past four or five decades, and this has influenced the land-use changes in the country. These changes between 1960- 61 and 2002-03. .

Three categories have undergone increases, while four have registered declines. Share of area under forest, area under non- agricultural uses and current fallow lands have shown an increase. The following observations can be made about these increases:

(i) The rate of increase is the highest in case of area under non-agricultural uses. This is due to the changing structure of Indian economy, which is increasingly depending on the contribution from industrial and services sectors and expansion of related infrastructural facilities. Also, an expansion of area under both urban and rural settlements has added to the increase. Thus, the area under non-agricultural uses is increasing  at the expense of wastelands and agricultural land.

(ii) The increase in the share under forest, as explained before, can be accounted for by increase in the demarcated area under forest rather than an actual increase in the forest cover in the country.

(iii) The increase in the current fallow cannot be explained from information pertaining to only two points. The trend of current fallow fluctuates a great  deal over years, depending on the variability of rainfall and cropping cycles.





http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 14
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


The four categories that have registered a decline are barren and wasteland, culturable wasteland, area under pastures and tree crops and net area sown.

The following explanations can be given for the declining trends:

(i) As the pressure on land increased, both from the agricultural and non- agricultural sectors, the wastelands and culturable wastelands have witnessed decline over time.

(ii) The decline in net area sown is a recent phenomenon that started in the late nineties, before which it was registering a slow increase. There are indications that most of the decline has occurred due to the increases in area under non- agricultural use. (Note : the expansion of building activity on agricultural land in your village
and city).

(iii) The decline in land under pastures and grazing lands can be explained by pressure from agricultural land. Illegal encroachment due to expansion of cultivation on common pasture lands is largely responsible for this decline.






25. Solution: d)



Coffee is a tropical plantation crop. Its seeds are roasted, ground and are used for preparing  a beverage. There are three varieties of coffee i.e. arabica, robusta and liberica. India mostly grows superior quality coffee, arabica, which is in great demand in International market. But India produces only about 4.3 percent coffee of the world and ranks sixth after Brazil, Vietnam, Colombia, Indonesia and Mexico. Coffee is cultivated in the highlands of Western Ghats in Karnataka,
Kerala and Tamil Nadu. Karnataka alone accounts for more than two- third of total
production of coffee in the country.




Meanwhile, coffee had been introduced to Brazil in 1727, although its cultivation did not gather momentum until independence in 1822. After this time, massive tracts of rainforest were cleared first from the vicinity of Rio and later São Paulo for coffee plantations.Cultivation was taken up by many countries in Central America in the latter half of the 19th century, and almost all involved the large-scale


http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 15
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


displacement  and exploitation of the indigenous people. Harsh conditions led to many uprisings, coups and bloody suppression of peasants. The notable exception was Costa Rica, where lack of ready labor prevented the formation of large farms. Smaller farms and more egalitarian conditions ameliorated unrest over the 19th and
20th centuries.

Coffee has become  a vital cash crop for many developing countries. Over one hundred million people in developing countries have become dependent on coffee as their primary source of income. It has become the primary export and backbone for African countries like Uganda, Burundi,  Rwanda, and Ethiopia, as well as many Central American countries.



26. Solution: b)

Mahatma Gandhi returned to India in January 1915. As you know, he had come from South Africa where he had successfully fought the racist regime with a novel method of mass agitation, which he called satyagraha. The idea of satyagraha emphasised the power of truth and the need to search for truth. It suggested that if the cause was true, if the struggle was against injustice, then physical force was not necessary to fight the oppressor. Without seeking vengeance or being aggressive, a satyagrahi could win the battle through non- violence. This could be done by appealing to the conscience of the oppressor. People – including the oppressors – had to be persuaded to see the truth, instead of being forced to accept truth through the use of violence. By this struggle, truth was bound to ultimately triumph. Mahatma Gandhi believed that this dharma of non-violence could unite all Indians.

After arriving in India, Mahatma Gandhi successfully organized satyagraha movements in various places. In 1916  he travelled to Champaran in Bihar to inspire the peasants to struggle against the oppressive plantation system. Then in 1917, he organised  a satyagraha to support the peasants of the Kheda district of Gujarat. Affected by crop failure and a plague  epidemic, the peasants of Kheda could not pay the revenue, and were demanding that revenue collection be relaxed. In 1918, Mahatma Gandhi went to Ahmedabad to organize  a satyagraha movement amongst cotton mill workers.

Mahatma Gandhi on Satyagraha





http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 16
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


‘It is said of “passive resistance” that it is the weapon of the weak, but the power which is the subject of this article can be used only by the strong. This power is not passive resistance; indeed it calls for intense activity. The movement in South
Africa was not passive but active …

‘ Satyagraha is not physical force. A satyagrahi does not inflict pain on the adversary; he does not seek his destruction … In the use of satyagraha, there is no ill-will whatever.

‘ Satyagraha is pure soul-force. Truth is the very substance of the soul. That is why this force is called satyagraha. The soul is informed with knowledge. In it burns the flame of love. … Non- violence is the supreme dharma …

‘It is certain that India cannot rival Britain or Europe in force of arms. The British worship the war-god and they can all of them become, as they are becoming, bearers of arms. The hundreds of millions in India can never carry arms. They have made the religion of non-violence their own ...’




27. Solution: c)

The Rowlatt Act passed by the Imperial Legislative Council in London on 10 March
1919, indefinitely extending "emergency measures" (of the Defence of India Regulations Act) enacted during the First World War in order to control public unrest and root out conspiracy, in India. Passed on the recommendations of
the Rowlatt Committee, named after its president, British judge Sir Sidney Rowlatt, this act effectively authorized the government to imprison for up to two years, without trial, any person suspected of terrorism living in the Raj and gave the imperial authorities power to deal with revolutionary activities. The unpopular legislation provided for stricter control of the press, arrests without warrant,
indefinite detention without trial, and juryless in camera trials for proscribed political acts. The accused was denied the right to know the accusers and the evidence used in the trial.[1] Those convicted were required to deposit securities upon release and were prohibited from taking part in any political, educational, or religious activities.[1]

Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, among other Indian leaders, was extremely critical of the Act and argued that not everyone should get punishment  in response to isolated political crimes. The Act annoyed many Indian leaders and the public, which caused the government to implement repressive measures. Gandhi and


http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 17
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


others found that constitutional opposition to the measure was fruitless, so on April
6, a "hartal"  was organised where Indians would suspend all business and fast as a sign of their opposition. This event is known as theRowlatt satyagraha. Gandhiji named rowlatt act as "black act".

However, the success of the hartal in Delhi, on 30 March, was overshadowed by tensions running high, which resulted in rioting in thePunjab and other provinces. Deciding that Indians were not ready to make a stand consistent with the principle of ahimsa (non-violence),  an integral part of satyagraha, Gandhi suspended the resistance.

The Rowlatt Act came into effect in March 1919. In the Punjab the protest movement was very strong, and on 10 April, two leaders of the congress, Dr. Satya Pal and Dr. Saifuddin Kitchlew, were arrested and taken to an unknown place.

Army was called in Punjab and on 13 April people from neighbouring villages gathered for Baisakhi Day celebrations in Amritsar, which led to the
infamous Jallianwala Bagh massacre of 1919.[2][3]

Accepting the report of the Repressive Laws Committee, the Government of
India repealed the Rowlatt Act, the Press Act and twenty-two  other laws in March
1922



Among the significant causes of Non-Cooperation movement were colonial oppression, exemplified by the Rowlatt Act and Jallianwala Bagh massacre, economic hardships to the common man due to a large  chunk of Indian wealth being exported to Britain, ruin of Indian artisans due to British factory-made goods replacing handmade goods, and popular resentment  with the British over Indian soldiers dying in World War I while fighting as part of the British Army, in battles that otherwise had nothing to do with India.




28. Solution: d)

New seed varieties of wheat (Mexico) and rice (Philippines) known as high yielding varieties (HYVs) were available for cultivation by mid-1960s. India took advantage of this and introduced  package technology comprising HYVs, along with chemical fertilizers in irrigated areas of Punjab, Haryana, Western Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat. Assured supply of soil moisture through irrigation was
a basic pre-requisite for the success of this new agricultural technology. This


http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 18
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


strategy of agricultural development paid dividends instantly and increased the foodgrains production at very fast rate. This spurt of agricultural growth came to be known as ‘Green Revolution’. This also gave fillip to the development of a large number of agro-inputs, agro-processing industries and small-scale industries. This strategy of agricultural development  made the country self-reliant in foodgrain production. But green revolution was initially confined to irrigated areas only. This led to regional disparities in agricultural development in the country till the seventies, after which the technology spread to the Eastern  and Central parts of the country.

The Planning Commission of India focused its attention on the problems of agriculture in rainfed areas in 1980s. It initiated agro-climatic planning in 1 988 to induce regionally balanced agricultural development in the country. It also emphasized the need for diversification of agriculture and harnessing of resources for development of dairy farming, poultry, horticulture, livestock rearing and aquaculture.

Initiation of the policy of liberalisation and free market economy in 1990s is likely to influence the course of development of Indian agriculture. Lack of development of rural infrastructure, withdrawal of subsidies and price support, and impediments in availing of the rural credits may lead to inter-regional and inter-personal disparities in rural areas.




29. Solution: b)

From the cities, the Non-Cooperation Movement spread to the countryside. It drew into its fold the struggles of peasants and tribals which were developing in different parts of India in the years after the war.

In Awadh, peasants were led by Baba Ramchandra – a sanyasi who had earlier been to Fiji as an indentured labourer. The movement here was against talukdars and landlords who demanded from peasants exorbitantly high rents and a variety  of other cesses. Peasants had to do begar and work at landlords’ farms without any payment.

As tenants they had no security of tenure, being regularly evicted so that they could acquire no right over the leased land. The peasant movement demanded reduction

http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 19
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


of revenue, abolition of begar, and social boycott of oppressive landlords. In many places nai – dhobi bandhs were organised by panchayats to deprive landlords of the services of even barbers and washermen. In June 1920, Jawaharlal Nehru began going around the villages in Awadh, talking to the villagers, and trying to
understand their grievances. By October, the Oudh Kisan Sabha was set up headed by Jawaharlal Nehru, Baba Ramchandra  and a few others. Within a month, over
300 branches had been set up in the villages around the region. So when the Non- Cooperation Movement began the following year, the effort of the Congress was to integrate the Awadh peasant struggle into the wider struggle. The peasant movement, however, developed in forms that the Congress leadership was unhappy with. As the movement spread in 1921, the houses of talukdars and merchants were attacked, bazaars were looted, and grain hoards were taken over. In many places local leaders told peasants that Gandhiji had declared that no taxes were to be paid and land was to be redistributed  among the poor. The name of the Mahatma was being invoked to sanction all action and aspirations.




30. Solution: a)

Workers too had their own understanding of Mahatma Gandhi and the notion of swaraj. For plantation workers in Assam, freedom meant the right to move freely in and out of the confined space in which they were enclosed, and it meant retaining  a link with the village from which they had come. Under the Inland Emigration Act of 1859, plantation workers were not permitted to leave the tea gardens without permission, and in fact they were rarely given such permission. When they heard of the Non-Cooperation Movement, thousands of workers defied the authorities, left the plantations and headed home. They believed that Gandhi Raj was coming and everyone would be given land in their own villages.

They, however, never reached their destination. Stranded on the way by a railway and steamer strike, they were caught by the police and brutally beaten up.












http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 20
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


31. Solution: a)

Harvesting of a crop is an important  task. The cutting of crop after it is mature is called harvesting. In harvesting, crops are pulled out or cut close to the ground. It usually takes 3 to 4 months for a cereal  crop to mature.

Harvesting in our country is either done manually by sickle or by a machine  called harvester. In the harvested crop, the grain seeds need to be separated from the
chaff. This process is called threshing. This is carried out with the help of a machine called ‘combine’ which is in fact  a combined  harvester and thresher Farmers with small holdings of land do the separation of grain and chaff by winnowing




32. Solution: b)

Indian peasantry had been exploited for a long time as there had been unequal distribution of land. Among the three revenue systems operational during British period i.e. Mahalwari, Ryotwari and Zamindari, the last one was most exploitative for the peasants

mahalwari system, one of the three main revenue systems of land tenure in British India, the other two being the zamindar (landlord) and the ryotwari (individual cultivator). The wordmahalwari is derived from the Hindi mahal, meaning  a house or, by extension, a district.
For revenue purposes the name was applied to any compact  area containing  one or more villages, which were called “estates.” The revenue settlement was made with the estate—hence the term mahalwari—and there were distinct types
of assessment. If a zamindar  held the whole estate, the settlement was with him;
otherwise, payment was exacted from individual cultivators.



33. Solution: b)

Rust of wheat is caused by a Fungi

Citrus canker is caused by Bacteria









http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 21
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


34. Solution: c)

Mahatma Gandhi found in salt a powerful symbol that could unite the nation. On
31 January 1930, he sent a letter to Viceroy Irwin stating eleven demands. Some of these were of general interest; others were specific demands of different classes, from industrialists to peasants. The idea was to make the demands wide-ranging, so that all classes within Indian society could identify with them and everyone could be brought together in a united  campaign.  The most stirring of all was the demand to abolish the salt tax. Salt was something consumed by the rich and the poor alike, and it was one of the most essential items of food. The tax on salt and the
government monopoly over its production, Mahatma Gandhi declared, revealed the most oppressive face of British rule.

Mahatma Gandhi’s letter was, in a way, an ultimatum.  If the demands were not fulfilled by 11 March, the letter stated, the Congress would launch  a civil disobedience  campaign. Irwin was unwilling to negotiate. So Mahatma Gandhi started his famous salt march accompanied by 78 of his trusted volunteers. The march was over 240 miles, from Gandhiji’s ashram in Sabarmati to the Gujarati coastal town of Dandi. The volunteers walked for 24 days, about 10 miles a day. Thousands came to hear Mahatma Gandhi wherever he stopped, and he told them what he meant by swaraj and urged them to peacefully defy the British. On 6 April he reached Dandi, and ceremonially  violated the law, manufacturing salt by boiling sea water.




35. Solution: d)

Acrylic fibers are synthetic fibers made from a polymer (polyacrylonitrile) with an average molecular weight of ~100,000, about 1900 monomer units. To be called acrylic in the U.S, the polymer must contain at least 85% acrylonitrile monomer. Typical comonomers arevinyl acetate or methyl acrylate. DuPont created the first
acrylic fibers in 1941 and trademarked them under the name Orlon. Acrylic is also
called acrilan fabric. As it resembles silk, it is also called artificial silk.









http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 22
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


36. Solution: a)

It was launched by NDA government in 20013. The Central and State Governments have initiated many watershed development  and management programmes in the country. Some of these are being implemented  by non- governmental organisations also. Haryali is a watershed development project sponsored by the Central Government which aims at enabling  the rural population to conserve water for drinking, irrigation, fisheries and afforestation. The Project is being executed by Gram Panchayats with people’s participation. Neeru-Meeru (Water and You) programme (in Andhra Pradesh) and Arvary Pani Sansad (in Alwar, Rajasthan) have taken up constructions of various water-harvesting structures such as percolation tanks, dug out ponds (Johad), check dams, etc. through people’s participation. Tamil Nadu has made water harvesting structures in the houses compulsory. No building can be constructed without making structures for water harvesting.

Watershed development projects in some areas have been successful in rejuvenating environment and economy. However, there are only a few success stories. In majority of cases, the programme is still in its nascent stage. There is a need to generate awareness regarding benefits of watershed development and management among people in the country, and through this integrated water resource management approach water availability can be ensured on sustainable basis.




37. Solution: b)

An electroscope is an early scientific instrument that is used to detect the presence and magnitude of electric charge on a body.  It was the first electrical measuring instrument. The first electroscope, a pivoted  needle called the versorium, was invented by British physicianWilliam Gilbert around 1600. The pith-ball electroscope and the gold-leaf electroscopeare two classical types of electroscope that are still used in physics education to demonstrate the principles
of electrostatics. A type of electroscope is also used in thequartz fiber radiation dosimeter. Electroscopes were used by the Austrian scientist Victor Hess in the discovery of cosmic rays.

Electroscopes detect electric charge by the motion of a test object due to
the Coulomb electrostatic force. The electric potential orvoltage of an object equals


http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 23
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


its charge divided by its capacitance, so electroscopes can be regarded as crude voltmeters. The accumulation of enough charge to detect with an electroscope requires hundreds or thousands of volts, so electroscopes are only used with high voltage sources such as static electricity and electrostatic machines. Electroscopes generally give only a rough, qualitative indication of the magnitude of the charge; an instrument that measures charge quantitatively is called
an electrometer.



38.  Solution: c)

Many nationalists thought that the struggle against the British could not be won through non-violence. In 1928, the Hindustan Socialist Republican Army (HSRA) was founded  at a meeting  in Ferozeshah Kotla ground in Delhi. Amongst its leaders were Bhagat Singh, Jatin Das and Ajoy Ghosh. In a series of dramatic actions in different parts of India, the HSRA targeted some of the symbols of British power.

In April 1929, Bhagat Singh and Batukeswar Dutta threw a bomb  in the Legislative Assembly. In the same year there was an attempt to blow up the train that Lord Irwin was travelling in. Bhagat Singh was 23 when he was tried and executed by the colonial government. During his trial, Bhagat Singh stated that he did not wish to glorify ‘the cult of the bomb and pistol’ but wanted  a revolution in society:
‘Revolution is the inalienable right of mankind. Freedom is the imprescriptible
birthright of all. The labourer is the real sustainer of society … To the altar of this revolution we have brought our youth as incense, for no sacrifice is too great for so magnificent a cause. We are content. We await the advent of revolution. Inquilab Zindabad!




39. Solution: a)

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alluri_Sita_Rama_Raju




40. Solution: c)

India is endowed with fairly abundant resources of iron ore. It has the largest reserve of iron ore in Asia. The two main types of ore found in our country are


http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 24
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


haematite and magnetite. It has great demand in international market due to its superior quality. The iron ore mines occur in close proximity to the coal fields in the north-eastern plateau region of the country which adds to their advantage.

The total reserves of iron ore in the country were about 20 billion tonnes in the
year 2004- 05. About 95 per cent of total reserves of iron ore is located in the States of Orissa, Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Karnataka, Goa, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu. In Orissa, iron ore occurs in a series of hill ranges in Sundergarh, Mayurbhanj and Jhar. The important mines are Gurumahisani, Sulaipet, Badampahar (Mayurbhaj), Kiruburu (Kendujhar)  and Bonai (Sundergarh). Similar hill ranges, Jharkhand has some of the oldest iron ore mines and most of the iron and steel plants are located around them. Most of the important mines such as Noamundi
and Gua are located in Poorbi and Pashchimi Singhbhum districts. This belt further extends to Durg, Dantewara and Bailadila. Dalli, and Rajhara in Durg are the important mines of iron ore in the country. In Karnataka, iron ore deposits occur in Sandur-Hospet area of Bellary district, Baba Budan hills and Kudremukh  in Chikmagalur district and parts of Shimoga, Chitradurg and Tumkur districts. The districts of Chandrapur, Bhandara and Ratnagiri in Maharashtra, Karimnagar, Warangal, Kurnool, Cuddapah and Anantapur districts of Andhra Pradesh, Salem and Nilgiris districts of Tamil Nadu are other iron mining regions. Goa has also emerged as an important producer of iron ore.




41. Solution: a)

Bioenergy is renewable  energy made available from materials derived from biological sources. Biomass is any organic material which has stored sunlight in the form of chemical energy. As a fuel it may include wood, wood
waste, straw, manure, sugarcane, and many other byproducts from a variety of
agricultural processes. By 2010, there was 35 GW (47,000,000 hp) of globally installed bioenergy capacity for electricity generation, of which 7 GW (9,400,000 hp) was in theUnited States.[1]

In its most narrow sense it is a synonym to biofuel, which is fuel derived from biological sources. In its broader sense it includes biomass, the biological material used as a biofuel, as well as the social, economic, scientific and technical fields associated with using biological sources for energy. This is a common misconception, as bioenergy is the energy extracted from the biomass, as the biomass is the fuel and the bioenergy is the energy contained in the fuel

http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 25
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS




42. Solution: c)

Dr B.R. Ambedkar, who organised the dalits into the Depressed Classes Association in 1930, clashed with Mahatma Gandhi at the second Round Table Conference by demanding separate electorates for dalits. When the British government conceded Ambedkar’s demand, Gandhiji began  a fast unto death. He believed that separate electorates for dalits would slow down the process of their integration into society. Ambedkar ultimately accepted Gandhiji’s position and the result was the Poona Pact of September 1932. It gave the Depressed Classes (later to be known as the Schedule Castes) reserved seats in provincial and central legislative councils, but they were to be voted in by the general electorate. The dalit movement, however, continued to be apprehensive of the Congress- led national movement. Some of the Muslim political organisations in India were also lukewarm in their response to the Civil Disobedience Movement.

After the decline of the Non-Cooperation-Khilafat movement, a large  section of Muslims felt alienated from the Congress. From the mid-1920s the Congress came to be more visibly associated with openly Hindu religious nationalist groups like the Hindu Mahasabha. As relations between Hindus and Muslims worsened, each
community organised religious processions with militant fervour, provoking Hindu- Muslim communal clashes and riots in various cities. Every riot deepened the distance between the two communities.




43. Solution: c)

In 1930, Sir Muhammad Iqbal, as president of the Muslim League, reiterated the importance of separate electorates for the Muslims as an important  safeguard for their minority political interests. His statement is supposed to have provided the intellectual justification for the Pakistan demand that came up in subsequent years. This is what he said:

‘I have no hesitation in declaring that if the principle that the Indian Muslim is entitled to full and free development on the lines of his own culture and tradition in his own Indian home-lands is recognised as the basis of a permanent  communal
settlement, he will be ready to stake his all for the freedom of India. The principle


http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 26
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


that each group is entitled to free development on its own lines is not inspired by any feeling of narrow communalism … A community which is inspired by feelings of ill-will towards other communities is low and ignoble.

I entertain the highest respect for the customs, laws, religions and social institutions of other communities. Nay, it is my duty according to the teachings of the Quran, even to defend their places of worship, if need be. Yet I love the communal group which is the source of life and behaviour and which has formed me what I am by giving me its religion, its literature, its thought, its culture and thereby its whole past as a living operative factor in my present consciousness …

‘Communalism in its higher aspect, then, is indispensable to the formation of a harmonious whole in a country like India. The units of Indian society are not territorial as in European countries … The principle of European democracy cannot be applied to India without recognising the fact of communal groups. The Muslim demand for the creation of a Muslim India within India is, therefore, perfectly justified…

‘The Hindu thinks that separate electorates are contrary to the spirit of true nationalism, because he understands the word “nation” to mean  a kind of universal amalgamation in which no communal entity ought to retain its private
individuality. Such a state of things, however, does not exist. India is a land of racial
and religious variety. Add to this the general economic inferiority of the Muslims, their enormous debt, especially in the Punjab, and their insufficient majorities in some of the provinces, as at present constituted and you will begin to see clearly the meaning of our anxiety to retain separate electorates.’




44. Solution: c)

The example of indentured labour migration from India also illustrates the two- sided nature of the nineteenth-century world. It was a world of faster economic growth as well as great misery, higher incomes for some and poverty for others, technological advances in some areas and new forms of coercion in others.

In the nineteenth century, hundreds of thousands of Indian and Chinese labourers went to work on plantations, in mines, and in road and railway construction projects around the world. In India, indentured labourers were hired under

http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 27
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


contracts which promised return travel to India after they had worked five years on their employer’s plantation.

Most Indian indentured workers came from the present-day regions of eastern Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, central India and the dry districts of Tamil Nadu. In the mid- nineteenth century these regions experienced many changes – cottage industries declined, land rents rose, lands were cleared for mines and plantations. All this affected the lives of the poor: they failed to pay their rents, became deeply indebted and were forced to migrate in search of work.

The main destinations of Indian indentured migrants were the Caribbean islands
(mainly Trinidad, Guyana and Surinam),  Mauritius and Fiji.

Closer home, Tamil migrants went to Ceylon and Malaya. Indentured workers were also recruited for tea plantations  in Assam.

Recruitment was done by agents engaged by employers and paid a small commission. Many migrants agreed to take up work hoping to escape poverty or oppression in their home villages.

Agents also tempted the prospective migrants by providing false information about final destinations, modes of travel, the nature of the work, and living and working conditions. Often migrants were not even told that they were to embark on a long sea voyage. Sometimes agents even forcibly abducted less willing migrants.

Nineteenth-century  indenture has been described as a ‘new system of slavery’. On arrival at the plantations, labourers found conditions to be different from what they had imagined. Living and working conditions were harsh, and there were few legal rights.

But workers discovered their own ways of surviving. Many of them escaped into the wilds, though if caught they faced severe punishment. Others developed new forms of individual  and collective self- expression, blending different cultural forms, old and new. In Trinidad the annual Muharram procession was transformed into a riotous carnival called ‘Hosay’ (for Imam Hussain) in which workers of all races and religions joined. Similarly, the protest religion of Rastafarianism (made famous by
the Jamaican reggae star Bob Marley) is also said to reflect social and cultural links
with Indian migrants to the Caribbean. ‘Chutney music’, popular in Trinidad and
Guyana, is another creative contemporary expression of the post-indenture

http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 28
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


experience. These forms of cultural fusion are part of the making of the global world, where things from different places get mixed, lose their original characteristics and become something entirely new.




45. Solution: b)


Advantage of Intercropping:


Intercropping gives additional yield income/unit area than sole cropping.
2. It acts as an insurance  against failure of crops in abnormal year.
3. Inter-crops maintain the soil fertility as the nutrient uptake is made from both layers of soil.
4. Reduction in soil runoff and controls weeds.
5. Intercrops provide shade and support to the other crop.
6. Inter cropping system utilizes resources efficiently and their productivity is increased (Reddy and Redid, 1992).
7. Intercropping with cash crops is higher profitable.
8. It helps to avoid inter-crop competition and thus a higher number of crop plants are grown  per unit area.

Disadvantages of intercropping:


Yield decreases as the crops differ in their competitive abilities.
2. Management  of I/c having different cultural practices seems to be difficult task.
3. Improved implements cannot be used efficiently.
4. Higher amount of fertilizer or irrigation water cannot be utilized properly as the component crops vary in their response of these resources.
5. Harvesting is difficult.




46. Solution: c)

CITES (the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, also known as the Washington Convention) is a multilateral treaty to protect endangered plants and animals. It was drafted as a result of a resolution adopted in 1963 at a meeting  of members of the International Union for
Conservation of Nature (IUCN). The convention was opened for signature in 1973,


http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 29
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


and CITES entered into force on 1 July 1975. Its aim is to ensure that international trade in specimens of wild animals and plants does not threaten the survival of the species in the wild, and it accords varying degrees of protection to more than
35,000 species of animals and plants. In order to ensure that theGeneral Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) was not violated, the Secretariat of GATT was consulted during the drafting process

CITES is one of the largest and oldest conservation  and sustainable use agreements in existence. Participation is voluntary,  and countries that have agreed to be bound by the Convention are known as Parties. Although CITES is legally binding on the Parties, it does not take the place of national laws. Rather it provides a framework respected by each Party, which must adopt their own domestic legislation to implement CITES at the national level. Often, domestic legislation is either non- existent (especially in Parties that have not ratified it), or with penalties with the
gravity of the crime and insufficient deterrents to wildlife traders.[2]  As of 2002, 50%
of Parties lacked one or more of the four major requirements for a Party:
designation of Management and Scientific Authorities; laws prohibiting the trade in violation of CITES; penalties for such trade; laws providing for the confiscation of specimens




47. Solution: d)

Soil erosion and depletion  are the major threats to soil  as a resource. Both human and natural factors can lead to degradation of soils. Factors which lead to soil degradation are deforestation,  overgrazing, overuse of  chemical feritilisers or pesticides, rain wash, landslides and floods.

Some methods of soil conservation are

Mulching: The bare ground between plants is covered with a layer  of organic matter like straw. It helps to retain soil moisture.

Contour barriers: Stones, grass, soil are used to build barriers along contours. Trenches are made in front of  the barriers to collect water.

Rock dam: Rocks are piled up to slow down the flow of  water. This prevents gullies and further soil loss.


http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 30
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


Terrace farming: These are made on the steep slopes so that flat surfaces are available to grow crops. They can reduce surface run-off and soil  erosion.

Intercropping: Different crops are grown  in alternate  rows and are sown at different times to protect the soil from rain wash.

Contour ploughing: Ploughing parallel to the contours of a hill slope to form a natural barrier for water to flow down the slope.

Shelter belts: In the coastal and dry regions, rows  of trees are planted to check the wind movement to protect soil cover.




48. Solution: a)

Why Earthing ?
Earthing is the process of creating an alternative path for the flow of fault/excessive currents safely into the ground in the presence of minimal
resistance or impedance.


The primary purpose of earthing is to reduce the risk of serious electric shock from current leaking into uninsulated metal parts of an appliance, power tool, or other electrical devices. In a properly earthed system, such leaking/fault current is carried away harmlessly while tripping the fuse. Earthing also provides protection from large electrical disturbances like lightning strikes and power surges. It also aids in
the dissipation of hazardous static electrical charges.


Although most electrical systems have fuses or circuit breakers for protection against a fault current, the human body may be fatally electrocuted by a current of less than one ampere which is well below the point at which a fuse or breaker will
operate. Earthing helps minimize such hazards from occurring.

The Earthing System


Safe Earthing Electrode
It is a metal electrode which goes into the ground near the building. It helps in the efficient discharge of all the fault currents/ surge currents present in the electrical
system. It also helps in dissipating the high voltages which are passed on through


http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 31
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


the lightning arrestors atop buildings.


Back Fill Compounds
These are earth enhancement compounds  which have different properties depending on soil and other atmospheric conditions. Essentially, an ideal BFC has high electrical conductivity, moisture capture and retention abilities and anti corrosive properties. It works in tandem with the Safe Earthing Electrode. Together
both form the efficient earthing system.


Lightning Arrester
It is a metallic device mounted  at the highest point of the building to capture lightning strikes and direct it to the earth via a safe path thereby preventing it from flowing through the building's electrcial circuit. In the absence of the lightning arrester a lightning strike could destroy electrical equipment and cause harm to human life through electrocutions.




49. Solution: a)

Historically, fine cottons produced in India were exported to Europe. With industrialisation, British cotton manufacture  began to expand, and industrialists pressurised the government to restrict cotton imports and protect local industries. Tariffs were imposed on cloth imports into Britain. Consequently, the inflow of fine Indian cotton began to decline.

From the early nineteenth century, British manufacturers also began to seek
overseas markets for their cloth. Excluded from the British market by tariff barriers, Indian textiles now faced stiff competition in other international markets. If we
look at the figures of exports from India, we see a steady decline of the share of cotton textiles: from some 30 per cent around 1800 to 15 per cent by 1815. By the
1870s this proportion had dropped to below 3 per cent.

What, then, did India export? The figures again tell a dramatic story. While exports of manufactures declined rapidly, export of raw materials increased equally fast. Between 1812 and 1871, the share of raw cotton exports rose from 5 per cent to 35 per cent. Indigo used for dyeing cloth was another important export for many
decades. And, as you have read last year, opium shipments to China grew rapidly


http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 32
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


from the 1820s to become for a while India’s single largest export. Britain grew opium in India and exported it to China and, with the money earned through this sale, it financed its tea and other imports from China.

Over the nineteenth century, British manufactures flooded the Indian market. Food grain and raw material exports from India to Britain and the rest of the world increased. But the value of British exports to India was much higher than the value of British imports from India. Thus Britain  had a ‘trade surplus’ with India. Britain used this surplus to balance its trade deficits with other countries – that is, with countries from which Britain was importing more than it was selling to. This is how a multilateral settlement system works – it allows one country’s deficit with
another country to be settled by its surplus with a third country. By helping Britain
balance its deficits, India played  a crucial role in the late-nineteenth-century world economy.

Britain’s trade surplus in India also helped pay the so-called ‘home charges’ that included private remittances home by British officials and traders, interest payments on India’s external debt, and pensions of British officials in India.




50. Solution: a)

http://www.indianetzone.com/50/indian_women_warli_movement.htm




51. Solution: d)

In 1849, Governor-General Dalhousie  announced that after the death of Bahadur Shah Zafar, the family of the king would be shifted out of the Red Fort and given another place in Delhi to reside in.

In 1856, Governor-General Canning decided that Bahadur Shah Zafar would be the last Mughal king and after his death none of his descendants would be recognized as
kings – they would just be called princes.








http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 33
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


52. Solution: d)

Refer pages 2 to 5 – Indian constitution at work, class 11th  NCERT




53. Solution: a)

Fundamental identity of a people

Finally, and perhaps even most importantly, a constitution expresses the fundamental identity of a people.

This means the people as a collective entity come into being only through the basic constitution. It is by agreeing to a basic set of norms about how one should be governed, and who should be governed that one forms a collective identity. One
has many sets of identities that exist prior to a constitution. But by agreeing to certain basic norms and principles one constitutes one’s basic political identity. Second, constitutional norms are the overarching framework within which one pursues individual aspirations, goals and freedoms.  The constitution sets authoritative constraints upon what one may or may not do. It defines the fundamental values that we may not trespass. So the constitution also gives one a moral identity. Third and finally, it may be the case that many basic political and moral values are now shared across different constitutional traditions.

If one looks at constitutions around the world, they differ in many respects — in the form of government they enjoin in many procedural details. But they also share a good  deal. Most modern constitutions create  a form of government that is democratic in some respects, most claim to protect certain basic rights.

But constitutions are different in the way they embody conceptions of natural identity. Most nations are an amalgamation of a complex set of historical traditions; they weave together the diverse groups that reside within the nation in different ways. For example, German identity was constituted by being ethnically G
German. The constitution gave expression to this identity.

The Indian Constitution, on the other hand, does not make ethnic identity a criterion for citizenship. Different nations embody different conceptions of what
the relationship between the different regions of a nation  and the central



http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 34
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


government should be. This relationship constitutes the national identity of a country.




54. Solution: b)

People’s participation has a long history in India. In 1731, the king of Jodhpur in Rajasthan asked one of his ministers to arrange wood for constructing a new palace. The minister and workers went to a forest near  a village, inhabited by Bishnois, to cut down trees. The Bishnoi community is known for its peaceful co-existence
with nature. The effort to cut down trees by the kings was thwarted by the Bishnois. A Bishnoi woman Amrita Devi showed exemplary courage by hugging  a tree and daring king’s men to cut her first before cutting the tree. The tree mattered much more to her than her own life. Sadly, the king’s men did not heed to her
pleas, and cut down the tree along with Amrita Devi. Her three daughters and
hundreds of other Bishnois followed her, and thus lost their lives saving trees. Nowhere in history do we find a commitment of this magnitude when human beings sacrificed their lives for the cause of the environment.

The Government of India has recently instituted the Amrita Devi Bishnoi Wildlife Protection Award for individuals or communities from rural areas that have shown extraordinary courage and dedication in protecting wildlife.




55. Solution: d)

http://agritech.tnau.ac.in/forestry/forest_jfm_index.html




http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joint_Forest_Management




56. Solution: c)

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slash_and_burn#Ecological_implications





http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 35
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


57. Solution: c)

Mode of promulgation

This refers to how a constitution comes into being. Who crafted the constitution and how much authority did they have? In many countries constitutions remain defunct because they are crafted by military leaders or leaders who are not popular and do not have the ability to carry the people with them. The most successful constitutions, like India, South Africa and the United States, are constitutions which were created in the aftermath of popular national movements. Although India’s

Constitution was formally created by a Constituent Assembly between December
1946 and November  1949, it drew upon a long history of the nationalist movement that had a remarkable  ability to take along different sections of Indian society together. The Constitution drew enormous legitimacy from the fact that it was drawn up by people who enjoyed immense public credibility, who had the capacity to negotiate and command the respect of a wide cross-section of society, and who were able to convince the people that the constitution was not an instrument for the aggrandisement of their personal power. The final document reflected the
broad national consensus at the time. Some countries have subjected their constitution to a full-fledged referendum, where all the people vote on the desirability of a constitution. The Indian Constitution was never subject to such a referendum, but nevertheless carried enormous public authority, because it had the consensus and backing of leaders who were themselves popular. Although the

Constitution itself was not subjected to a referendum, the people adopted it as their own by abiding by its provisions. Therefore, the authority of people who enact the constitution helps determine in part its prospects for success.




58. Solution: c)

Almost like a living being, this document keeps responding to the situations and circumstances arising from time to time. Like a living being, the Constitution responds to experience. In fact that is the answer to the riddle we mentioned  at the beginning about the durability of the Constitution. Even after so many changes in
the society, the Constitution continues to work effectively because of this ability to

http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 36
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


be dynamic, to be open to interpretations  and the ability to respond to the changing situation. This is a hallmark  of a democratic constitution. In a democracy, practices and ideas keep evolving over time and the society engages in experiments according to these. A constitution, which protects democracy  and yet allows for evolution of new practices becomes not only durable but also the object of respect from the citizens.

Indian constitution, as of now seems to be indestructible because of the strong democracy  and presence of checks and balances.




59. Solution: a)

In the late eighteenth century, Calcutta, Bombay and Madras rose in importance as Presidency cities. They became the centres of British power in the different regions of India. At the same time, a host of smaller cities declined. Many towns manufacturing specialized goods declined due to a drop in the demand for what they produced. Old trading centres and ports could not survive when the flow of trade moved to new centres. Similarly, earlier centres of regional power collapsed when local rulers were defeated by the British and new centres of administration emerged. This process is often described as de-urbanisation. Cities such as

Machlipatnam,  Surat and Seringapatam were de urbanised during the nineteenth century. By the early twentieth century, only 11 per cent of Indians were living in cities.




60. Solution: b)

Collective Farming

The basic principal behind this types of farming is based on social ownership of the means of production and collective labour. Collective farming or the model of Kolkhoz was introduced in erstwhile Soviet Union to improve upon the
inefficiency of the previous methods of agriculture and to boost agricultural
production for self-sufficiency.





http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 37
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


The farmers pool in all their resources like land, livestock and labour. However, they are allowed to retain very small plots to grow crops in order to meet their daily requirements.

Yearly targets are set by the government  and the produce is also sold to the state at fixed prices. Produce in excess of the fixed amount is distributed  among the members or sold in the market. The farmers have to pay taxes on the farm produces, hired machinery etc. Members are paid according to the nature of the work allotted to them by the farm management. Exceptional work is rewarded in cash or kind. This type of farming was introduced in former Soviet Union under
the socialist regime which was adopted by the socialist countries. After its collapse, these have already been modified.




61. Solution: c)

Waterlogging  and soil salinity: Irrigation without proper drainage of water leads to waterlogging in the soil. Besides affecting the crops, waterlogging draws salt to the surface of the soil. The salt then is deposited as a thin crust on the land surface or starts collecting at the roots of the plants. This increased salt content is inimical to the growth of crops and is extremely damaging to agriculture. Waterlogging and soil salinity are some of the problems that have come in the wake of the Green Revolution




62. Solution: d)

Commercial grain cultivation is practised in the interior parts of semi-arid lands of the mid- latitudes. Wheat is the principal crop, though other crops like corn, barley, oats and rye are also grown. The size of the farm is very large, therefore
entire operations of cultivation from ploughing to harvesting are mechanized. There
is low yield per acre but high yield per person.










http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 38
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


63. Solution: a)

Viticulture (from the Latin word for vine) is the science, production, and study of grapes. It deals with the series of events that occur in the vineyard. When the grapes are used forwinemaking, it is also known as viniculture. It is a branch  of the
science of horticulture.

While the native territory of Vitis vinifera, the common grape vine, ranges from Western Europe to the Persian shores of the Caspian Sea, the vine has demonstrated high levels ofadaptability  and will sometimes mutate to accommodate a new environment after its introduction. For this reason, viticulture can be found on every continent except Antarctica.

Vineyards in India range from the more temperate climate of the northwestern state ofPunjab down to the southern state of Tamil Nadu. Some of India's larger wine producing areas are located in Maharashtra, Karnataka
near Bangalore and Andhra  Pradesh nearHyderabad. Within the Maharashtra region, vineyards are found on the Deccan Plateauand around
Baramati, Nashik, Pune, Sangli and Solapur. The high heat and humidity of the far eastern half of the country limits viticultural activity.



64. Solution: a)

The thickness of the ozone in a column of air from the ground to the top of the atmosphere is measured in terms of Dobson units (DU).




65. Solution: c)

http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v344/n6266/abs/344529a0.html




66. Solution: b)

Truck  farming, horticultural practice of growing one or more vegetable crops on a large scale for shipment to distant markets. It is usually less intensive and diversified
than market gardening. At first this type of farming depended entirely on local or
regional markets. As the use of railroads and large-capacity trucks expanded and refrigerated carriers were introduced, truck farms spread to the cheaper lands of the West and South, shipping seasonal crops to relatively distant markets where their


http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 39
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


cultivation is limited by climate. The major truck-farming  areas are in California, Texas, Florida, along the Atlantic Coastal Plain, and in the Great Lakes area. Centers for specific crops vary with the season. Among the most important truck crops are tomatoes, lettuce, melons, beets, broccoli, celery, radishes, onions, cabbage, and strawberries.




67. Solution: b)

Eutrophication is the natural aging of a lake by biological enrichment of its water.
In a young  lake the water is cold and clear, supporting little life. With time, streams draining into the lake introduce nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorus, which encourage the growth of aquatic organisms. As the lake’s fertility increases, plant
and animal life burgeons, and organic remains begin to be deposited on the lake bottom. Over the centuries, as silt and organic debris pile up, the lake grows shallower and warmer, with warm-water organisms supplanting those that thrive in a cold environment. Marsh plants take root in the shallows and begin to fill in the original lake basin. Eventually, the lake gives way to large masses of floating plants (bog), finally converting into land. Depending on climate, size of the lake and other factors, the natural aging of a lake may span thousands of years. However,
pollutants from man’s activities like effluents from the industries and homes can
radically accelerate the aging process. This phenomenon has been called Cultural or Accelerated Eutrophication. During the past century, lakes in many parts of the earth have been severely eutrophied by sewage and agricultural and industrial wastes. The prime contaminants are nitrates and phosphates,  which act as plant nutrients. They overstimulate the growth of algae, causing unsightly scum and unpleasant odors, and robbing the water of dissolved oxygen vital to other aquatic life. At the same time, other pollutants flowing into a lake may poison whole populations of fish, whose decomposing remains further deplete the water’s dissolved oxygen content. In such fashion, a lake can literally choke to death.

Heated (thermal) wastewaters flowing out of electricity-generating units, e.g., thermal power plants, constitute another important category of pollutants. Thermal wastewater eliminates or reduces the number of organisms sensitive to high temperature,  and may enhance the growth of plants and fish in extremely cold
areas but, only after causing damage to the indigenous flora and fauna.



http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 40
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


Negative environmental effects include hypoxia, the depletion of oxygen in the water, which causes a reduction in specific fish and other animals. Other species (such as Nomura's jellyfish in Japanese waters) may experience an increase  in population that negatively affects otherspecies.




68. Solution: a)

In the last fifty five years some very critical situations arose in the politics and constitutional development of the country. We have made a brief reference to some of these in this chapter already. In terms of constitutional-legal issues, the most serious question that came up again and again from 1950 was about the supremacy of the Parliament. In a parliamentary democracy, the

Parliament represents the people and therefore, it is expected to have an upper hand over both Executive and Judiciary. At the same time, there is the text of the Constitution and it has given powers to other organs of the government. Therefore, the supremacy of the

Parliament has to operate within this framework. Democracy is not only about votes and people’s representation. It is also about the principle of rule of law.

Democracy is also about developing institutions and working through these institutions. All the political institutions must be responsible to the people and maintain  a balance  with each other.

Contribution of the Judiciary

During the controversy between the Judiciary and the Parliament, the Parliament thought that it had the power and responsibility to make laws (and amendments) for furthering the interests of the poor, backward and the needy. The Judiciary insisted that all this has to take place within the framework provided by the Constitution and pro-people measures should not bypass legal procedures, because, once you bypass laws even with good intentions, that can give an excuse to the power holders to use their power arbitrarily. And democracy is as much about checks on arbitrary use of power as it is about the well-being of the people.

The success of the working of the Indian Constitution lies in resolving these tensions. The Judiciary, in its famous Kesavananda ruling found a way  out of the

http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 41
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


existing complications by turning to the spirit of the Constitution rather than its letter. If you read the Constitution, you will not find any mention of the ‘basic structure’ of the Constitution. Nowhere does the Constitution say that such and such are part of the basic structure. In this sense, the ‘basic structure’ theory is the invention of the Judiciary. How did it invent such a non- existent thing? And how is it that all other institutions have accepted this during the past three decades?

Therein lies the distinction between letter and spirit. The Court came to the conclusion that in reading  a text or document, we must respect the intent behind that document. A mere text of the law is less important than the social circumstances and aspirations that have produced  that law or document. The Court was looking at the basic structure as something without which the Constitution cannot be imagined  at all. This is an instance of trying to balance the letter and the spirit of the Constitution.




69.Solution: a)

The Sikhs

The organisation of the Sikhs into a political community during the seventeenth century helped in regional state-building in the Punjab. Several battles were fought by Guru Gobind Singh against the Rajput  and Mughal  rulers, both before and after the institution of the Khalsa in 1699. After his death in 1708, the Khalsa rose in revolt against the Mughal authority under Banda Bahadur’s leadership, declared
their sovereign rule by striking coins in the name of Guru Nanak and Guru Gobind
Singh, and established  their own administration between the Sutlej and the Jamuna. Banda Bahadur was captured in 1715 and executed in 1716.

Under a number  of able leaders in the eighteenth century, the Sikhs organized themselves into a number  of bands called jathas, and later on misls. Their combined forces were known as the grand army (dal khalsa). The entire body used to meet at Amritsar at the time of Baisakhi and Diwali to take collective decisions known as “resolutions of the Guru (gurmatas)”. A system called rakhi was introduced, offering protection to cultivators on the payment of a tax of 20 per cent of the produce.

Guru Gobind Singh had inspired the Khalsa with the belief that their destiny was to rule (raj karega khalsa). Their well-knit organization enabled them to put up a

http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 42
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


successful resistance to the Mughal governors first and then to Ahmad Shah Abdali who had seized the rich province of the Punjab and the Sarkar of Sirhind from the Mughals. The Khalsa declared their sovereign rule by striking their own coin again in 1765. Significantly, this coin bore the same inscription as the one on the orders issued by the Khalsa in the time of Banda Bahadur.

The Sikh territories in the late eighteenth century extended from the Indus to the Jamuna but they were divided under different rulers. One of them, Maharaja Ranjit Singh, reunited these groups and established his capital at Lahore in 1799.




70. Solution: a)

A few toxic substances, often present in industrial waste waters, can undergo biological magnification (Biomagnification) in the aquatic food chain. Biomagnification refers to increase in concentration of the toxicant at successive trophic levels. This happens because a toxic substance accumulated by an organism cannot be metabolised or excreted, and is thus passed on to the next higher trophic level. This phenomenon is well-known for mercury and DDT. In this manner, the concentration of DDT is increased  at successive trophic levels; say if it starts at
0.003 ppb (ppb = parts per billion) in water, it can ultimately  can reach 25 ppm (ppm = parts per million) in fish-eating birds, through biomagnification. High concentrations of DDT disturb calcium metabolism in birds, which causes thinning of eggshell and their premature breaking, eventually causing decline in bird populations.

Fish and shellfish concentrate mercury in their bodies, often in the form of methylmercury, a highly toxic organic compound of mercury. Fish products have been shown to contain varying amounts of heavy metals, particularlymercury  and fat-soluble pollutants from water pollution. Species of fish that arelong-lived and high on the food chain, such as marlin, tuna, shark, swordfish,king
mackerel, tilefish (Gulf of Mexico), and northern pike contain higher
concentrations of mercury than others.









http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 43
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


71. Solution: d)



CFL contain mercury and is an health hazard. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compact_fluorescent_lamp#Energy_efficiency




72. Solution: c)

Agricultural technologies While the prevalence of agriculture is indicated by finds of grain, it is more difficult to reconstruct actual agricultural practices. Were seeds broadcast (scattered) on ploughed lands?

Representations on seals and terracotta sculpture indicate that the bull was known, and archaeologists  extrapolate from this that oxen were used for ploughing. Moreover, terracotta models of the plough have been found at sites in

Cholistan and at Banawali (Haryana).  Archaeologists  have also found evidence of a ploughed field at Kalibangan (Rajasthan), associated with Early Harappan levels.

The field had two sets of furrows at right angles to each other, suggesting that two different crops were grown together. Archaeologists have also tried to identify the tools used for harvesting. Did the Harappans use stone blades set in wooden handles or did they use metal tools?

Most Harappan sites are located in semi-arid lands, where irrigation was probably required for agriculture. Traces of canals have been found at the Harappan site of Shortughai in Afghanistan, but not in Punjab or Sind. It is possible that ancient canals silted up long ago. It is also likely that water drawn from wells was used for irrigation. Besides, water reservoirs found in Dholavira (Gujarat) may have been used to store water for agriculture.




73. Solution: C)

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bharat_Stage_emission_standards




http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 44
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/2014-03-
24/news/48523863_1_quality-fuel-emission-norms-bs-iv




74. Solution: b)

It includes six systems: Ayurveda, Yoga, Unani, Siddha, Naturopathy and
Homeopathy (AYUSH).

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Siddha_medicine




http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unani




75. Solution: b)

The Constituent Assembly had 300 members  in all. Of these, six members played particularly important roles. Three were representatives of the Congress, namely, Jawaharlal Nehru, Vallabh Bhai Patel and Rajendra Prasad. It was Nehru who moved the crucial “Objectives Resolution”, as well as the resolution proposing that the National Flag of India be a “horizontal tricolour of saffron, white and dark green in equal proportion”, with a wheel in navy blue at the centre. Patel, on the other hand, worked mostly behind the scenes, playing  a key role in the drafting of several reports, and working to reconcile opposing points of view. Rajendra Prasad’s role was as President of the Assembly, where he had to steer the discussion along constructive lines while making sure all members  had a chance  to speak.

Besides this Congress trio, a very important member of the Assembly was the lawyer and economist B.R. Ambedkar. During the period of British rule, Ambedkar had been  a political opponent of the Congress; but, on the advice of Mahatma Gandhi, he was asked at Independence to join the Union Cabinet as law minister.

In this capacity, he served as Chairman of the Drafting Committee of the Constitution. Serving with him were two other lawyers, K.M. Munshi from Gujarat and Alladi Krishnaswamy Aiyar from Madras, both of whom gave crucial inputs in
the drafting of the Constitution.



http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 45
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


These six members were given vital assistance b y two civil servants. One was B. N. Rau, Constitutional Advisor to the Government of India, who prepared  a series of background papers based on a close study of the political systems obtaining in other countries. The other was the Chief Draughtsman, S. N. Mukherjee, of whom Ambedkar said that his “ability to put the most intricate proposals in the simplest and clearest legal form can rarely be equalled”.




76. Solution: c)

Functions of the Environment: The environment performs four vital functions (i) it supplies resources: resources here include both renewable  and non-renewable resources. Renewable resources are those which can be used without the possibility of the resource becoming depleted or exhausted. That is, a continuous supply of
the resource remains available. Examples of renewable resources are the trees in the
forests and the fishes in the ocean. Non-renewable resources, on the other hand, are those which get exhausted with extraction and use, for example, fossil fuel (ii) it assimilates waste (iii) it sustains life by providing genetic and bio diversity and (iv)
it also provides aesthetic services like scenery etc.




77. Solution: c)

Judicial activism has had manifold impact on the political system. It has democratised the judicial system by giving not just to individuals but also groups access to the courts. It has forced executive accountability. It has also made an attempt to make the electoral system much more free and fair. The court asked candidates contesting elections to file affidavits indicating their assets and income along with educational qualifications so that the people could elect their representatives based on accurate knowledge.

There is however a negative  side to the large number of PILs and the idea of a pro- active judiciary. In the first place it has overburdened the courts. Secondly, judicial activism has blurred the line of distinction between the executive and legislature on the one hand and the judiciary on the other. The court has been involved in resolving questions which belong to the executive. Thus, for instance, reducing air
or sound pollution or investigating cases of corruption or bringing about electoral

http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 46
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


reform is not exactly the duty of the Judiciary. These are matters to be handled by the administration under the supervision of the legislatures. Therefore, some people feel that judicial activism has made the balance among the three organs of government very delicate. Democratic government is based on each organ of government respecting the powers and jurisdiction of the others. Judicial activism may be creating strains on this democratic principle.




78. Solution: a)

Refer page 149, Themes in Indian History, 12th  NCERT




79. Solution: b)

The twelfth century witnessed the emergence of a new movement in Karnataka, led by a Brahmana  named  Basavanna (1106-68) who was initially a Jaina and a minister in the court of a Chalukya king. His followers were known as Virashaivas (heroes of Shiva) or Lingayats (wearers of the linga). Lingayats continue to be an important community in the region to date. They worship Shiva in his
manifestation as a linga,  and men usually wear  a small linga in a silver case on a loop strung over the left shoulder. Those who are revered  include the jangama or wandering monks. Lingayats believe that on death the devotee will be united with Shiva and will not return to this world. Therefore they do not practise funerary
rites such as cremation, prescribed in the Dharmashastras. Instead, they ceremonially bury their dead.

The Lingayats challenged the idea of caste and the “pollution” attributed to certain groups by Brahmanas. They also questioned the theory of rebirth. These won them followers amongst those who were marginalised within the Brahmanical social order. The Lingayats also encouraged certain practices disapproved in the Dharmashastras, such as post-puberty marriage and the remarriage of widows. Our understanding of the Virashaiva tradition is derived from vachanas (literally,
sayings) composed in Kannada by women and men who joined the movement.







http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 47
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


80.Solution: b)

There are several ways of removing particulate matter; the most widely used of which is the electrostatic precipitator, which can remove over 99 per cent particulate matter present in the exhaust from a thermal  power plant. It has electrode wires that are maintained  at several thousand volts, which produce  a corona that releases electrons. These electrons attach to dust particles giving them a net negative charge. The collecting plates are grounded  and attract the charged dust particles. The velocity of air between the plates must be low enough to allow the dust to fall. A scrubber can remove gases like sulphur dioxide. In a scrubber, the exhaust is passed through a spray of water or lime. Recently we have realised the dangers of particulate matter that are very very small and are not removed by these precipitators. According to Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), particulate
size 2.5 micrometers or less in diameter (PM 2.5) are responsible for causing the greatest harm to human health. These fine particulates can be inhaled deep into the lungs and can cause breathing and respiratory  symptoms, irritation, inflammations and damage to the lungs and premature deaths.




81. Solution: b)

Ex situ Conservation– In this approach, threatened animals and plants are taken out from their natural habitat and placed in special setting where they can be protected and given special care. Zoological parks, botanical gardens and wildlife safari parks serve this purpose. There are many animals that have become extinct in the wild but continue to be maintained in zoological parks. In recent years ex situ conservation has advanced beyond  keeping threatened  species in enclosures. Now gametes of threatened species can be preserved in viable and fertile condition for long periods using cryopreservation techniques, eggs can be fertilised in vitro, and plants can be propagated using tissue culture methods. Seeds of different genetic strains of commercially important plants can be kept for long periods in seed banks.




82. Solution: a)

Groundnut in India
India ranks second in the world in groundnut production. In India, groundnut is

http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 48
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


considered as the most important oilseed followed by mustard. In India, groundnut is mostly grown as a kharif  crop, and contributes to around 45 percent of the total oilseed production in the country. Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan and Karnataka are the leading groundnut producing states in India accounting for around 86 percent of the total domestic output. However, area under groundnut cultivation in the country has gradually decreased from 6.7 million hectares (mha)
in 2005-06 to an estimated 4.9 mha in 2010-11. Total  production of  groundnut has also declined from 8.0 million tonnes in 2005-06 to an estimated 5.6 million tonnes in 2010-11




83. Solution: b)

The narrowly utilitarian arguments for conserving biodiversity are obvious; humans derive countless direct economic benefits from nature- food (cereals, pulses, fruits), firewood, fibre, construction material, industrial products (tannins, lubricants, dyes, resins, perfumes ) and products of medicinal importance. More than 25 per cent of the drugs currently sold in the market worldwide are derived from plants and
25,000 species of plants contribute to the traditional medicines used by native peoples around the world. Nobody knows how many more medicinally useful plants there are in tropical rain forests waiting to be explored.

With increasing resources put into ‘bioprospecting’ (exploring molecular, genetic and species-level diversity for products of economic importance), nations endowed with rich biodiversity can expect to reap enormous benefits.

The broadly utilitarian argument says that biodiversity plays a major  role in many ecosystem services that nature provides. The fast- dwindling Amazon forest is estimated to produce, through photosynthesis, 20 per cent of the total oxygen in the earth’s atmosphere.

Can we put an economic value on this service by nature? You can get some idea by finding out how much your neighborhood hospital spends on a cylinder of oxygen. Pollination (without which plants cannot give us fruits or seeds) is another service, ecosystems provide through pollinators layer – bees, bumblebees, birds and bats. What will be the costs of accomplishing pollination without help from natural
pollinators? There are other intangible benefits – that we derive from nature–the


http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 49
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


aesthetic pleasures of walking through thick woods, watching spring flowers in full
bloom or waking up to a bulbul’s song in the morning.




84. Solution: d)

Coal: In India, coal is the most abundantly available fossil fuel. It provides a substantial part of the nation’s energy needs. It is used for power generation, to supply energy to industry as well as for domestic needs. India is highly dependent on coal for meeting its commercial energy requirements.

As you are already aware that coal is formed due the compression of plant material over millions of years. Coal, therefore, is found in a variety of forms depending on the degrees of compression and the depth and time of burial. Decaying plants in swamps produce peat. Which has a low carbon and high moisture contents and low heating capacity. Lignite is a low grade brown coal, which is soft with high moisture content. The principal lignite reserves are in Neyveli in Tamil Nadu and are used
for generation of electricity. Coal that has been buried deep and subjected to increased temperatures is bituminous coal.

It is the most popular coal in commercial use. Metallurgical coal is high grade bituminous coal which has a special value for smelting iron in blast furnaces. Anthracite is the highest quality hard coal. In India coal occurs in rock series of two main geological ages, namely Gondwana, a little over 200 million years in age and in tertiary deposits which are only about 55 million years old. The major resources of Gondwana coal, which are metallurgical  coal, are located in Damodar valley (West Bengal-Jharkhand). Jharia, Raniganj, Bokaro are important coalfields. The Godavari, Mahanadi, Son and Wardha valleys also contain coal deposits. Tertiary coals occur
in the north eastern states of Meghalaya, Assam, Arunachal Pradesh and Nagaland.

Remember coal is a bulky material, which loses weight on use as it is reduced to ash. Hence, heavy industries and thermal power station are located on or near the
coalfields.










http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 50
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


85. Solution: b)

Refer page no. 246, biology class 12th NCERT




86. Solution: d)

Red soil develops on crystalline igneous rocks in areas of low rainfall in the eastern and southern parts of the Deccan plateau. Yelllow and red soils are also found in parts of Orissa, Chhattisgarh, southern parts of the middle Ganga plain and along the piedmont zone of the Western Ghats. These soils develop  a reddish colour due to diffusion of iron in crystalline and metamorphic  rocks. It looks yellow when it occurs in a hydrated  form.




87. Solution: c)

Rabi crops are sown in winter from October to December and harvested in summer from April to June. Some of the important rabi crops are wheat, barley, peas, gram and mustard. Though, these crops are grown  in large parts of India, states from the north and north- western parts such as Punjab, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Uttaranchal and Uttar Pradesh are important  for the production of wheat and other rabi crops. Availability of precipitation during winter months due to the western temperate cyclones helps in the success of these crops.

However, the success of the green revolution in Punjab, Haryana, western Uttar Pradesh and parts of Rajasthan has also been an important factor in the growth of the above- mentioned rabi crops. Kharif crops are grown with the onset of monsoon in different parts of the country and these are harvested in September- October.

Important crops grown during this season are paddy, maize, jowar, bajra, tur (arhar), moong, urad, cotton, jute, groundnut and soyabean. Some of the most important rice-growing regions are Assam, West Bengal, coastal regions of Orissa, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Maharashtra, particularly the (Konkan
coast) along with Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. Recently, paddy has also become an



http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 51
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


important crop of Punjab and Haryana. In states like Assam, West Bengal and
Orissa, three crops of paddy are grown in a year.  These are Aus, Aman and Boro.

In between the rabi and the kharif seasons, there is a short season during the summer months known as the Zaid season. Some of the crops produced during
‘zaid’ are watermelon, muskmelon,  cucumber, vegetables and fodder crops. Sugarcane takes almost a year  to grow.




88. Solution: b)




89. Solution: b)

The Gold Standard: From around 1870 to the outbreak of the First World War in
1914, the prevailing system was the gold standard which was the epitome of the fixed exchange rate system. All currencies were defined in terms of gold; indeed some were actually made of gold. Each participant country committed to guarantee the free convertibility of its currency into gold  at a fixed price. This meant that residents had, at their disposal, a domestic currency which was freely convertible at a fixed price into another asset (gold) acceptable in international payments. This also made it possible for each currency to be convertible into all others at a fixed price. Exchange rates were determined by its worth in terms of gold (where the currency was made of gold, its actual gold content). For example, if one unit of say currency A was worth one gram of gold, one unit of currency B was worth two grams of gold, currency B would be worth twice as much as currency A. Economic agents could directly convert one unit of currency B into two units of currency A, without having to first buy gold and then sell it. The rates would fluctuate between an upper  and a lower limit, these limits being set by the costs of melting, shipping and recoining between the two Currencies 3. To maintain the official parity each country needed an adequate stock of gold reserves. All countries on the gold standard had stable exchange rates.

The question arose – would not a country lose all its stock of gold if it imported too much (and had a BoP deficit)? The mercantilist4 explanation was that unless the state intervened, through tariffs or quotas or subsidies, on exports, a country
would lose its gold and that was considered one of the worst tragedies. David


http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 52
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


Hume, a noted  philosopher writing in 1752, refuted this view and pointed out that if the stock of gold went down, all prices and costs would fall commensurately and no one in the country would be worse off. Also, with cheaper goods at home, imports would fall and exports rise (it is the real exchange rate which will determine competitiveness). The country from which we were importing and making payments in gold would face an increase  in prices and costs, so their now expensive exports would fall and their imports of the first country’s now cheap goods would go up. The result of this price- specie-flow (precious metals were referred to as ‘specie’ in the eighteenth century) mechanism is normally to improve the BoP of the country losing gold, and worsen that of the country with the favourable trade balance, until equilibrium in international trade is re-established at relative prices that keep imports and exports in balance with no further net gold flow. The equilibrium is stable and self-correcting, requiring no tariffs and state action. Thus, fixed exchange rates were maintained by an automatic equilibrating mechanism.




90.Solution: a) Oxidation and Reduction
In weathering, oxidation means a combination of a mineral with oxygen to form oxides or hydroxides. Oxidation occurs where there is ready access to the atmosphere and oxygenated waters. The minerals most commonly involved in this process are iron, manganese, sulphur etc. In the process of oxidation rock breakdown occurs due to the disturbance caused by addition of oxygen. Red colour of iron upon oxidation turns to brown or yellow. When oxidised minerals are placed in an environment  where oxygen is absent, reduction takes place. Such conditions exist usually below the water table, in areas of stagnant water and waterlogged ground. Red colour of iron upon reduction turns to greenish or bluish grey.




91. Solution: b)

Refer page 198, NCERT history class 10th



http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 53
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS





92. Solution: a)

Cirques are the most common of landforms in glaciated mountains. The cirques quite often are found at the heads of glacial valleys. The accumulated ice cuts these cirques while moving down the mountain tops. They are deep, long and wide troughs or basins with very steep concave to vertically dropping high walls at its head as well as sides. A lake of water can be seen quite often within the cirques after the glacier disappears. Such lakes are called cirque or tarn lakes. There can be two or more cirques one leading into another down below in a stepped sequence.




93. Solution: d)

The stratosphere is found above the tropopause and extends up to a height  of 50 km. One important feature of the stratosphere is that it contains the ozone layer. This layer absorbs ultra-violet radiation and shields life on the earth from intense, harmful form of energy.




94. Solution: c)

The Khilafat Movement, (1919-1920) was a movement of Indian Muslims, led by Muhammad Ali and Shaukat Ali, that demanded the following: The Turkish Sultan or Khalifa must retain control over the Muslim sacred places in the erstwhile Ottoman empire; the jazirat-ul-Arab (Arabia, Syria, Iraq, Palestine) must remain under Muslim sovereignty;  and the Khalifa must be left with sufficient territory to enable him to defend the Islamic faith. The Congress supported the movement and Mahatma Gandhi sought to conjoin it to the Non-cooperation Movement.




95. Solution: b)

Factors Controlling Temperature Distribution The temperature of air at any place is influenced by (i) the latitude of the place; (ii) the altitude of the place; (iii) distance from the sea, the air- mass circulation; (iv) the presence of warm and cold
ocean currents; (v) local aspects. The latitude : The temperature of a place  depends

http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 54
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


on the insolation received. It has been explained earlier that the insolation varies according to the latitude hence the temperature also varies accordingly.

The altitude : The atmosphere is indirectly heated by terrestrial radiation from below. Therefore, the places near the sea-level record higher temperature than the places situated at higher elevations. In other words, the temperature generally decreases with increasing height. The rate of decrease of temperature with height is termed as the normal lapse rate. It is 6.5°C per 1,000 m.

Distance from the sea : Another factor that influences the temperature is the location of a place  with respect to the sea. Compared to land, the sea gets heated slowly and loses heat slowly. Land heats up and cools down quickly. Therefore, the variation in temperature over the sea is less compared to land. The places situated near the sea come under the moderating influence of the sea and land breezes which moderate the temperature.

Air-mass and Ocean currents : Like the land and sea breezes, the passage of air masses also affects the temperature. The places, which come under the influence of warm air-masses experience higher temperature  and the places that come under
the influence of cold air- masses experience low temperature. Similarly the places located on the coast where the warm ocean currents flow record higher temperature than the places located on the coast where the cold currents flow.




96.Solution: c)

After the failure of the Cripps Mission, Mahatma Gandhi decided to launch his third major movement against British rule. This was the “Quit India” campaign, which began in August 1942. Although Gandhiji was jailed at once, younger activists organised strikes and acts of sabotage all over the country. Particularly active in the underground resistance were socialist members of the Congress, such as Jayaprakash Narayan. In several districts, such as Satara in the west and Medinipur in the east, “independent” governments were proclaimed.

The British responded with much force, yet it took more than a year to suppress the rebellion. “Quit India” was genuinely  a mass movement, bringing into its ambit hundreds of thousands of ordinary Indians. It especially energised the young who, in
very large numbers, left their colleges to go to jail. However, while the Congress

http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 55
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


leaders languished in jail, Jinnah and his colleagues in the Muslim League worked patiently  at expanding their influence. It was in these years that the League began to make a mark in the Punjab and Sind, provinces where it had previously had scarcely any presence.




97. Solution: a) Continental Shelf
The continental shelf is the extended margin of each continent occupied by relatively shallow seas and gulfs. It is the shallowest part of the ocean showing an average gradient of 1° or even less. The shelf typically ends at a very steep slope, called the shelf break. The width of the continental shelves vary from one ocean to another. The average width of continental shelves is about 80 km. The shelves are almost absent or very narrow along some of the margins like the coasts of Chile, the west coast of Sumatra, etc. On the contrary, the Siberian shelf in the Arctic Ocean, the largest in the world, stretches to 1,500 km in width. The depth of the shelves also varies. It may be as shallow as 30 m in some areas while in some areas it is as deep as 600 m.

The continental shelves are covered with variable thicknesses of sediments brought down by rivers, glaciers, wind, from the land and distributed  by waves and currents. Massive sedimentary deposits received over a long time by the continental shelves, become the source of fossil fuels.

Continental Slope

The continental slope connects the continental shelf and the ocean basins. It begins where the bottom of the continental shelf sharply drops off into a steep slope. The gradient of the slope region varies between 2-5°. The depth of the slope region varies between 200 and 3,000 m. The slope boundary indicates the end of the
continents. Canyons and trenches are observed in this region.










http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 56
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS


98. Solution: c)

Guyots

It is a flat topped seamount. They show evidences of gradual subsidence through stages to become flat topped submerged mountains. It is estimated that more than
10,000 seamounts and guyots exist in the Pacific Ocean alone.




99.Solution: a)

Factors affecting ocean salinity are mentioned  below:

(i) The salinity of water in the surface layer of oceans depend mainly on evaporation and precipitation.

(ii) Surface salinity is greatly influenced in coastal regions by the fresh water flow from rivers, and in polar regions by the processes of freezing and thawing of ice.
(iii) Wind, also influences salinity of an area by transferring water to other areas. (iv) The ocean currents contribute to the salinity variations. Salinity, temperature
and density of water are interrelated. Hence, any change in the temperature or
density influences the salinity of an area.




100.         Solution: b)

Separation and isolation of DNA fragments : The cutting of DNA by restriction endonucleases results in the fragmentes of DNA. These fragments can be separated by a technique known as gel electrophoresis.

Since DNA fragments are negatively  charged molecules they can be separated by forcing them to move towards the anode under an electric field through  a medium/matrix. Nowadays the most commonly used matrix is agarose which is a natural polymer extracted from sea weeds.

The DNA fragments separate (resolve) according to their size through sieving
effect provided by the agarose gel. Hence, the smaller the fragment size, the farther it moves.


http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 57
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 7 SOLUTIONS




































































http://insightsonindia.com       INSIGHTS                                                                                                 Page 58
