INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS


1.     Solution:  a)



Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs)

Produced mostly in developed countries, HFCs replaced chlorofluorocarbons  (CFCs) and hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs), that were phased out under the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer. HFCs pose no harm to the ozone layer because, unlike CFCs and HCFCs, they do not contain chlorine that depletes the ozone layer. But it has been
established that HFCs are not innocuous either.

They are super-greenhouse  gases with an extremely high global warming potential. This means they are capable of trapping enormous amounts of infrared radiations in the atmosphere  and can cause a greenhouse  effect a thousand  times stronger than carbon dioxide. It has been four years
since the issue of bringing HFCs under the Protocol's ambit was raised.

Developed countries say that since the rise in the emission of super-greenhouse  gases is a consequence of the phasing out of CFCs and HCFCs under the Montreal Protocol, the same agreement should monitor them. Developing countries like India, China and Brazil, however, say that the emission and regulation of greenhouse gases fall under the purview of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and HFCs already figure in the basket of six greenhouse gases under the Kyoto Protocol. Developed countries following the Kyoto
Protocol report their HFC emission data to UNFCCC; parties to the Montreal Protocol have no
such obligation. At the root of this argument is a doubt. Developing countries are apprehensive about the high cost of transition from HFCs to a safer  option.

2.     Solution: a)

If you work out the latitudinal and longitudinal extent of India, they are roughly about 30 degrees, whereas the actual distance measured from north to south extremity is 3,214 km, and that from east to west is only 2,933 km.

This difference is based on the fact that the distance between two longitudes decreases towards the poles whereas the distance between two latitudes remains the same everywhere.



3.    Solution c)


Most nations are an amalgamation of a complex set of historical traditions; they weave together the diverse groups that reside within the nation in different ways. For example, German identity was constituted by being ethnically German. The constitution gave expression to this identity. The Indian Constitution, on the other hand, does not make ethnic
identity a criterion for citizenship.

http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                            Page 1
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS



Formally, the Constitution was made by the Constituent Assembly which had been elected for undivided India. It held its first sitting on 9 December1946 and re-assembled  as Constituent Assembly for divided India on 14 August 1947. Its members were elected by indirect election by the members of the Provisional Legislative Assemblies that had been established in 1935. The Constituent Assembly was composed roughly along the lines suggested by the plan proposed by the committee of the British cabinet, known as the Cabinet Mission.


There were legitimate differences of principle. And the differences were many: should India adopt  a centralised or decentralised system of government? What should be the relations between the States and the centre? What should be the powers of the judiciary? Should the Constitution protect property rights? Almost every issue that lies at the foundation of a modern state was discussed with great sophistication. Only one provision of the Constitution was passed without virtually any debate: the introduction of universal suffrage (meaning that all citizens reaching a certain  age, would be entitled to be voters irrespective of religion, caste, education, gender or income). So, while the members felt no need at all to discuss the issue of who should have the right to vote, every other matter was seriously discussed and debated.


Reference : Page 9, 15, 17(Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)



4.       Solution: d)



Explanation: The Harappan seal is possibly the most distinctive artefact of the Harappan or Indus valley civilisation. Made of a stone called steatite, seals like this one often contain animal motifs and signs from a script that remains undeciphered.
Metals were used in other artefacts, but for seals special clay was frequently used. Archaeologists have been able to reconstruct dietary practices from finds of charred grains and
seeds. These are studied by archaeo-botanists, who are specialists in ancient plant remains. Grains
found at Harappan sites include wheat, barley, lentil, chickpea and sesame. Millets are found from sites in Gujarat. Finds of rice are relatively  rare.


Reference:  Page No. 1,2 and 3 (THEMES  IN INDIAN HISTORY PART I)


http://www.thehindu.com/books/archaeometallurgy-of-indus-civilisation/article2913312.ece





http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                            Page 2
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS


5.    Solution: d)

Both are correct statements. http://moef.gov.in/citizen/specinfo/eia.html


6.    Solution: d)

All are correct.




7.   Solution b)


Each of the two Houses of the Parliament has different bases of representation. The Rajya Sabha represents the States of India. It is an indirectly elected body. Residents of the State elect members to State Legislative Assembly. The elected members of State Legislative Assembly in turn elect the members of Rajya Sabha.


The number of members to be elected from each State has been fixed by the fourth schedule of the Constitution.


Members of the Rajya Sabha are elected  for a term of six years. They can get re-elected. All members of the Rajya Sabha do not complete their terms at the same time. Every two years, one third members of the Rajya Sabha complete their term and elections are held for those one third seats only. Thus, the Rajya Sabha is never fully dissolved. Therefore, it is called the permanent House of the Parliament.


Reference : Page 105, 106 (Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)



8.    Solution c)


The basic philosophy of the Jainas was already in existence in north India before the birth of
Vardhamana, who came to be known as Mahavira, in the sixth century BCE.
Jaina scholars produced  a wealth  of literature in a variety  of languages – Prakrit, Sanskrit and
Tamil. According to Jaina teachings, the cycle of birth and rebirth is shaped
through karma. Asceticism and penance are required to free oneself from the cycle of karma.


Reference:  Page No. 88,89(THEMES  IN INDIAN HISTORY PART I)



http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                            Page 3
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS



9.   Solution: c)

http://www.cpcb.nic.in/Water_Quality_Criteria.php




10.  Solution b)


Purusha sukta is a hymn in the Rig veda. It describes the sacrifice of Purusha, the primeval man. All the elements of the universe, including the four social categories, were supposed to have emanated from his body: The Brahmana was his mouth, of his arms was made the Kshatriya.
His thighs became the Vaishya, of his feet the Shudra was born.


Reference:  Page No. 61(THEMES  IN INDIAN HISTORY PART I)



11.   Solution a)


What is true of the right to vote is also true of right to contest election. All citizens have the right to stand for election and become  the representative of the people.
However, there are different minimum age requirements for contesting elections. For
example, in order to stand for Lok Sabha or Assembly election, a candidate must be at least 25 years old.


There are some other restrictions also. For instance, there is a legal provision that  a person who has undergone imprisonment  for two or more years for some offence is disqualified from contesting elections.


But there are no restrictions of income, education or class or gender on the right to contest elections. In this sense, our system of election is open to all citizens.


Reference : Page 67(Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)



12.   Solution: b)

The northern plains are formed by the alluvial deposits brought by the rivers – the Indus, the Ganga and the Brahmaputra. These plains extend approximately 3,200 km from the east to the west. The average width of these plains varies between 150-300 km. The maximum depth of
alluvium deposits varies between 1,000-2,000 m. From the north to the south, these can be




http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                            Page 4
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS


divided into three major zones: the Bhabar, the Tarai and the alluvial plains. The alluvial plains can be further divided into the Khadar and the Bhangar.

Bhabar is a narrow  belt ranging between 8-10 km parallel to the Shiwalik foothills at the break- up of the slope. As a result of this, the streams and rivers coming from the mountains deposit heavy materials of rocks and boulders, and at times, disappear in this zone. South of the Bhabar is the Tarai belt, with an approximate width of 10-20 km where most of the streams and rivers re- emerge without having any properly demarcated channel, thereby, creating marshy and swampy conditions known as the Tarai. This has a luxurious growth of natural vegetation and houses a varied wild life. The south of Tarai is a belt consisting of old and new alluvial deposits known as the Bhangar and Khadar respectively. These plains have characteristic  features of mature stage of fluvial erosional and depositional landforms such as sand bars, meanders, ox-bow lakes and
braided channels. The Brahmaputra plains are known for their riverine islands and sand bars. Most
of these areas are subjected  to periodic floods and shifting river courses forming braided streams.




13.  Solution b)


After 1800, urbanization in India was sluggish. All through the nineteenth century up to the first two decades of the twentieth, the proportion of the urban population to the total population in India was extremely low and had remained  stagnant. In the forty years between 1900 and 1940 the urban population increased from about 10 per cent of the total population to about 13 per cent. The smaller towns had little opportunity to grow economically.  Calcutta, Bombay and Madras on the other hand grew rapidly and soon became sprawling cities. In other words, the growth of these three cities as the new commercial  and administrative centres was at the expense of other existing urban centres.


Reference:  Page No. 322(THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY PART III)



14.  Solution: b)

Biochemical oxygen demand or B.O.D is the amount of dissolved oxygen needed by aerobic biological organisms in a body  of water to break down organic material present in a given  water
sample at certain temperature over a specific time period.

Biochemical oxygen demand is the amount of oxygen required for microbial metabolism of organic compounds in water. This demand occurs over some variable period of time depending on temperature, nutrient concentrations, and the enzymes available to indigenous microbial populations. The amount of oxygen required to completely oxidize the organic compounds to
carbon dioxide and water through generations of microbial growth, death, decay, and cannibalism
is total biochemical oxygen demand (total BOD).

http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                            Page 5
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS




15.  Solution b)


Larger geographical areas are demarcated as constituencies. The entire country may be considered as a single constituency.


More than one representative  may be elected from one constituency Candidate who wins the election gets majority of votes unlike in First Past the Post (FPTP) system.


Voter votes for the party rather than the candidate (which is followed in First past the Vote system) Every party gets seats in the legislature in proportion to the percentage of votes that it gets.


In other electoral systems, especially PR systems, voters are often asked to choose a party  and the representatives are elected  on the basis of party lists. As a result, there is no one representative who represents and is responsible for one locality. In constituency based system like the FPTP, the voters know who their own representative is and can hold him or her accountable.


Reference : Page 59 (Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)



16.  Solution b)


No major bill is introduced in the Parliament without the approval of the Cabinet. Members other than ministers can also introduce bills but these have no chance of being passed without the support of the government.


If the Government of India proposes to introduce any new tax, it has to get the approval of the Lok Sabha.


The Financial powers of the Parliament, involve grant of resources to the government to implement its programmes. The government has to give an account to the Legislature about the money it has spent and resources that it wishes to raise. The legislature also ensures that the government does not misspend or overspend. This is done through the budget and annual financial statements.

A bill is a draft  of the proposed law. There can be different types of bills. When a non- minister proposes a bill, it is called private member’s Bill. A bill proposed by a minister is described as Government Bill. Let us now see the different stages in the life of a bill.




http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                            Page 6
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS


Reference : Page 108, 112(Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)





17.   Solution b)


Alvars were the devotees of Vishnu while Nayanars were the devotees of Shiva. Some historians suggest that the Alvars and Nayanars initiated a movement of protest against
the caste system and the dominance of Brahmanas or at least attempted to reform the system. To
some extent this is corroborated by the fact that bhaktas hailed from diverse social backgrounds ranging from Brahmanas to artisans and cultivators and even from castes considered “untouchable”. one of the major themes in Tamil  Bhakti hymns is the poets’ opposition to Buddhism and Jainism. This is particularly marked in the compositions of the Nayanars.


Reference:  Page No. 143-146(THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY PART II)



18.   Solution c)


Explanation: Both the upper and the lower sections were walled and separated from each other.
Reference:  Page No. 5 and 6(THEMES  IN INDIAN HISTORY PART I)



19.  Solution:  a)

Three major geological events in the distant past have shaped the present  drainage systems of Peninsular India: (i) Subsidence of the western flank of the Peninsula leading to its submergence below the sea during the early tertiary period. Generally, it has disturbed the symmetrical plan of the river on either side of the original watershed.

(ii) Upheaval of the Himalayas when the northern flank of the Peninsular block was subjected to subsidence and the consequent trough faulting. The Narmada and The Tapi flow in trough faults and fill the original cracks with their detritus materials. Hence, there is a lack of alluvial and deltaic deposits in these rivers. (iii) Slight tilting of the Peninsular block from northwest to the southeastern direction gave orientation  to the entire drainage system towards the Bay of Bengal during the same period.



20.  Solution:  a)

As in the case of agriculture, so also in manufacturing, India could not develop a sound industrial
base under the colonial rule. Even as the country’s world famous handicraft industries declined,

http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                            Page 7
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS


no corresponding modern industrial base was allowed to come up to take pride of place so long enjoyed by the former.

The primary reasons behind de-industrializing India by the British were: Firstly, to reduce India to the status of a mere exporter of important raw materials for the upcoming modern industries in Britain. Secondly, o turn India into a sprawling market for the finished products of those
industries so that their continued expansion could be ensured to the maximum advantage of their
home country — Britain.

Third statement is unfounded  and unsubstantiated.




21.    Solution (a)


There are three all India Civil Services of India, namely the Indian Administrative Service
(IAS), the Indian Forest Service (IFS) & the Indian Police Service (IPS).


AIS include the officer is governed by the service conditions laid down by the central government? An IAS or IPS officer is assigned to a particular State, where he or she works under the supervision of the State government. However, the IAS or IPS officers are appointed by the central government, they can go back into the service of the central government and most importantly, only the central government can take disciplinary action against them.


Rajya Sabha is empowered to make laws creating one or more All India Services, which would be common to the Union and State, if it is deemed to serve the national interest.


Reference : Page 95, 96(Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)



22.    Solution a)


In the colonial India, money was raised for administering towns through the systematic annual collection of municipal taxes. surveys, gathering of statistical data, and publishing of various official reports was done regularly. But towns dominated over the rural population even in Pre- Colonial times also, thriving on the surplus and taxes derived from agriculture.


Reference:  Page No. 317,320 &321(THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY PART III)



23.  Solution: c)



http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                            Page 8
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS


Financial Sector Reforms:

Financial sector includes financial institutions such as commercial banks, investment banks, stock exchange operations and foreign  exchange  market. The financial sector in India is controlled by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI). You may be aware that all the banks and other financial institutions in India are controlled through various norms and regulations of the RBI. The RBI decides the amount of money that the banks can keep with themselves, fixes interest rates, nature of lending to various sectors etc. One of the major aims of financial sector reforms is to reduce the role of RBI from regulator to facilitator of financial sector. This means that the financial sector may be allowed to take decisions on many matters without consulting the RBI.



24.  Solution: d)

Traffic congestion reduces average traffic speed. At low speeds, scientific studies reveal, vehicles burn fuel inefficiently and pollute more per trip. For example, a study in the United States found that for the same trip, cars consumed more fuel and polluted more if the traffic was congested, than when traffic flowed freely. At average trip speeds between  20 to 40 kilometers per hour, the cars pollutant emission was twice as much as when the average speed was 55 to 75 kilometers per hour. At average trip speeds between 5 to 20 kilometers per hour, the cars pollutant emissions were 4 to 8 times as much as when the average speed was 55 to 70 kilometers per hour. Fuel
efficiencies similarly were much worse with traffic congestion.

India's Central Pollution Control Board now routinely monitors four air pollutants namely sulphur dioxide (SO2), oxides of nitrogen (NOx), suspended particulate matter (SPM) and respirable particulate matter (PM10). These are target air pollutants for regular monitoring  at 308 operating stations in 115 cities/towns in 25 states and 4 Union Territories of India. The monitoring of meteorological parameters such as wind speed and direction, relative humidity and
temperature has also been integrated with the monitoring of air quality. The monitoring of these
pollutants is carried out for 24 hours (4-hourly sampling for gaseous pollutants and 8-hourly sampling for particulate matter) with a frequency of twice a week, to yield 104 observations in a year.



25.  Solution a)


Habeas corpus: A writ of habeas corpus means that the court orders that the arrested person should be presented before it. It can also order to set free an arrested person if the manner or
grounds of arrest are not lawful or satisfactory.





http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                            Page 9
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS


Mandamus: This writ is issued when the court finds that  a particular office holder is not doing legal duty and thereby is infringing on the right of an individual.


Prohibition: This writ is issued by a higher  court(High Court or Supreme Court) when a lower court has considered a case  going beyond its jurisdiction.


Quo Warranto: If the court finds that  a person is holding office but is not entitled to hold that office, it issues the writ of quo warranto and restricts that person from acting as an office holder.


Certiorari: Under this writ, the court orders a lower court or another authority to transfer amatter pending before it to the higher authority or court.


Reference : Page 41(Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)



26.  Solution: d) Siricilla Tragedy
As a part of liberalisation,  privatisation and globalisation, the government started to reform the power sector. The most important impact of these reforms has been a steep hike in power tariff. Since the powerlooms, on which a large number of industrial workers in cottage and small-scale sector depend, are driven by power energy, the impact of high tariff on them has been very serious. Further, while the power sector reforms have led to hike in tariffs, the power producers have failed in providing quality power to the powerloom industry. Since the wages of the powerloom workers are linked to the production of cloth, power-cut means cut in wages of weavers who were already suffering from hike in tariff. This led to a crisis in the livelihood of the weavers and fifty powerloom workers committed suicide in a small town called ‘Siricilla’ in Andhra Pradesh.



27.  Solution: d)

A socialist society answers the three questions in a totally different manner. In a socialist society the government decides what goods are to be produced in accordance with the needs of society. It is assumed that the government knows what is good for the people of the country and so the desires of individual consumers are not given much importance. The government decides how goods are to be produced and how they should be distributed. In principle, distribution under socialism is supposed to be based on what people need and not on what they can afford to purchase. Unlike under capitalism, for example, a socialist nation provides free health care to the
citizens who need it. Strictly, a socialist society has no private property since everything is owned

http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 10
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS


by the state. With the collapse of the Soviet system in the last decades of the twentieth century, socialist economies in the former Soviet Union and the socialist states in Eastern Europe ceased to exist.



28.  Solution: d)

The Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ), known by sailors as the doldrums, is the area encircling the earth near the equator where the northeast and southeast trade winds come together.

As the summer sets in and the sun shifts northwards, the wind circulation over the subcontinent undergoes  a complete reversal at both, the lower as well as the upper levels. By the middle of July, the low pressure belt nearer the surface [termed as Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ)] shifts northwards, roughly parallel to the Himalayas between 20° N and 25° N. By this time, the westerly jet stream withdraws from the Indian region. In fact, meteorologists have found an interrelationship  between the northward shift of the equatorial trough (ITCZ) and the withdrawal of the westerly jet stream from over the North Indian Plain. It is generally believed
that there is a cause  and effect relationship between the two.

The ITCZ being  a zone of low pressure, attracts inflow of winds from different directions. The maritime tropical airmass (mT) from the southern hemisphere, after crossing the equator, rushes to the low pressure area in the general southwesterly direction. It is this moist air current which is
popularly known as the southwest monsoon.

Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ)

The Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) is a low pressure zone located at the equator where trade winds converge, and so, it is a zone where air tends to ascend. In July, the ITCZ is located around 20°N-25°N latitudes (over the Gangetic plain), sometimes called the monsoon trough. This monsoon trough encourages the development of thermal low over north and northwest India. Due to the shift of ITCZ, the trade winds of the southern hemisphere cross the equator between 40° and 60°E longitudes and start blowing from southwest to northeast due to the Coriolis force. It becomes southwest monsoon. In winter, the ITCZ moves southward, and so the reversal of winds from
northeast to south and southwest, takes place. They are called northeast monsoons.




29.  Solution a)


Al-Biruni who came from Uzbekistan in the eleventh century, called Kitab-ul-Hind in Arabic. Ibn
Battuta who came from Morocco in the fourteenth century, wrote Rihla in Arabic.



http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 11
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS


Reference:  Page No. 116,118(THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY PART II)



30. Solution a)


Principles of Liberty, Equality and Fraternity were borrowed from French Constitution. Fundamental Rights, Power of Judicial Review and independence of Judiciary, written Constitution from U.S.


Quasi-federal form of government and residuary powers from Canada.
Reference : Page 22(Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)



31.  Solution: c)

The Greenhouse Gas Protocol (GHG Protocol) is the most widely used international accounting tool for government  and business leaders to understand, quantify, and manage greenhouse  gas emissions. The GHG Protocol, a decade-long partnership between the World Resources
Institute and the World Business Council for Sustainable Development, is working with
businesses, governments, and environmental groups around the world to build a new generation of credible and effective programs for tackling climate change.

It provides the accounting framework for nearly every GHG standard and program in the world - from the International Standards Organization to The Climate Registry - as well as hundreds of GHG inventories prepared by individual companies.




32.    Solution b)


Initially, only men were allowed into the sangha, but later women also came to be admitted. According to Buddhist texts, this was made possible through the mediation of Ananda, one of the Buddha’s dearest disciples, who persuaded him to allow women into the sangha. The Buddha’s foster mother,  Mahapajapati Gotami was the first woman to be ordained as a bhikkhuni.


Reference:  Page No.92, 95(THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY PART I)



33.  Solution:  a)

An isthmus is a narrow  strip of land connecting two larger land areas, usually with water on either side. A tombolo is an isthmus where the strip of land consists of a spit or bar.




http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 12
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS


A bay is a large body of water connected to an ocean or sea formed by an inlet of land due to the surrounding land blocking some waves and often reducing winds.[1]  Bays also exist in in-land environments as an inlet to any larger body of water, such as a lake or pond, or the estuary of a river, such as those found in and around the Great Lakes of North America, or in the estuary of the Parramatta River in Australia. A large bay may be called a gulf, a sea,  a sound, or a bight.
A cove is a circular or oval coastal inlet with a narrow  entrance;  some coves may be referred to as
bays. A fjord is a particularly steep bay shaped by glacial activity.

A strait is a naturally formed, narrow, typically navigable waterway that connects two larger, navigable bodies of water. It most commonly refers to a channel  of water that lies between two land masses, but it may also refer to a navigable channel  through  a body of water that is otherwise not navigable, for example because it is too shallow, or because it contains an
unnavigable reef or archipelago.

A gulf in geography is a large bay that is an arm of an ocean or sea.




34.  Solution: c)




The Questions should have read “ Soon after independence, Indian had…….”

(regret the error)

Market and State in Indian Industrial Development:

The big question facing the policy makers was — what should be the role of the government and the private sector in industrial development? At the time of independence, Indian industrialists did not have the capital to undertake investment in industrial ventures required for the development of our economy; nor was the market big enough to encourage industrialists to undertake major projects even if they had the capital to do so. It is principally for these reasons that the state had to play an extensive role in promoting the industrial sector. In addition, the decision to develop the Indian economy on socialist lines led to the policy of the state controlling the commanding heights of the economy, as the Second Five Year plan put it. This meant that
the state would have complete control of those industries that were vital for the economy. The policies of the private sector would have to be complimentary to those of the public sector, with the public sector leading the way.



35.   Solution  d)




http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 13
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS


Our Constitution believes that diversity is our strength. Therefore, one of the fundamental rights is the right of the minorities to maintain their culture. This minority status is not dependent only upon religion. Linguistic and cultural minorities are also included in this provision.


All minorities, religious or linguistic, can set up their own educational institutions. By doing so, they can preserve and develop their own culture.


Educational institutions set up by a minority are open all and not only to those children who belong to that minority.


The first case : “Rex - versus - Dhyan Singh” (AIR 1952 Allahabad, 53) arose under the provisions of U.P. Arms Act in 1948, and was decided by the Allahabad High Court in 1952. Dhyan Singh had been convicted under the Arms Act for wearing and carrying more than one kirpan without licence. When the Appeal came to the High Court, the Constitution of India had come into operation, giving right to the Sikhs to wear and carry kirpans under Article 25. The question to be decided before the High Court was : Whether a Sikh can wear and carry more than one kirpan as the plural word kirpans has been used in Explanation I of the Article
25. After referring to the religious literature of the Sikhs, the High Court had held that  a Sikh
is entitled to wear and carry only one kirpan, as Guru Gobind Singh had ordained the Sikhs to wear always five K’s, i.e., kesh, kangha, kirpan, kachh and kara, which indicates only one of these signs.


Right to minorities includes both linguistic and cultural minorities. http://sikhinstitute.org/sikh_p_l/ch_5.htm
Reference : Page 39, 40 (Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)



36.    Solution   a)


According to Buddhist philosophy, the world is transient (anicca) and constantly  changing; it is also soulless ( anatta) as there is nothing permanent or eternal in it. Within this transient world, sorrow (dukkha) is intrinsic to human existence.


Reference:  Page No.90, 91(THEMES  IN INDIAN HISTORY PART I)



37.  Solution: d)




http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 14
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS


The industrial policy that we adopted was closely related to the trade policy. In the first seven plans, trade was characterized by what is commonly called an inward looking trade strategy. Technically, this strategy is called import substitution. This policy aimed at replacing  or substituting imports with domestic production. For example, instead of importing vehicles made in a foreign  country, industries would be encouraged to produce them in India itself. In this policy the government protected the domestic industries from foreign competition. Protection from imports took two forms: tariffs and quotas.

Tariffs are a tax on imported goods; they make imported goods more expensive and discourage their use. Quotas specify the quantity of goods which can be imported. The effect of tariffs and quotas is that they restrict imports and, therefore, protect the domestic firms from foreign competition. The policy of protection is based on the notion that industries of developing countries are not in a position to compete against the goods produced by more developed economies. It is assumed that if the domestic industries are protected  they will learn to compete in the course of time. Our planners also feared the possibility of foreign exchange being spent on import of luxury goods if no restrictions were placed on imports. Nor was any serious thought given to promote exports until the mid-1980’s.



38. Solution: d)

A capital good is a durable  good (one that does not quickly wear out) that is used in the production of goods or services. Capital goods are one of the three types of producer goods, the other two being land and labor, which are also known collectively as primary factors of production. This classification originated during the classical economic period and has remained
the dominant method for classification.

The sector of the economy that includes capital-goods-producing businesses such as Boeing, Caterpillar and Lockheed Martin. Aerospace, defense, construction and machinery businesses
make up most of the capital goods sector.

There was hardly any capital goods industry to help promote further industrialization in India. Capital goods industry means industries which can produce machine tools which are, in turn,
used for producing articles for current consumption.

Factors of Production

In economics, factors of production are the inputs to the production process. Finished goods are the output. Input determines the quantity of output i.e. output depends upon input. Input is the starting point and output is the end point of production process and such input-output relationship is called a production function. There are three basic factors of
production: land, labor, capital.


http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 15
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS




39. Solution: b)

Although contributing to many other physical and chemical reactions, the major atmospheric constituents, nitrogen (N2), oxygen (O2), and argon (Ar), are not greenhouse gases. This is because molecules containing two atoms of the same element such as N2 and O2
and monatomic  molecules such as argon (Ar) have no net change in their dipole moment when they vibrate and hence are almost totally unaffected by infrared radiation. Although molecules containing two atoms of different elements such as carbon monoxide (CO) or hydrogen chloride (HCl) absorb IR, these molecules are short-lived in the atmosphere owing to their reactivity  and solubility. Because they do not contribute significantly to the greenhouse effect,
they are usually omitted when discussing greenhouse gases.

In 2013, this liquid was shown by researchers  at the University of Toronto to be a greenhouse  gas, with warming properties more than 7,000 times that of carbon dioxide over a 100 year
period, and that, as such, it is the most potent greenhouse gas ever discovered. Its concentration in the atmosphere is approximately 0.18 parts per trillion. The researchers also reported that the gas
can persist in the atmosphere for up to 500 years.

When ranked by their direct contribution to the greenhouse effect, the most important are:


Compound                     Formula  Contribution
(%)



Water vapor and clouds H
2O

36 – 72%


Carbon dioxide               CO2            9 – 26%


Methane                         CH
4

4 – 9%


Ozone                             O
3

3    – 7%



40.  Solution:  d)






http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 16
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS


Groundwater is a critical resource in India, accounting for over 65% of irrigation water and 85%
of drinking water supplies. However, on current trends it is estimated that 60% of groundwater sources will be in a critical state of degradation within the next twenty years.

India’s declining groundwater resources are the product of a number  of drivers. Utilization of groundwater facilitates irrigated agriculture in areas far from rivers; in fact, this was key to the agricultural “green revolution” that occurred from the mid 1960s. In places where surface water is available but unsafe for drinking or farming—more than 70% of India’s surface water resources
are polluted by human waste or toxic chemicals—groundwater has often been seen as a safe alternative. Urban water supply infrastructure is often poor and unreliable: well drilling is
typically the most economical means of obtaining household water.

In rural areas, electricity subsidies allowing farmers to pump groundwater cheaply have become entrenched in the political landscape. They are likely to become even more so as energy requirements increase to extract water from greater depths. Low cost encourages excess water withdrawal, an inefficient usage pattern commonly exacerbated by ineffective application methods and the wastage of agricultural produce between farm and market. In order to feed  a growing and wealthier population, it is projected that agricultural water demand in the India of
2030 would need double to 1,200 billion m3 if these inefficient practices continued. The
problems are only going to get worse unless urgent changes occur.

Moreover, the groundwater belongs to the landowner as most of the state laws suggest. However, the groundwater is actually a community resource. For, the depletion of groundwater beneath
one’s own land is likely to deplete the levels in the areas around it too.

One of the critical challenges during the 12th Five-Year Plan is to evolve strategies to manage ground water resources in a rational and sustainable manner.

In a major  shift in the water sector, the 12th Plan clearly calls for “more holistic aquifer management strategies” including separation of electricity feeders for agriculture and domestic use
to “break the cycle of free use of electricity and excess use of groundwater.”


It also focuses on rationalising the pricing of water for various categories of users, including domestic users.


Besides, the new National water policy seeks to make the groundwater  a community resource by urging the states to amend their laws through financial incentives.

41.  Solution: c)

All definitions are correct.





http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 17
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS


42.   Solution c)


The winning candidate need not secure a majority  of the votes. This method is called the First
Past the Post (FPTP) system.


In the electoral race, the candidate who is ahead of others, who crosses the winning post first of all, is the winner. This method is also called the Plurality System.


The FPTP system offers voters a choice not simply between parties but specific candidates.. In constituency based system like the FPTP, the voters know who their own representatives and can hold him or her accountable.


The FPTP system is adopted in the lower house of the parliament and state legislative assemblies; proportional representation by means of single transferable vote is carried out in Rajya Sabha


Reference : Page 57(Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)



43.   Solution a)

Representations on seals and terracotta sculpture indicate that the bull was known, and archaeologists extrapolate from this that oxen were used for ploughing. Archaeologists have also found evidence of a ploughed  field at Kalibangan (Rajasthan), associated with Early Harappan levels. The field had two sets of furrows at right angles to each other, suggesting that two different crops were grown together.


Reference:  Page No. 3 (THEMES  IN INDIAN HISTORY PART I)



44. Solution: b)

Economic growth doesn’t always bring development as is evident from various countries,
especially emerging economies including India.




45.   Solution b)


While some such as clay were locally available, many such as stone, timber and metal had to be procured from outside the alluvial plain. Recent archaeological finds suggest that copper was also
probably brought from Oman, on the southeastern tip of the Arabian peninsula. Steel was not


http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 18
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS


known to the Harappans. Exchanges were regulated by a precise system of weights, usually made of a stone called chert and generally cubical, with no markings. The lower denominations of weights were binary (1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, etc. up to 12,800), while the higher denominations followed the decimal system.


Reference:  Page No. 12,13(THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY PART I)



46.   Solution d)


The Election Commission supervises the preparation of up-to-date voters’ list. It makes every effort to ensure that the voters’ list is free of errors like nonexistence of names of registered voters or existence of names of those non-eligible or non-existent.


It also determines the timing of elections and prepares the election schedule. The election schedule includes the notification of elections, date from which nominations can be filed, last date for filing nominations, last date of scrutiny, last date of withdrawal, date of polling and date of counting and declaration of results.


During this entire process, the Election Commission has the power to take decisions to ensure a free and fair poll. It can postpone or cancel the election in the entire country or a specific State or constituency on the grounds that the atmosphere is vitiated and therefore,  a free and fair election may not be possible.


The Commission also implements a model  code of conduct for parties and candidates. It can order a re-poll in a specific constituency. It can also order a recount of votes when it feels that the counting process has not been fully fair and just.


The Election Commission accords recognition to political parties and allots symbols to each of them.


The Election Commission has very limited staff of its own. It conducts the elections with the help of the administrative machinery. However, once the election process has begun, the commission has control over the administration as far as election related work is concerned. During the election process, the administrative officers of the State and central governments are assigned election related duty and in this respect, the Election Commission has full control over them. The EC can transfer the officers, or stop their transfers; it can take action against them for failing to act in a non-partisan  manner.


Reference : Page 67, 68, 69(Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)



http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 19
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS




47. Solution: b)

Srinagar, capital city of the state of Jammu and Kashmir is located on the banks of Jhelum river.

A meander, in general, is a bend  in a sinuous watercourse or river. A meander is formed when the moving water in a stream  erodes  the outer banks and widens its valley and the inner part of the river has less energy and deposits what it is carrying. A stream of any volume may assume  a meandering course, alternately eroding sediments from the outside of a bend and depositing  them on the inside. The result is a snaking pattern as the stream meanders back and forth across its down-valley axis. When a meander  gets cut off from the main stream, an oxbow lake is formed.



48. Solution b)


Baba Guru Nanak did not wish to establish a new religion, but after his death his followers consolidated their own practices and distinguished  themselves from both Hindus and Muslims. Also he did not give the name Sikhism. He rejected sacrifices, ritual baths, image worship, austerities  and the scriptures of both Hindus and Muslims. It was Guru Gobind Singh who defined its five symbols: uncut hair,  a dagger,  a pair of shorts, a comb and a steel bangle.


Reference:  Page No. 163,164(THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY PART II)



49. Solution: c)

The following was the outcome of the recent Doha conference –


An eight year extension of the Kyoto Protocol until 2020 limited in scope to only
15% of the global carbon dioxide emissions due to the lack of participation of Canada, Japan, Russia, Belarus, Ukraine, New Zealand and the United States and due to the fact that developing countries like China (the world's largest emitter), India and Brazil are not subject to any emissions reductions under the Kyoto Protocol.
Language on loss and damage, formalized for the first time in the conference documents.
The conference made little progress towards the funding of the Green Climate
Fund.
Focus on increasing the effectiveness of conventional means to tackle climate change rather than going for risky and unexplored  options like geo-engineering
etc.

http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 20
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS




50.   Solution b)


The Vice President is elected for five years. His election method is similar to that of the President, the only difference is that members of State legislatures are not part of the electoral college.


The Vice President may be removed from his office by a resolution of the Rajya Sabha passed by a majority  and agreed to by the Lok Sabha. The Vice President acts as the ex-officio Chairman of the Rajya Sabha and takes overthe  office of the President when there is a
vacancy by reasons of death, resignation, removal by impeachment or otherwise. The Vice
President acts as the President only until a new President is elected.


All disputes arising in connection with the election of the Vice President are petitioned to the Supreme Court of India, which inquires into the matter. The petition is heard by a five- member bench of the Supreme Court, which decides on the matter. The decision of the Supreme Court is final.


Reference : Page 88(Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)



51.  Solution:  a)

As compared to the other sections of the Himalayas, these along with the Arunachal Himalayas are conspicuous by the absence of the Shiwalik formations. In place of the Shiwaliks here, the
‘duar formations’ are important, which have also been used for the development of tea gardens.
Sikkim and Darjiling  Himalayas are also known for their scenic beauty and rich flora and fauna, particularly various types of orchids.

The Dooars or Duars are the floodplains  and foothills of the eastern Himalayas in North-East India around Bhutan. The region forms the gateway to Bhutan from India. There are 18 passages or gateways through which the Bhutanese people can communicate with the people living in the plains. This region is divided by the Sankosh river into the Eastern and the Western Dooars, consisting of an area of 8,800 km² (3,400 sq mi). The Western Dooars is known as the Bengal Dooars and the Eastern Dooars as the Assam Dooars. Dooars is synonymous with the
term Terai used in Nepal and northern India and form the only nitrate rich soil in India.




52.  Solution: c)




http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 21
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS


Both are incorrect. Most kayals or backwaters are predominantly brackish i.e. saline. In certain areas, such as the Vembanad Kayal, where a barrage has been built near Kumarakom, salt water from the sea is prevented from entering the deep inside, keeping the fresh water intact. Such fresh water is extensively used for irrigation purposes.



53.  Solution a)


Reference:  Page No. 161(THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY PART II)




54.  Solution: d)

When corals are stressed by changes in conditions such as temperature, light, or nutrients, they expel the symbiotic algae living in their tissues, causing them to turn completely white

Warmer water temperatures can result in coral bleaching. When water is too warm, corals will expel the algae (zooxanthellae) living in their tissues causing the coral to turn completely white. This is called coral bleaching. When a coral bleaches, it is not dead. Corals can survive a bleaching event, but they are under more stress and are subject to mortality.



When exposed to natural constraints (such as an increase/decrease  in the temperature, high tides) or anthropic factors (such as pollution or the sedimentation of terrrigenous substances), coral can respond in various ways, depending on the species involved and on the extent of the disturbance. When the temperature of the sea is greater than the tolerance threshold for some time, the zooxanthellae carry out too much photosynthesis, and this leads the polyps to actively
reject these algae.


When the atolls are hit by "El Niño " or "La Niña", the climatic conditions are disturbed for a short period and this leads to a change  in the direction of the ocean currents, and in the case of " El Niño", to an abnormally large increase in the temperature in the region of the coral reefs.
The global heating process which is affecting both the atmosphere and the oceans of the world and might involve increases of as much as 2°C over the next 50 years constitutes a serious threat to the survival of the coral, since this would mean that the tolerance limits would be
overstepped.


The effects of the bleaching process



http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 22
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS


The loss of symbiotic algae is causing the primary functions of the coral colonies (their growth, their reproductive capacity, etc.) to regress, if not to stop altogether.
If this stress persists, the coral colonies will be at least partly if not completely destroyed and invaded by algal meadows.


The disappearance of the coral would have the following consequences:

The fish population dependent on the corals for food would decrease thus hurting the marine
food chain and the biodiversity. This would affect fishermen’s catch and impact the local
economy.

The coastline would become eroded since it would no longer be protected by the reefs from sea swell.




55.  Solution: b)

Some economists point out that subsidies do not allow prices to indicate the supply of a good. When electricity and water are provided  at a subsidized rate or free, they will be used wastefully without any concern for their scarcity. Farmers will cultivate water intensive crops if water is supplied free, although the water resources in that region may be scarce and such crops will further deplete the already scarce resources. If water is priced to reflect scarcity, farmers will cultivate crops suitable to the region. Fertiliser and pesticide subsidies result in overuse of resources which can be harmful to the environment. Subsidies provide an incentive for wasteful use of resources.



56. Solution: d)

There are two major island groups in India – one in the Bay of Bengal and the other in the
Arabian Sea. The Bay of Bengal island groups consist of about 572 islands/islets. These are situated roughly between 6°N-14°N and 92°E -94°E. The two principal groups of islets include the Ritchie’s archipelago and the Labrynth island.

The entire group of island is divided into two broad categories – the Andaman in the north and the Nicobar in the south. They are separated by a water body which is called the Ten degree channel. It is believed that these islands are an elevated portion of submarine mountains. However, some smaller islands are volcanic in origin. Barren island, the only active volcano in
India is also situated in the Nicobar islands.




http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 23
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS


57.  Solution b)


The government has established in 2000 an institution, the National Human Rights Commission. The National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) is composed of a former chief justice of the Supreme Court of India, a former judge of the Supreme Court, a former chief justice of a High Court and two other members who have knowledge and practical experience in matters relating to human rights.


The commission’s functions include inquiry at its own initiative or on a petition presented to it by a victim into complaint of violation of human rights; visit to jails to study the condition of the inmates; undertaking and promoting research in the field of human rights etc.
The commission receives complaints in thousands every year related to custodial death, custodial rape, disappearances, police excesses, failure in taking action, Indignity to women etc.


The commission does not have the power of prosecution. It can merely make recommendations to the government or recommend to the courts to initiate proceedings based on the inquiry that it conducts.


Reference : Page 42 (Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)



58. Solution a)

Of the groups of sufis who migrated to India in the late twelfth century, the Chishtis were the most influential. This was because they adapted successfully to the local environment and adopted several features of Indian devotional traditions. Chistis used the local languages in their compositions and communication.  The sufis accepted unsolicited grants and donations from the political elites.


Reference:  Page No. 154,158,159(THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY PART II)





59. Solution: c)

An antecedent stream is a stream that maintains its original course and pattern despite the changes in underlying rock topography. A stream with a dendritic drainage pattern, for example, can be subject to slow tectonic uplift. However, as the uplift occurs, the stream erodes through the rising ridge to form a steep-walled gorge. The stream thus keeps its dendritic pattern even
though it flows over a landscape that will normally produce a trellis drainage pattern.


http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 24
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS


The Himalayan Rivers are great examples of antecedent origin. These rivers originated well before the Himalayan region was uplifted. The rivers Indus, Ganga and Sutlej originated on Tibetan side and now traverse the existing mountain ranges, cutting deep gorges.



The Subansiri, tributary of the Brahmaputra and the Kosi, tributary of the Ganga are also antecedent rivers.



60. Solution d)


Who decides which constituency is to be reserved? On what basis is this decision taken? This decision is taken by an independent body called the Delimitation Commission. The Delimitation Commission is appointed by the President of India and works in collaboration with the Election Commission of India. It is appointed for the purpose of drawing up the boundaries of constituencies all over the country. A quota of constituencies to be reserved in each State is fixed depending on the proportion of SC or ST in that State. After drawing the boundaries, the Delimitation Commission looks at the composition of population in each constituency. Those constituencies that have the highest proportion of Scheduled Tribe population are reserved for ST.


In the case of Scheduled Castes, the Delimitation Commission looks at two things. It picks constituencies that have higher proportion  of Scheduled Caste population. But it also spreads these constituencies in different regions of the State. This is done because the Scheduled Caste population is generally spread evenly throughout the country.


These reserved constituencies can be rotated each time the Delimitation exercise is undertaken. The Delimitation Commission in India is a high power body whose orders have the force of law and cannot be called in question before any court.


Reference : Page 59 and http://eci.nic.in(Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)




61.  Solution: c)

6. Save Our Species (SOS)” is a global coalition initiated by the three founding partners IUCN, GEF and World Bank to build the biggest species conservation fund, supporting on-the-ground field conservation projects all over the world. SOS will combine resources and funding experience from the World Bank and GEF (Global Environment Facility), the authoritative
science of IUCN  and the resources and ingenuity of the private sector to create  a mechanism that


http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 25
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS


ensures sufficient funding goes to species conservation projects where and when it will have the
most impact.

Apart from Red-crowned roof turtle, Four-toed terrapin and Gangetic Dolphins; white bellied herons are also included in the initiative.



62.  Solution a)


The Election Commission of India can either be a single member or a multi-member body. Till 1989, the Election Commission was single member. Just before the 1989 general elections, two Election Commissioners were appointed, making the body multi-member. Soon after the elections, the Commission reverted to its single member status. In 1993, two Election Commissioners were once again appointed and the Commission became multi- member  and has remained multi-member since then.


The Chief Election Commissioner (CEC) presides over the Election Commission, but does not have more powers than the other Election Commissioners. The CEC and the two Election Commissioners have equal powers to take all decisions relating to elections as a collective body. They are appointed by the President of India on the advice of the Council of Ministers.


The CEC is removed by the President if both Houses of Parliament make such are commendation with a special majority. This is done to ensure that a ruling  party cannot remove  a CEC who refuses to favour it in elections. The Election Commissioners can be removed by the President of India.
Reference : Page 67, 68(Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)




63. Solution:  a)

The discharge is the volume of water flowing in a river measured over time. It is measured either in cusecs (cubic feet per second) or cumecs (cubic metres per second).

The Ganga has its minimum flow during the January-June period. The maximum flow is attained either in August or in September. After September, there is a steady  fall in the flow. The river, thus, has a monsoon regime during the rainy season.

There are striking differences in the river regimes in the eastern and the western parts of the
Ganga Basin. The Ganga maintains a sizeable flow in the early part of summer due to snow melt



http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 26
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS


before the monsoon rains begin. The mean maximum discharge of the Ganga at Farakka is about
55,000 cusecs while the mean minimum is only 1,300 cusecs




64. Solution c)


The word silsila  literally means a chain, signifying a continuous link between master and disciple, stretching as an unbroken  spiritual genealogy to the Prophet Muhammad. It was through this channel that spiritual power and blessings were transmitted to devotees.


Reference:  Page No. 153 (THEMES  IN INDIAN HISTORY PART II)




65. Solution: d)

Permafrost is permanently frozen soil, and occurs mostly in high latitudes. Permafrost comprises
24% of the land in the Northern Hemisphere, and stores massive amounts of carbon. As a result of climate change, permafrost is at risk of melting, releasing the stored carbon in the form of carbon dioxide and methane, which are powerful heat-trapping gases. In addition, permafrost is structurally important, and its melting has been known to cause erosion, disappearance of lakes, landslides, and ground subsidence. It will also cause changes in plant species composition at high latitudes.








66.  Solution d)


The founding and settling of hill stations was initially connected with the needs of the British army. Hill stations became strategic places for billeting troops, guarding frontiers and launching campaigns against enemy rulers. Simla became the official residence of the commander-in-chief of the Indian army. Hill stations were important for the colonial economy. With the setting up of
tea and coffee plantations in the adjoining areas, an influx of immigrant labour from the plains began. This meant that hill stations no longer remained exclusive racial enclaves for Europeans in India.


Reference:  Page No. 327,328(THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY PART III)




http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 27
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS


67. Solution: c)

4. Marine protected areas, like any protected area, are regions in which human activity has been placed under some restrictions in the interest of protecting the natural environment,  its surrounding waters and the occupant ecosystems, and any cultural or historical resources that may require preservation or management. Marine protected areas' boundaries will include some area of ocean, even if it is only a small fraction of the total area of the territory.

Natural or historic marine resources are protected  by local, state, territorial, native, regional, or national authorities  and may differ substantially from nation to nation. This variation includes different limitations on development, fishing practices, fishing seasons and catch limits, moorings, bans on removing or disrupting marine life of any kind.

Some people confuse marine reserves, where extraction of any resources is prohibited (no-take), as the only type of MPA. MPAs may include marine reserves, as well as other zones in which partial protection is afforded (seasonal closures, catch limits, etc.). Many MPAs are multiple-use areas, where a variety  of uses are allowed. For example, there are many different kinds of MPAs in U.S. waters including national parks, wildlife refuges, monuments and marine sanctuaries, fisheries closures, critical habitat, habitat areas of particular concern, state parks, conservation areas, estuarine reserves and preserves, and numerous  others. While a few sites exist as no-
take marine reserves, the vast majority of MPAs, both in terms of numbers and area, are open for
fishing, diving, boating, and other recreational and commercial  uses.

In the case of India, the first MPA was designated in 1967 for the protection of wetlands and of the birds migrating there, even before  a specific legal framework for protected areas (PAs) was put in place. According to the Government of India there are 31 MPAs in India, designated mainly in 1980s and early 1990s. The main MPAs in mainland India are the Gulf of Mannar national park and biosphere reserve, Gahirmatha wildlife sanctuary, Gulf of Kutch national park and wildlife sanctuary, Malvan (marine) wildlife sanctuary, and Sunderbans national park and biosphere reserve. There also are several PAs in Andaman and Nicobar islands.



68. Solution: d)

Equity in agriculture called for land reforms which primarily refer to change in the ownership of landholdings. Just a year  after independence, steps were taken to abolish intermediaries  and to make the tillers the owners of land. The idea behind this move was that ownership of land would give incentives to the tillers to invest in making improvements provided sufficient capital was made available to them.

Land ceiling was another policy to promote equity in the agricultural sector. This means fixing the maximum size of land which could be owned by an individual. The purpose of land ceiling was to reduce the concentration of land ownership in a few hands. The abolition of
intermediaries  meant that some 200 lakh tenants came into direct contact with the government

http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 28
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS


— they were thus freed from being exploited by the zamindars. The ownership conferred on tenants gave them the incentive to increase output and this contributed to growth in agriculture. However, the goal of equity was not fully served by abolition of intermediaries. In some areas the former zamindars continued to own large areas of land by making use of some loopholes in the legislation.

The Debate Over Subsidies:

The economic justification of subsidies in agriculture is, at present, a hotly debated question. It is generally agreed that it was necessary to use subsidies to provide an incentive for adoption of the new HYV technology by farmers in general and small farmers in particular. Any new technology will be looked upon as being risky by farmers. Subsidies were, therefore, needed to encourage farmers to test the new technology.

Some economists believe that once the technology is found profitable and is widely adopted, subsidies should be phased out since their purpose has been served. Further, subsidies are meant to benefit the farmers but a substantial  amount of fertilizer subsidy also benefits the fertilizer industry; and among farmers, the subsidy largely benefits the farmers in the more prosperous regions. Therefore, it is argued that there is no case for continuing with fertilizer subsidies; it does not benefit the target group and it is a huge burden  on the government’s finances.

On the other hand, some believe that the government should continue with agricultural subsidies because farming in India continues to be a risky business. Most farmers are very poor and they will not be able to afford the required inputs without subsidies. Eliminating subsidies will
increase the inequality between rich and poor farmers and violate the goal of equity. These experts argue that if subsidies are largely benefiting the fertilizer industry and big farmers, the correct policy is not to abolish subsidies but to take steps to ensure that only the poor farmers enjoy the benefits.



69. Solution d)


Banning of loudspeaker after 10 pm is in the interest of the larger public good, else this would lead to sound pollution (loud speakers also disrupt people’s peace and concentration). Hence this ban by the district court does not violate fundamental right.


All linguistic minorities can set up their own educational institutions to preserve and develop their own culture. Thus the Karnataka Society has every right to run Kannada medium schools outside Karnataka.

A director makes  a documentary film that criticises the policies of the government. In this situation the freedom of expression is being used.

http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 29
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS



Reference : Chapter 2(Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)



70. Solution:  a)

The western cyclonic disturbances which enter the Indian subcontinent from the west and the northwest during the winter months, originate over the Mediterranean Sea and are brought  into India by the westerly jet stream. An increase in the prevailing night temperature generally indicates an advance in the arrival of these cyclones disturbances.



71.  Solution d)


"Objectives Resolution”  was introduced by Pandit Nehru in the Constituent Assembly, It proclaimed India to be an “Independent Sovereign Republic”. Did not include the words Socialist and Secular.


Reference:  Page No. 411(THEMES  IN INDIAN HISTORY PART III)


72.  Solution:  a)

The Damodar occupies the eastern margins of the Chotanagpur Plateau where it flows through  a rift valley and finally joins the Hugli. The Barakar is its main tributary.

It has a number  of tributaries and subtributaries,  such as Barakar, Konar, Bokaro, Haharo, Jamunia, Ghari, Guaia, Khadia and Bhera.

The Barakar is the most important tributary of the Damodar. It originates  near Padma in Hazaribagh district and flows through Jharkhand before meeting the Damodar near Dishergarh  in West Bengal. The Damodar and the Barakar trifurcates the Chota Nagpur plateau.



73.  Solution d)


The governments from time to time tried to give effect to some Directive Principles of State Policy. They passed several zamindari abolition bills, nationalised banks, abolition of Privy Purses enacted numerous factory laws, fixed minimum wages, cottage and small industries were promoted  and provisions for reservation for the uplift of the scheduled castes and scheduled
tribes were made.





http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 30
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS


Directive Principles include the right to education, formation of Panchayati raj institutions all
over the country, partial right to work under employment guarantee programme  and the mid-day meal scheme etc.


Reference : Page 43,44(Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)



74. Solution: d)

Many distinguished thinkers contributed to the formulation of our five year plans. Among them, the name of the statistician, Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis, stands out. Planning, in the real sense of the term, began with the Second Five Year Plan.

The Second Plan, a landmark contribution to development planning in general, laid down the basic ideas regarding goals of Indian planning; this plan was based on the ideas of Mahalanobis. In
that sense, he can be regarded as the architect of Indian planning.

The Feldman–Mahalanobis model is a Neo-Marxist model of economic development, created independently by Soviet economist G. A. Feldman in 1928, and Indian statistician Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis in 1953. Mahalanobis became essentially the key economist
of India's Second Five Year Plan, becoming subject to much of India's most dramatic economic debates.

The essence of the model is a shift in the pattern of industrial investment towards building up
a domestic consumption goods sector. Thus the strategy suggests in order to reach  a high standard in consumption, investment in building a capacity  in the production of capital goods is firstly needed. A high enough capacity in the capital goods sector in the long-run expands the capacity
in the production of consumer goods.



https://ib-economics.wikispaces.com/Harrod-Domar+Growth+Model




75.  Solution: d)

The general orientation of these ranges is from northwest to the southeast direction in the northwestern part of India. Himalayas in the Darjeeling and Sikkim regions lie in an east-west direction, while in Arunachal Pradesh they are from southwest to the northwest direction. In Nagaland, Manipur and Mizoram, they are in the north-south direction.



76. Solution: d)



http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 31
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS


http://www.currentscience.ac.in/Volumes/100/06/0805.pdf




77. Solution d)


Fundamental rights primarily protect individuals from any arbitrary state actions, but some rights are enforceable  against individuals.


These provisions act as a check both on state action as well as the action of private individuals. However, these rights are not absolute or uncontrolled and are subject to reasonable restrictions as necessary for the protection of general welfare. They can also be selectively curtailed.


Right to demonstration or picketing can be a Fundamental  Right but not right to strike.
Every citizen has the right to assemble peacefully and without arms. There can be restrictions on a peaceful march (For instance recent case on Anna Hazare) if the march breaches certain laws or causes inconvenience to the general public.


Restrictions can be placed on Government officials expressing their grievances against the government through media.


Reasonable restrictions can be imposed in the interest of public order, security of State, decency or morality.


Reference : Chapter  2 (Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)




78. Solution d)


On 27 August 1947, B. Pocker Bahadur from Madras  made a powerful plea for continuing separate electorates. Not all Muslims supported the demand for separate electorates. Begum Aizaas Rasul, for instance, felt that separate electorates were self destructive since they isolated the minorities from the majority.


Reference:  Page No. 416-419 (THEMES  IN INDIAN HISTORY PART III)




79. Solution: c)



http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 32
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS


Yamuna does  not flow through a rift valley.

A rift valley is a linear-shaped lowland between several highlands or mountain ranges created by the action of a geologic rift or fault. A Rift Valley is formed on a divergent plate boundary,  a crustal extension, a spreading apart of the surface, which is subsequently further deepened by the forces of erosion. When the tensional forces were strong enough to cause the plate to split apart,
a center block dropped down between the two blocks at its flanks, forming  a graben. This drop
of the center creates the nearly parallel steeply dipping walls of rift valley when it is new. This feature is the beginning of the rift valley, but as the process continues, the valley widens, until it becomes a large basin, that fills with sediment from the rift walls and the surrounding area. One
of the most well known examples of this process is the East African Rift.

Lake Tanganyika is an African Great Lake. It is estimated to be the second largest freshwater lake in the world by volume, and the second deepest, in both cases, after only Lake
Baikal in Siberia; it is also the world's longest freshwater lake. The lake is divided among four countries – Tanzania, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Burundi, and Zambia, with Tanzania (46%) and the DRC (40%) possessing the majority of the lake. The water flows into the Congo River system and ultimately  into the Atlantic Ocean.


80.   Solution: d)

The third geological division of India comprises the plains formed by the river Indus, the Ganga and the Brahmaputra. Originally, it was a geo-synclinal depression which attained its maximum development during the third phase of the Himalayan mountain formation approximately about
64 million years ago. Since then, it has been gradually filled by the sediments brought by the
Himalayan and Peninsular rivers. Average depth of alluvial deposits in these plains ranges from
1,000-2,000 m.

Geosyncline

It is a linear trough of subsidence of the Earth’s crust within which vast amounts of
sediment accumulate. The filling of a geosyncline with thousands or tens of thousands of feet of sediment is accompanied in the late stages of deposition by folding, crumpling, and faulting of the deposits. Intrusion of crystalline igneous rock and regional uplift along the axis of the trough generally complete the history of a particular geosyncline, which is thus transformed to a belt of folded mountains. The concept of the geosyncline was introduced by the American
geologist James Hall in 1859. Most modern geologists regard the concept as obsolete and largely
explain the development of linear troughs in terms of plate tectonics; the term geosyncline, however, remains in use.






http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 33
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS


81.  Solution c)


Ordinarily, a person would be arrested after he or she has reportedly committed some offence. However there are exceptions to this. Sometimes a person can be arrested simply out of an apprehension that he or she is likely to engage in unlawful activity and imprisoned for some time without following the above mentioned procedure. This is known as preventive detention. It means that if the government feels that  a person can be a threat  to law and order or to the peace and security of the nation, it can detain or arrest that person.
The government can impose restrictions in certain areas declaring the assembly of five or more persons as unlawful. Freedom to assemble too is to be exercised peacefully and without arms. Right to demonstration or picketing can be a Fundamental  Right but not right to strike. Reference : Page 35 (Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)


82.  Solution:  c)

Industrial Policy Resolution 1956 (IPR 1956):

In accordance with the goal of the state controlling the commanding heights of the economy, the Industrial Policy Resolution of 1956 was adopted. This resolution formed the basis of the Second Five Year Plan, the plan which tried to build the basis for a socialist pattern of society. This resolution classified industries into three categories. The first category comprised industries which would be exclusively owned by the state; the second category consisted of industries in which the private sector could supplement the efforts of the state sector, with the state taking the sole responsibility for starting new units; the third category consisted of the remaining industries
which were to be in the private sector.

Although there was a category  of industries left to the private sector, the sector was kept under state control through  a system of licenses. No new industry was allowed unless a license was obtained from the government. This policy was used for promoting industry in backward regions; it was easier to obtain  a license if the industrial unit was established in an economically  backward area. In addition, such units were given certain concessions such as tax benefits and electricity at a lower tariff. The purpose of this policy was to promote regional equality.

Even an existing industry had to obtain  a license for expanding output or for diversifying production (producing a new variety of goods). This was meant to ensure that the quantity of goods produced was not more than what the economy required. License to expand production was given only if the government was convinced that the economy required the larger quantity of goods.



83. Solution: c)


http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 34
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS


In 1955, the Village and Small-scale Industries Committee, also called the Karve Committee, noted the possibility of using small-scale industries for promoting rural development.

It was believed that small-scale industries are more ‘labour intensive’ i.e., they use more labour than the large-scale industries and, therefore,  generate more employment. But these industries cannot compete with the big industrial firms; it is obvious that development of small-scale industry requires them to be shielded from the large firms. For this purpose, the production of a number of products was reserved for the small-scale industry; the criterion of reservation being the ability of these units to manufacture the goods. They were also given concessions such as
lower excise duty and bank loans at lower interest rates.

What is the definition of MSME?

The Government of India has enacted the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development (MSMED)  Act, 2006 in terms of which the definition of micro, small and medium enterprises is as under:

(a) Enterprises engaged in the manufacture or production, processing or preservation of goods as specified below:

(i) A micro enterprise is an enterprise  where investment in plant and machinery does not exceed
Rs. 25 lakh;

(ii) A small enterprise is an enterprise  where the investment in plant and machinery is more than
Rs. 25 lakh but does not exceed Rs. 5 crore; and

(iii) A medium enterprise is an enterprise  where the investment in plant and machinery is more than Rs.5 crore but does not exceed Rs.10 crore.






84. Solution b)


Congress swept the general seats in the provincial elections, and the Muslim League captured most of the reserved Muslim seats. But the League chose to boycott the Constituent Assembly, pressing its demand for Pakistan with a separate  constitution. The Socialists too were initially unwilling to join, for they believed the Constituent Assembly was a creation of the British, and therefore incapable of being truly autonomous. In effect, therefore, 82 per cent of the members of
the Constituent Assembly were also members of the Congress.




http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 35
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS


Many of the linguistic minorities wanted the protection of their mother tongue, religious minorities asked for special safeguards, while dalits demanded an end to all caste oppression and reservation of seats in government bodies. Important issues of cultural rights and social justice raised in these public discussions were debated on the floor of the Assembly.


Reference:  Page No. 408(THEMES IN INDIAN HISTORY PART III)






85. Solution b)


First Past the Post (FPTP)system is followed in Lok Sabha and Assembly elections, whereas proportional representation by means of single transferable vote is carried out in Rajya Sabha and election of President and Vice-President.


Election Commission does not supervise Panchayat and Municipal elections, it is done by
State Election Commission.


The Election Commissioners are removed by the President not the Chief Election
Commissioner.


In 1993, two Election Commissioners were once again appointed and the Commission became multi-member and has remained multi-member since then.
Reference : Page 68, 69 (Indian Constitution at Work Class XI), Election Commission website.



86. Solution d)


The President can send back the advice given by the Council of Ministers and ask the Council to reconsider the decision. In doing this, the President acts on his (or her) own discretion. When the President thinks that the advice has certain flaws or legal lacunae, or that it is not
in the best interests of the country, the President can ask the Council to reconsider the
decision. Although, the Council can still send back the same advice and the President would then be bound by that advice, such a request  by the President to reconsider the decision, would naturally carry  a lot of weight. So, this is one way in which the president can act in his own discretion.


The President also has veto power by which he can withhold or refuse to give assent to Bills
(other than Money Bill) passed by the Parliament. Every bill passed by the Parliament goes to the President for his assent before it becomes a law. The President can send the bill back to


http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 36
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS


the Parliament asking it to reconsider the bill. This ‘veto’ power is limited because, if the Parliament passes the same bill again and sends it back to the President, then, the President has to give assent to that bill.


Proportional representation by means of single transferable vote is carried out in the election of President.


The President’s ordinance making power is not a discretionary power, since it is based on the
advice of the council of ministers headed by the Prime Minister.


President is elected by the members of the electoral college consisting of Elected members of both the Houses of the parliament, elected members of the legislative assemblies (States & Union territories)


Reference : Page 84, 85, 86, 87(Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)







87. Solution: c)

In Mizoram State the Barak flows southwest then veers abruptly north when joined by a north flowing stream and flows into Assam State where it turns westward  again near Lakhipur as it enters the plains. It then flows west past the town of Silchar where it is joined by the Madhura
River. Silchar is in Assam.

Tipaimukh Dam is a proposed  embankment dam on the river Barak in Manipur state India, first commissioned in 1984. The purpose of the dam is flood control and hydroelectric power generation. It has been subject to repeated delays as the project developed, as there has been controversy between India and Bangladesh over water rights, in addition to questions of environmental effects of the huge project, as well as the need to relocate Manipuri people to make way for a vast  reservoir. In 2013, the governments of India and Bangladesh announced further delays, as the latter nation undertakes additional studies about expected effects and mitigating measures.


88. Solution: d) All are correct.





http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 37
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS


The catchments of large rivers are called river basins while those of small rivulets and rills are often referred to as watersheds. There is, however, a slight difference between a river basin  and a watershed. Watersheds are small in area while the basins cover larger areas. River basins and watersheds  are marked by unity. What happens in one part of the basin or watershed directly affects the other parts and the unit as a whole. That is why, they are accepted as the most appropriate micro, meso or macro planning regions.



89. Solution: b)


(i)        Major river basins with more than 20,000 sq. km of catchment area. It includes 14 drainage basins such as the Ganga, the Brahmaputra, the Krishna, the Tapi, the Narmada, the Mahi, the Pennar, the Sabarmati, the Barak, etc.
(ii)        Medium river basins with catchment area between  2,000-20,000 sq. km incorporating 44 river basins such as the Kalindi, the Periyar, the Meghna, etc.
(iii)       Minor river basins with catchment area of less than 2,000 sq. km include fairly good number of rivers flowing in the area of low rainfall.






90. Solution:  a)

India agreed to the conditionalities of World Bank and IMF and announced the New Economic Policy (NEP). The NEP consisted of wide ranging economic reforms. The thrust of the policies was towards creating a more competitive environment in the economy and removing the barriers to entry and growth  of firms. This set of policies can broadly be classified into two groups: the stabilisation  measures and the structural reform measures. Stabilisation measures are short term measures, intended to correct some of the weaknesses  that have developed in the balance of payments  and bring inflation under control. In simple words, this means that there was a need  to maintain sufficient foreign exchange reserves and keep the rising prices under control.

On the other hand, structural reform policies are long-term measures, aimed at improving the efficiency of the economy and increasing its international competitiveness by removing the rigidities in various segments of the Indian economy.



91.  Solution: c)






http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 38
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS


River Kosi, also know as the ‘sorrow of Bihar’, has been notorious for frequently changing its
course. The Kosi brings huge quantity of sediments from its upper reaches  and deposits it in the plains. The course gets blocked, and consequently,  the river changes its course.

Extensive soil erosion and landslides in its upper catchment have produced a silt yield of about
19 m³/ha/year (10 cu yd/acre/yr), one of the highest in the world. Of major tributaries, the Arun brings the greatest amount of coarse silt in proportion to its total sediment load. The river transports sediment down the steep gradients and narrow gorges in the mountains and foothills where the gradient is at least ten metres per km. On the plains beyond Chatra, the gradient falls below one metre per km to as little as 6 cm per km as the river approaches the Ganges. Current slows and the sediment load settles out of the water and is deposited on an immense alluvial
fan that has grown to an area of about 15 000 km². This fan extends some 180 km from its apex where it leaves the foothills, across the international border into Bihar state and on to the Ganges. The river has numerous interlacing channels that shift laterally over the fan from time to time. Without channelization, floods spread out very widely. The record flow of 24 200 m³/s is equivalent to water a metre  deep and more than 24 km wide, flowing at one metre per second.



92.  Solution: d)

The northern boundary of the Peninsular Block may be taken as an irregular line running from Kachchh along the western flank of the Aravali Range near Delhi and then roughly parallel to the Yamuna and the Ganga as far as the Rajmahal Hills and the Ganga delta. Apart from these, the Karbi Anglong and the Meghalaya Plateau in the northeast  and Rajasthan in the west are also extensions of this block. The northeastern parts are separated by the Malda fault in West Bengal from the Chotanagpur plateau. In Rajasthan, the desert and other desert–like features overlay this block.

The Peninsula is formed essentially by a great  complex of very ancient gneisses and granites, which constitutes a major  part of it. Since the Cambrian period, the Peninsula has been standing like a rigid block with the exception of some of its western coast which is submerged beneath the sea and some other parts changed due to tectonic activity without affecting the original basement.



93. Solution c)


Size of the Council of Ministers- Before the 91st Amendment Act (2003),the size of the
Council of Ministers was determined according to exigencies of time and requirements  of the situation.



http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 39
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS


But then according to the amendment the Council of Ministers shall not exceed 15 percent of total number of members of the House of People (or Assembly, in the case of the States).
The Council of Ministers is collectively responsible to the Lok Sabha. This provision means
that  a Ministry which loses confidence of the Lok Sabha is obliged to resign. The principle indicates that the ministry is an executive committee of the Parliament and it collectively governs on behalf of the Parliament. Collective responsibility is based on the principle of the solidarity of the cabinet. It implies that  a vote of no confidence even  against a single minister leads to the resignation of the entire Council of Ministers.


In India, the Prime Minister enjoys a pre-eminent place in the government. The Council of Ministers cannot exist without the Prime Minister. The Council comes into existence only after the Prime Minister has taken the oath of office. The death or resignation of the Prime Minister automatically brings about the dissolution of the Council of Ministers but the demise, dismissal or resignation of a minister only creates  a ministerial vacancy.


Reference : Page 90, 91, 92(Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)



94. Solution: d)

Some of the factors responsible for land degradation are

(i)        loss of vegetation occurring due to deforestation (ii)       unsustainable fuel wood and fodder extraction (iii)      shifting cultivation
(iv)       encroachment into forest lands
(v)        forest fires and over grazing
(vi)      non-adoption of adequate soil conservation measures
(vii)     improper crop rotation
(viii)     indiscriminate use of agro-chemicals such as fertilizers and pesticides
(ix)       improper planning and management of irrigation systems
(x)        extraction of ground water in excess of the recharge capacity
(xi)       open access resource and
(xii)     Poverty of the agriculture-dependent people.




95. Solution: d)

All are correct.





http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 40
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS


Export surplus means an economic measure of a positive balance of trade, where a country's exports exceeds its imports. A trade surplus represents a net inflow of domestic currency from foreign markets, and is the opposite of a trade  deficit, which would represent a net outflow.



96. Solution:  a)

The British introduced the railways in India in 1850 and it is considered as one of their most important contributions. The railways affected the structure of the Indian economy in two important ways.

On the one hand it enabled people to undertake long distance travel and thereby break geographical and cultural barriers while, on the other hand it fostered commercialization of Indian agriculture which adversely affected the comparative self-sufficiency of the village economies in India. The volume of India’s export trade undoubtedly expanded but its benefits rarely accrued to the Indian people.




97. Solution d)


The Prime Minister acts as a link between the Council of Ministers on the one hand and the President as well as the Parliament on the other. It is this role of the Prime Minister which led Pt. Nehru to describe him as ‘the linchpin of Government’. It is also the constitutional obligation of the Prime Minister to communicate to the President all decisions of the Council of Ministers relating to the administration of the affairs of the Union and proposals  for legislation.


At the State level, a similar parliamentary executive exists, though with some variations. The most important variation is that there is a Governor of the State appointed by the President (on the advice of the Central govt).Though the Chief Minister, like the Prime Minister is the leader of the majority party in the Assembly, the Governor has more discretionary powers.


The writ jurisdiction of the Supreme Court is narrower compared to the High Court since writ jurisdiction of High Court involves not only Fundamental Rights but also ordinary legal right.


Reference : Page 92, 93, 94(Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)


98. Solution: d) Physical and Human Capital



http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 41
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS


Both the forms of capital formation are outcomes of conscious investment decisions. Decision regarding investment in physical capital is taken on the basis of one’s knowledge in this regard. The entrepreneur possesses knowledge to calculate the expected rates of return to a range  of investments and then rationally decides which one of the investments should be made. The ownership of physical capital is the outcome of the conscious decision of the owner — the physical capital formation is mainly an economic and technical process. A substantial part of the human capital formation takes place in one’s life when she/he is unable to decide whether it would maximize her/his  earnings.

Children are given different types of school education and health care facilities by their parents and the society. The peers, educators  and society influence the decisions regarding human capital investments even at the tertiary level, that is, at the college level. Moreover, the human capital formation  at this stage is dependent upon the already formed  human capital at the school level. Human capital formation is partly  a social process and partly a conscious decision of the possessor of the human capital.

You know that the owner of a physical capital, says a bus, need not be present in the place where it is used; whereas,  a bus-driver, who possesses the knowledge and ability to drive the bus, should be present when the bus is used for transportation of men and materials. Physical capital is tangible and can be easily sold in the market like any other commodity. Human capital is intangible; it is endogenously built in the body and mind of its owner. Human capital is not sold
in the market; only the services of human capital are sold and hence the necessity of the owner of the human capital to be present in the place of production. The physical capital is separable from its owner, whereas, human capital is inseparable from its owner.

The two forms of capital differ in terms of mobility across space. Physical capital is completely mobile between countries except for some artificial trade restrictions. Human capital is not perfectly mobile between countries as movement is restricted by nationality and culture. Therefore, physical capital formation can be built even through imports, whereas human capital formation is to be done through conscious policy formulations in consonance with the nature of the society and economy and expenditure  by the state and the individuals.

Both forms of capital depreciate with time but the nature of depreciation differs between the two. Continuous use of machine leads to depreciation  and change of technology makes a machine obsolete. In the case of human capital, depreciation takes place with ageing but can be reduced,
to a large extent, through continuous investment in education, health, etc. This investment also
facilitates the human capital to cope with change in technology which is not the case with physical capital.

Nature of benefits flowing from human capital is different from that of physical capital. Human capital benefits not only the owner but also the society in general. This is called external benefit.
An educated person can effectively take part in a democratic process and contribute to the socio-


http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 42
INSIGHTS MOCK PRELIMS TEST-4                                                                                      SOLUTIONS


economic progress of a nation.  A healthy person, by maintaining personal hygiene and sanitation, stops the spread of contagious diseases and epidemics. Human capital creates both private and social benefits, whereas physical capital creates only private benefit. That is, benefits from a capital good flow to those who pay the price for the product and services produced by it.




99. Solution d)


The Prime Minister is involved in all crucial decisions of the government  and decides on the policies of the government. Thus, the power wielded by the Prime Minister flows from various sources: control over the Council of Ministers, leadership of the Lok Sabha, command over the bureaucratic machine, access to media, projection of personalities during elections, projection as national leader during international summitry as well as foreign visits.


Reference : Page 92(Indian Constitution at Work Class XI)





100.       Solution: d)

The Environmental Performance Index (EPI) is a method  of quantifying and numerically  marking the environmental performance of a state's  policies. This index was developed from the Pilot Environmental Performance Index, first published in 2002, and designed  to supplement the environmental targets set forth in the United Nations Millennium Development Goals.

The EPI was preceded by the Environmental Sustainability Index (ESI), published between 1999 and 2005. Both indexes were developed by Yale University (Yale Center for Environmental Law and Policy) and Columbia University (Center for International Earth Science Information Network) in collaboration with the World Economic Forum and the Joint Research Centre of the European Commission. The ESI was developed to evaluate environmental  sustainability relative to the paths of other countries. Due to a shift in focus by the teams developing the ESI, the EPI uses outcome-oriented indicators, then working as a benchmark  index that can be more easily used by policy makers, environmental scientists, advocates and the general public.

In the 2012 EPI ranking, the top five countries were Switzerland, Latvia, Norway, Luxembourg, and Costa Rica.

The bottom five countries were South Africa, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan,
and Iraq. The United Kingdom was ranked in 9th place, Japan 23rd place, Brazil 30th, the United
States 49th, China 116th, and India came in 125th.





http://insightsonindia.com                               INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 43
