
INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK PRELIMINARY EXAM - 2014


INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST - 6

GENERAL STUDIES

PAPER-I

Time Allowed: One and Half Hours                                                                    Maximum Marks: 150


INSTRUCTIONS
1.   IMMEDITELY AFTER THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE EXAMINATION, YOU SHOULD
CHECK  THAT  THIS  TEST  BOOKLET  DOES  NOT  HAVE  ANY  UNPRINTED  OR  TORN  OR MISSING PAGES OR ITEMS, ETC. IF SO, GET IT REPLACED BY A COMPLETE TEST BOOKLET.
2.  You have to enter your Roll Number on the Test I Booklet in the Box provided alongside. DO NOT write anything else on the Test Booklet.

4.  This Test Booklet contains 100 items (questions). Each  item is  printed only in  English. Each item comprises four responses (answers). You will select the response which you want to mark on the Answer Sheet. In case you feel that there is more than one correct response, mark the response which you consider the best. In any case, choose ONLY ONE response for each item.
5.  You have to mark all your responses ONLY on the separate Answer Sheet provided. See directions in the
Answer Sheet.
6.  All items carry equal marks.

7.  Before you proceed to mark in the Answer Sheet the response to various items in the Test Booklet, you have to fill in some particulars in the Answer Sheet as per instructions sent to you with your Admission Certificate.

8.  After you have completed filling in all your responses on the Answer Sheet and the examination has concluded, you should hand over to the Invigilator only the Answer Sheet. You are permitted to take away with you the Test Booklet.

9.  Sheets for rough work are appended in the Test Booklet at the end.
10.  Penalty for wrong answers :
THERE WILL BE PENALTY FOR WRONG ANSWERS MARKED BY A CANDIDATE IN THE OBJECTIVE TYPE QUESTION PAPERS.
(i)   There are four alternatives for the answer to every question. For each question for which a wrong answer has been given by the candidate, one-third of the marks assigned to that question will be deducted as penalty.
(ii)   If a candidate gives more than one answer, it will be treated as a wrong answer even if one of the given answers happens to be correct and there will be same penalty as above to that question.
(iii)    If a question is left blank, i.e., no answer is given by the candidate, there will be no penalty for that question.


http://insightsonindia.com


INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST SERIES FOR CIVIL SERVICES PRELIMINARY EXAM 2014





http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                        Page 1



1.  Consider the following statements with reference to human development.



1.  Nobel Laureate Prof Amartya Sen saw an increase in freedom (or decrease in unfreedom) as the main objective of development.
2.   According to Dr Mehbub-Ul- Haq, development is all about enlarging people’s  choices  in order to lead long, healthy lives with dignity.

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None

2.  Which  of  the following is/are  true in connection  with  Special  Drawing Rights (SDRs) ?

1. The SDR quota in IMF is different for different countries.

2. Its value is not constant.

3. It derives its legitimacy from IMF
and other nations willing to use it.

Select the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   All of the above b.  1 and 3
c.  2 Only d.  1 Only
3. With   reference  to  AIDS, consider the following statements


1.   AIDS  is caused by the Human Immuno deficiency Virus (HIV),  a  member of a  group of viruses called retrovirus.
2. The    virus    enters    into macrophages where  RNA genome of the virus replicates to form infective new RNA with the help of the enzyme reverse transcriptase.
3. This    viral    DNA      gets incorporated into  host  cell’s DNA  and directs the infected cells to produce virus particles

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.  1 and 2 Only c.  2 and 3 Only d.  All




4. Consider      the     following statements   about population change


1.   Population change is also called as population growth
2.   Natural Growth   of  Population refers to the population increased by difference between births and deaths  in  a  particular region between two points of time.
3.  Population change in an area is an
important indicator of economic


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 2
development, social  upliftment and historical and cultural background of the region.

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are incorrect?

a.   3 Only b.  1 Only c.  None d.  All




5. In which of the following cases of budget deficits  will  the government  have to necessarily borrow not only to finance its investment but also its consumption requirements?

a) Fiscal deficit

b) Revenue deficit c) Primary deficit
d) Current account deficit

6.    The  proportional income tax regime acts as  an automatic  stabiliser – a  shock absorber for the economy in which of the following ways?

1. It makes disposable income of the households less sensitive to fluctuations in the GDP.

2.     It   redistributes   the   national income and redirects government spending in the right sectors.

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None of the above
7.  Productivity  and   sustainability  are two pillars of human development, with reference to these two, consider the following statements


1. Productivity   here    means human labour productivity or productivity in terms of human work. Such productivity must be constantly enriched by building capabilities in people.
2.   Sustainability                means
continuity  in  the  availability of opportunities.
3.  To   have   sustainable human
development,  each generation must have the same opportunities.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  1 and 3 Only d.  All
8.  Consider  the following factors that influence the distribution of population around the world


1.   Availability of water
2.   Soil
3.  Industrialization
4.  Climate
5.  Landforms
6.  Minerals
7.  Urbanization

Which   of  the  above factors have  direct influence     on     the     distribution     of
population?

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 3
a.   1,2,4 and 6 b.  1,2,4 and 5
c.  1,2,3,4 and 7
d.  1,2,4,5,6 and 7


9. Consider the following statements about ‘inbreeding’ which  is  used in animal husbandry


1. Inbreeding   refers   to   the mating of more closely related individuals within the same breed for 4- 6 generations.
2. Inbreeding exposes harmful recessive genes that are eliminated by selection.
3.  It  helps  in  accumulation of superior genes and elimination of less desirable genes.
4. Continued            inbreeding, especially close inbreeding, usually reduces fertility and even productivity. This is called inbreeding depression.

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are incorrect?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 4 Only c.  4 Only
d.  None


10. Consider the following factors:


1.   The size of the economy
2.   Relief features of the country
3.  Inheritance practices of the society
4.  The composition of the economy
5.  Traditional practices of the farmers

Which of the factors affects land use?
a)  1, 2 and 3 Only b) 2, 3 and 5 Only
c)  1, 2, 3 and 5 Only
d) 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 Only



11. Consider  the  following  statements with reference to antibiotics


1. Antibiotics  which  are also called as antimicrobial are an agent that completely eliminates microorganisms.
2.   In                  1928, Alexander Fleming became the  first   to discover a  natural antimicrobial  fungus  known as penicillium rubens.
3. Ozone  is  an antimicrobial agent.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 Only
b.  1 and 2 Only c.  2 and 3 Only d.  1 and 3 Only

12.   Which  of the following factors affect the value of the Indian currency in international transactions?

1. Political stability in India

2. Economic potential of India

3. Demand of rupee in International market

4. The  difference between interest rates between India and other countries.

Select the correct answer using the codes below.

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 4
a) 1, 3 and 4

b) All of the above c) 2, 3 and 4
d) 1 and 2

13. Consider the following crops:


1.   Barley
2.   Rice
3.  Cotton
4.  Jute
5.  Groundnut

Which of these are Rabi crops?

a)  1 and 5 Only
b) 1, 2, and 4 Only c)  1, 4 and 5 Only d) 1, 3 and 5 Only



14.   Which   of  the  following  statements is/are true?

1. A change in nominal exchange rate affects the real exchange rate.

2. Nominal exchange rate is affected by the inflation rate prevailing in a country.

a) Only 1 b) Only 2 c) Both
d) None




15. Consider  the  following  statements about growth and development
1.  Growth   is   quantitative and value neutral. It may have a positive or a negative  sign.
2. Development     means    a qualitative change which   is always value positive.
3. Development occurs when positive growth takes place.
4. Development  occurs   when there is  a  positive change in quality.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are incorrect?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only
c.  1 and 2 Only d.  None




16.  Which  of the following help stabilize the economy in periods of slump in economic growth?

1. Discretionary fiscal policy

2. Welfare transfers

3. Inelasticity in household spending a) 1 and 2
b) All of the above c) Only 2
d) 1 and 3

17. Consider  the  following  statements regarding methanogens


1. Methanogenic     populations play an indispensable role  in



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 5
anaerobic wastewater treatments
2.   They   live   in   the  digestive
tracts of humans, where they are responsible for the methane content of flatulence
3.  Methanogens are
microorganisms     that produce methane as
a metabolic byproduct         in
anoxic conditions.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  3 Only
d.  All
18.  Consider the following statements:
1.   Enlarging  the   range  of   people’s
choices.
2.   Political  freedom.
3.  A sound physical environment.

Which  of the above is/are the aspect/s of Human Development?

a)  1 and 2 Only b) 1 and 3 Only c)  2 and 3 Only d) All the above


19. Consider  the  following  statements about the Census  data  on Decadal Population Growth Rate in India:


1. India has consistently witnessed a Positive Decadal Population Growth in every decade since 1901.
2.   The   Decadal  Population  Growth
Rate  between 2001-11  as  shown by
the   Census   2011   is   the   lowest Decadal  Population Growth   Rate since 1951.


Which of the above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None


20. Consider  the  following  statements about beneficial microbes


1.  The   large    holes   in   ‘Swiss cheese’ are due to production of a large amount  of CO2 by a bacterium named Propionibacterium sharmanii.
2.   The dough, which is used for making bread, is   fermented using a bacteria (Saccharomyces cerevisiae)
3. Micro-organisms    such    as Lactobacillus and others commonly called lactic acid bacteria (LAB)  grow  in  milk and convert it to curd.

Which of the above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  1 and 2 Only d.  All

21. Which  of the following, inter alia, form part  of   the   Current   Account   Deficit (CAD)?

1. Gifts and grants from abroad

2. Trade in invisibles


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 6
3. Sale and purchase of stocks a) Only 2
b) 1 and 3

c) All of the above d) 1 and 2
22. With        reference      to       factors
contributing to  migration,  consider the following


1.   Unemployment
2.    Poor living conditions
3.  Political turmoil
4.  Unpleasant climate
5.  Natural disasters
6.  Epidemics   and  socio-economic backwardness.

Which  of the above factors can considered
as ‘pull’ factors?

a.   1 and 2 b.  3
c.  5
d.  None


23. With  reference to organic  farming, consider the following statements


1.   The organic farmer holds the view  that  the  eradication of the  creatures   that  are often described as pests is not only possible, but also undesirable.
2.  A key belief of the organic farmer is  that  biodiversity furthers health.
3.  The very familiar beetle with red and black markings – the Ladybird, and Dragonflies are
useful to get rid of aphids and mosquitoes, respectively.
4.  In Indian  the Government is
promoting organic farming through  various schemes like National Project  on  Organic Farming (NPOF), National Horticulture Mission  (NHM), Horticulture   Mission   for North  East &  Himalayan States (HMNEH),  National Project  on   Management   of Soil  Health and Fertility (NPMSH&F), Rashtriya Krishi Vikas  Yojana (RKVY) and also Network Project on Organic  Farming of  Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR).

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 4 Only
b.  1,2 and 4 Only c.  1, 2 and 3 Only d.  All
24. Australia’s age-sex  pyramid is  bell shaped and tapered towards the top. This indicates that Australia has


a.   Expanding populations b.  Constant populations
c.  Declining populations d.  None of the above


25. Consider  the  following  statements with reference to a  bioactive molecule, cyclosporin A


1.   It      is       used       as       an immunosuppressive  agent   in

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 7
organ-transplant    patients  to prevent rejection.
2.   It is  produced by the fungus
Trichoderma polysporum.

Which     of    the    above    statements    is incorrect?

a.   1 b.  2
c.  Both
d.  None


26. Consider the following:


1.  About  80  per  cent  of   the  coal deposits in India is of anthracite type and is of non-coking grade.
2. Crude    petroleum   occurs    in sedimentary rocks  of  the  tertiary period
3.  Uranium   deposits   occur   in   the
Laterite rocks.
4. World’s  richest  monazite deposits occur in Kerala, Andhra Pradesh and also in Orissa

Which  of  the statements  given  above is/are correct?

a)  1 and 2 Only b) 2 and 4 Only
c)  1, 3 and 4 Only d) 1, 2 and 4 Only

27. Fiscal deficit does not include which of the following?

1. Non-debt creating capital receipts

2.   Borrowing from  RBI  and other financial institutions

3. Borrowing from abroad
Select the correct answer using the codes below

a) 1 only

b) All of the above

c) None of the above d) 2 and 3



28. With  reference to procedures used in sewage water treatment, consider the following statements.


1. The greater  the Biological Oxygen Demand of waste water, more  is  its  polluting potential.
2.   In the secondary treatment of
sewage water, flocs or masses of bacteria is allowed to grow and increase BOD levels
3.  BOD refers to the amount of the oxygen that would be consumed if all the organic matter  in  one liter  of  water were oxidized by bacteria.

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are incorrect?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  2 Only
d.  All
29. The Central and State Governments have initiated many watershed development and management programmes in  the  country.  One such  program  is  Haryali. Which  of


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 8
the following is/are correct regarding
Haryali?


1. It is State Government sponsored program
2.   The  Project is  executed by  Gram
Sabha
3.  Aims  at  enabling rural and urban population to conserve water
4.  It helps in employment generation
Select the correct code. a.   2 Only
b.  2 and 4 Only
c.  1, 2 and 3 Only d.  1, 2 and 4 Only



30. Which   of  the  following  can be  the possible   implications   of   high   revenue deficit  in  the budget of  the central government for the Indian economy?

1.   Stock  of   debt  and  interest liabilities will pile up.
2.   Reduction   in   social   sector expenditure
3.  Low economic growth

Select the correct answer using the codes below

a.   1 and 2 b.  2 and 3
c.  1,2 and 3 d.  1 and 3


31. Consider  the  following  statements about sex-ratio pattern around  the world
1. A deficit of males in the populations of many European countries  is  attributed  to better status of women an excessively male-dominated out-migration to  different parts of the world in the past.
2. More    women    in    the population does not mean they have a  better status.  It could be that the men might have migrated to other areas for employment.
3.  In India,  Haryana  has lowest sex ratio among states, and its ratio has decreased further compared to 2001 census.

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only
b.  1 and 2 Only c.  1 and 3 Only d.  2 and 3 Only


32. Consider  the  following  statements about Single Cell Protein (SCP)

1.  Microorganisms  have a   high rate of multiplication and, hence, rapid succession  of generations   (algae: 2–6  hours, yeast: 1–3 hours, bacteria: 0.5–
2 hours) This principle is used in production of SCP
2.   Single-cell          protein (SCP)
typically refers  to  sources  of mixed protein extracted from pure    or     mixed     cultures of algae, yeasts, fungi or
bacteria



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 9
3.  They are  used as a  substitute for protein-rich foods, in human and animal feeds.

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  2 Only
d.  All

33.   Consider   the   following   statements about the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM) Act, 2003:

1. It  strives   for  Inter-generational equity in government finances.
2.   It restricts  borrowing from the RBI by the Central government other than in some specific cases.
3. It      strengthens      the      fiscal accountability of  the  executive  to the legislature.

Which  of the following is/are  true in this connection?

a.   All of the above b.  1 and 2
c.  2 and 3 d.  Only 2


34. Consider  the  following  statements with reference to Tissue Culture


2.  Micropropagation  under tissue culture  refers  to  transfer of desired genes into plant saplings to  produce identical plants.
3.  Explants refer to any part of a
plant taken out and grown in
a  test tube, under sterile conditions  in  special nutrient media.
4.  Capacity to generate   a whole plant from any cell/explant is called totipotency.
5.  Each of  the plants produced by tissue culture will be genetically identical to the original plant from which they were grown, i.e., they are somaclones.


Which    of   the   above  statements is/are correct?
a.   1,2 and 3 Only
b.  2,3 and 4 Only c.  3 and 4 Only
d.  All

35.  Which  of the following form part of the non-tax revenue receipts of the government budget?

1.   Interest receipts
2. Dividend and returns from investment made by the government
3. Grants in aid from foreign governments

Select the correct answer using the codes below

a.   1 and 2 b.  2 and 3
c.  All of the above d.  Only 1


36. Which  one of the following is  the correct  order  of   water   allocation


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 10
priorities  according to the National
Water policy, 2012?


1. Drinking        water,       Irrigation, Hydropower, Ecology, Agro industries and non-agricultural industries, Navigation
2. Drinking water, Irrigation, Agro industries and non-agricultural industries, Hydropower, Ecology, Navigation
3.  Ecology, Drinking water,  Irrigation, Agro industries and non-agricultural industries, Navigation, Hydropower
4.  Drinking  water, Ecology, Irrigation, Agro industries and non-agricultural industries, Hydropower, Navigation



37.    Which   of  the  following  statements is/are true?

1. The  Capital Budget is  an account of the assets as well as liabilities of the central government.
2.   The subsidies provided by the
Central government as a percentage  of GDP has been declining from 1991 onwards.
3. Fiscal    deficit    is    always inflationary.



Select the correct answer using the codes below



a.   Only 1 b.  2 and 3 c.  1 and 3
d.  None of the above
38. Which  of the following qualify to be a part  of  capital receipts  of  the  Central government?

1.   Borrowing from the RBI
2.  Loans received from foreign governments  and institutions
3.  PSU Disinvestment

Select the correct answer using the codes below

a.   1 and 3 b.  1 and 2 c.  2 and 3
d.  All of the above


39. Consider  the  following  statements about biofertilizers


1.  Biofertilisers    are     organisms that  enrich  the  nutrient quality of the soil.
2.   Bio-fertilizers  do not contain any chemicals which  are harmful to the living soil.
3. The     main    sources     of biofertilisers are bacteria, fungi and cyanobacteria.
4.  Bio-fertilizers  add nutrients through the natural  processes of nitrogen                 fixation, solubilizing phosphorus,    and stimulating plant growth through the synthesis of growth-promoting
substances.

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   2,3 and 4 Only b.  3 and 4 Only

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 11
c.  None d.  2 Only


40. Consider  the  following  statements with reference to the population theory put forward by Thomas Malthus


1.   He stated that the number of people would  increase  faster than the food supply
2.  Any further increase would result  in  a   population crash caused by famine, disease and war.
3.  The    physical    or    positive
checks are better than the preventive checks.
4.  The preventive checks include
abortion, birth control, prostitution, postponement of marriage and celibacy

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only
c.  1,2 and 4 Only d.  All


41. The  Modern  Indian  Languages  can be classified into 4 Families, a number of sub-families and groups. Consider the following statements about the Indian Languages:
1.   The  languages   spoken  in  Central
India are classified under the Austric
Family.
2.   Kashmiri language is classified under the Indo-Aryan group.
3.  Konkani language  spoken in Goa is
classified under the Dravidian family of languages.

Which of the above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only
c.  2 and 3 Only d.  1 and 2 Only

42. Expenditure on which of the following is  eligible to be a  part of capital expenditure of the Government of India?

1. Land Acquisition

2. Loans by the Central government to the state governments  and UTs.

3. Advances and loans made to the
PSUs.

Select the correct answer using the codes below

a.   All of the above b.  2 and 3
c.  1 and 2 d.  1 and 3



43. Which  one of the following is NOT the part of the definition of a  town as per the census of India?


1.  Population density  of  400 persons per sq km.
2. Presence       of        municipality, corporation, Cantonment etc.
3.  More   than  75%   of   the  working
population engaged  in  non-primary sector.
4.  Population size of more than 5,000 persons.

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 12
44. Consider  the  following  statements about Multiple  Ovulation Embryo Transfer Technology (MOET)


1. It is  a  program for  herd improvement for  the successful production of hybrids
2. In this method, a  cow is administered hormones, with FSH-like activity (Follicle Stimulating Hormone), to induce follicular maturation and super ovulation – instead of one egg, which they normally yield per cycle, they produce 6-8 eggs.
3.  The  animal is  either  mated with an elite bull or artificially inseminated.  Fertilized eggs are non-surgically removed and transferred to  surrogate mothers.
4.  The genetic mother is used for another round of super ovulation

Which   of  the  statements   given   above is/are incorrect?

a.   2 Only b.  None c.   3 Only
d.  3 and 4 Only

45. Which of the following relate to central plan revenue expenditure?

1. Central Five year plans

2.   Central  assistance   to  state   and
Union Territories (UTs)
Select the correct answer using the codes below

a.   Only 1 b.  Only 2 c.  Both
d.  None of the above


46. Consider  the  following  statements with reference to mutation breeding


1.  It is  the process  of exposing seeds
to chemicals or radiation in
order   to   generate   mutants with desirable traits to be bred with other cultivars.
2.   Mutation        breeding        is
commonly used to produce traits in  crops  such  as larger seeds, new colors,  or sweeter fruits,  that  either  cannot be found in nature or have been lost during evolution
3.  In   India,   mutation   induced
crops are produced by BARC and have been released and officially notified by the Ministry of Agriculture, Government of India for commercial cultivation.
4. In developing and  applying mutation  breeding using ionising radiation, India  has a leading role among all nations.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 and 3 Only
b.  1,2 and 3 Only c.  2,3 and 4 Only

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 13
d.  All


47. Consider  the  following  statements with reference to demographic transition theory


1.  In the last stage,  both fertility  and mortality decline considerably. The population is either stable or grows slowly.
2.   The first stage has low   fertility and high mortality because people reproduce less   for the fear of   the deaths due to epidemics and variable food supply
3.  Fertility    remains    high    in    the
beginning of second stage but it declines with time. This is accompanied by  reduced mortality rate.
4.  Fertility is  the natural  capability to
produce offspring.

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1,2,3 and 4 b.  1,3 and 4
c.  1,2 and 3 d.  2,3 and 4


48. Consider  the following with  reference to minerals and its distribution:


1.  All   minerals  are   exhaustible  over time.
2.   Over  97  per cent of  coal reserves
occur  in  the  valleys  of  Damodar, Sone, Mahanadi and Godavari
3.  Bauxite is  usually  associated  with
Sedimentary rocks
4.  Copper   and  Zinc   form   part  of
Dharwar system of rocks
Select the correct code. a.   1 and 2 Only
b.  2 Only
c.  1, 3 and 4 Only d.  1, 2 and 4 Only

49. Which of the following activities would be included in the revenue expenditure of the central government?

1. Expenditure on building roads

2. Interest payments

3. Grants to state governments

Select the correct answer using the codes below

a.   1 and 3
b.  All of the above c.  2 and 3
d.  Only 2


50. Rural   settlements   in    India    can broadly be put into four types: Clustered, Semi-clustered or fragmented, Hamleted and Dispersed or isolated.  Consider the following statements with regard to the Rural settlements in India:


1.   In the Bundelkhand region of central India and in Nagaland people live in compact village for security or defence reasons.
2. Dispersed  settlements are often caused by extremely fragmented nature  of   the   terrain  and  land
resource base of habitable areas.


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 14
3.  In fertile alluvial plains of India, the Dispersed settlements are commonly found as there is a space constraint.


Which of the above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  1 and 3 Only c.  2 and 3 Only d.  All the above


51. With  reference to  commonly used drugs by addicts, consider the following statements


1. The    drugs,    which    are commonly abused, opioids, cannabinoids and coca alkaloids, are obtained from flowering plants.
2.   Cocaine,    commonly    called
coke or crack is usually snorted. It has a  potent stimulating action on  central nervous  system,  producing a sense of euphoria and increased energy.
3.  Morphine  is  used  to  relieve
the pain for patients suffering from terminal illnesses such as cancer, HIV  and thalassemia.
4. In India, as of now, use of Morphine   even  for  medical use is completely banned

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1,2 and 3 Only b.  2 and 3 Only
c.  3 and 4 Only
d.  2 and 4 Only
52. Consider  the  following  statements with reference to allergy


1.  The  exaggerated  response  of the immune system to certain antigens present in  the environment is called allergy.
2.   Allergy is due to the release of chemicals  like  histamine and serotonin from the mast cells.
3.  The use of drugs like adrenalin and steroids quickly reduce the symptoms of allergy.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are incorrect?

a.   2 Only b.  3 Only
c.  2 and 3 Only
d.  None


53. National  Income may include which of the following:
1. Investment in the national economy
2.   External               Commercial
Borrowing
3.  Indirect taxes imposed by the government

Select the correct answer using the codes below

a.   All of the above b.  1 only
c.  1 and 3 d.  2 and 3
54. Consider  the  following  statements about immunization  and vaccination

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 15
1. The          principle          of immunization or  vaccination is  based on  the  property of
‘memory’   of    the   immune
system.
2.   In  vaccination, a   preparation of     antigenic    proteins     of pathogen                             or inactivated/weakened pathogen      (vaccine)      are introduced into the body.
3. The      vaccines      generate memory – B and T-cells  that recognize  the  pathogen quickly on subsequent exposure and overwhelm the invaders with a  massive production of antibodies.
4.  In  cases  of   snakebites,  the
injection which is given to the patients, contain preformed antigens   against the snake venom

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are incorrect?

a.   3 and 4 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  4 Only
d.  None

55.    What  amongst the  following  is/are affected by high levels of government debt?

1. Inter-generational equity

2. Capital formation

3. Economic growth

Select the correct answer using the codes below
a.   Only 3 b.  2 and 3 c.  1 and 2
d.  1,2 and 3




56.    Which   of  the  following  statements is/are false?

1. The  Real  Exchange   rate captures  the  purchasing power parity between two nations.
2.  The nominal exchange rate does  not  represent the  true international competitiveness of a nation’s economy.
Select the correct answer using the
codes below


a.   Only 1 b.  Only 2 c.  Both
d.  None


57. Consider  the  following  statements about immunity in human beings


1. Acquired      immunity     is pathogen specific
2.   Acquired immunity is  carried
out with the help of two special types of  lymphocytes present in our blood, B- Lymphocytes and T- Lymphocytes
3. The  cell-mediated immune response which  is  a   type of acquired immunity is responsible    for    the    graft
rejection.

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 16
Which   of  the  above statements   is/are incorrect?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.  3 Only
c.  2 and 3 Only d.  None

58.  Trade  deficit  is  possibly  affected by which of the following factors?

1. Domestic Savings

2. Fiscal deficit

3. Investment in the economy

Select the correct answer using the codes below




a.   All of the above b.  2 and 3
c.  1 and 2 d.  1 and 3


59. Which   of  the  following  crops  are grown in semi-arid region?


1.   Cotton
2.   Wheat
3.  Jowar
4.  Maize
5.  Pearl Millet
6.  Groundnut
Select the correct code. a)  1, 3 and 4 Only
b) 2, 3 and 5 Only
c)  1, 3, 4 and 6 Only d) 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6
60.Which  one of the following is  the correct  sequence of  availability  of fresh water in the decreasing order?


a. Glaciers, groundwater,  freshwater lakes, atmosphere and rivers
b. Glaciers,         freshwater         lakes, groundwater, rivers and atmosphere
c. Glaciers,  groundwater,  freshwater lakes, rivers and atmosphere
d. Glaciers,      groundwater,      rivers, freshwater  lakes and atmosphere



61. With  reference to  India,  consider  the following Central Acts/Programs:


1.   Environment Protection Act 1986
2.   Water Cess Act
3. Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA)
4.  Rural Drinking Water Program

Which  of  the above  Acts  have relevance to/bearing  on the water conservation in the country?

a.   2 Only
b.  1 and 2 Only
c.  1, 2 and 3 Only d.  1, 2, 3 and 4



62. Which  of the following is/are  part of innate immunity in humans?

1.  Gastrointestinal and urogenital tracts that    help in  trapping microbes entering our body
2.   Acid in the stomach
3.  Tears from eyes
4.  Interferons


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 17
Select the correct answer using the codes given below

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only
c.  1,2 and 3 Only d.  All

63. Consider  the  following  statements about Gambusia


1.   It is kind of fish
2.    It is introduced into ponds to feed on mosquito larvae

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None


64. Consider  the  following  statements about chikungunya


1.   It is a vector borne disease
2.   It is caused by a virus
3.   It  is  transmitted to  humans by virus-carrying domesticated birds.
4.  There is no specific treatment with medications used to help with symptoms

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only
b.  1,2 and 3 Only c.  2,3 and 4 Only
d.  1,2 and 4 Only
65. Which one among the following sectors has the highest proportion of the total water used in India?


a)  Domestic use b) Irrigation
c)  Industries
d) Power generation


66. Consider  the  following  statements about the life cycle of Plasmodium


1.   Plasmodium enters  the human body as sporozoites (infectious form) through the bite of infected male Anopheles mosquito.
2.    The    parasites    initially
multiply within  the liver cells  and then attack  the red blood cells (RBCs) resulting in their rupture.
3.  The  rupture of  RBCs  is associated with release  of a toxic substance, haemozoin, which   is responsible for the chill and high fever recurring every three to four days.

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 Only
c.  2 and 3 Only
d.  All




http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 18
67. Consider  the  following  statements about ringworms
1.   Fungi   are     responsible    for
ringworms which is one of the most common infectious diseases in man
2. Ringworms   are   generally acquired from soil or by using towels, clothes or even the comb of infected individuals
3.  Most fungi thrive in warm and dry conditions

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  1 and 3 Only d.  All
68. With  reference to food grains grown in
India, consider the following statement :


1.   Maize is  a  considered to be a  food and also a fodder  crop.
2.   Growing     pulses     increases    soil fertility.
3.  Cereals   occupy   majority  of   the cropped area
4.  Maize   is   grown   under  semi-arid
conditions.

Which  of  the statements  given  above is/are correct?

a)  2 and 3 Only
b) 2, 3 and 4 Only c)  1, 2 and 3 Only d) 1, 2, 3 and 4


69. Which  one of the following is the main form of degradation in irrigated areas?


a)  Wind erosion b) Gully erosion
c)  Siltation of land
d) Salinisation of soils



70. Consider the following statements


1.   All parasites are pathogens
2.   Pathogens   have to  adapt  to  life within  the  environment of  the host.
3.  Rhinoviruses,  a pathogen,   causes common cold in humans
4.  All   cancers  are non-pathogenic diseases i.e.  they  are  genetic   in origin

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1,2 and 3 Only b.  1,3 and 4 Only c.  2,3 and 4 Only d.  All


71. Consider  the  following  statements with reference to Malaria
1.   Plasmodium, a   tiny  bacteria   is
responsible for this disease.
2. Malignant malaria caused by Plasmodium falciparum  is   the most serious one and can even be fatal.
3. Recently        researchers       in Cambridge have identified a single protein, AP2-G, which acts as a  “master switch” that triggers the process in the malaria parasite that spreads the disease.


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 19
Which   of  the  above statements   is/are incorrect?

a.   2 Only b.  1 Only
c.  1 and 2 Only d.  None


72. Consider the following statements:


1.  Most  of the area  under permanent pastures are  owned by  the  village panchayat.
2.   Any land which is left uncultivated for more than five years is known as a culturable waste-Land.
3.  The   physical  extent  of   land  on which crops are sown and harvested is known as net sown area.
4. Land   which    is    left   without cultivation for more than one agricultural year is known as Current Fallow.

Which  of  the statements  given  above is/are correct?

a)  3 Only
b) 1 and 2 Only
c)  1, 2 and 3 Only
d) 1, 2, 3 and 4 Only



73. India   has  undergone  major  changes within the economy over the past five decades (1960-2012), and this  has influenced the land-use changes in the country. With  regard to this, what has been the general  trend in the land-use
pattern?
1.   The area under non-agricultural uses has increased at  the expense of wastelands and agricultural land.
2.   The barren and wasteland are on the decline.
3.  The net sown area has increased.
4. The  area  under the  forest  has increased.
Select the correct code. a)  1 Only
b) 1, 2, and 4 Only
c)  1, 2 and 3 Only
d) 1, 2, 3 and 4 Only




74. In   the   context   of   India,   Common Property Resources (CPRs) type of land ownership  has  been  advocated since decades. What is  the intention behind advocating CPR?


1.   It provides fodder for the livestock
2.   It  provides  more  revenue to  the government
3.  It provides livelihood for the weaker
section of the society
4.  Every  member can have property rights over the land
5.  Women are benefited
Select the correct code. a)  2, 3, and 4 Only
b) 1, 3 and 5 Only
c)  1, 2, 3 and 4 Only
d) 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 Only






http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 20
75. With  reference to spread of cancer in human body, consider the following statements


1.  Normal cells show a property called contact inhibition by virtue of which  contact with other cells inhibits their uncontrolled growth. Cancer cells  appear  to have lost  this property. As  a  result of this, cancerous cells  just  continue to divide giving rise to masses of cells called tumors.
2.   Metastasis,     the    spread   of
a cancer  from       one organ or
part to  another non-adjacent organ or part, is  the most feared property of  malignant tumors.
3.  Cancer   causing   agents    are called as carcinogens

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  1,2 and 3
c.  2 and 3 Only d.  1 and 3 Only














































http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 21
