
INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK PRELIMINARY EXAM - 2014


INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST - 7

GENERAL STUDIES

PAPER-I

Time Allowed: Two Hours                                                                                  Maximum Marks: 200


INSTRUCTIONS
1.   IMMEDITELY AFTER THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE EXAMINATION, YOU SHOULD
CHECK  THAT  THIS  TEST  BOOKLET  DOES  NOT  HAVE  ANY  UNPRINTED  OR  TORN  OR MISSING PAGES OR ITEMS, ETC. IF SO, GET IT REPLACED BY A COMPLETE TEST BOOKLET.
2.  You have to enter your Roll Number on the Test I Booklet in the Box provided alongside. DO NOT write anything else on the Test Booklet.

4.  This Test Booklet contains 100 items (questions). Each  item is  printed only in  English. Each item comprises four responses (answers). You will select the response which you want to mark on the Answer Sheet. In case you feel that there is more than one correct response, mark the response which you consider the best. In any case, choose ONLY ONE response for each item.
5.  You have to mark all your responses ONLY on the separate Answer Sheet provided. See directions in the
Answer Sheet.
6.  All items carry equal marks.

7.  Before you proceed to mark in the Answer Sheet the response to various items in the Test Booklet, you have to fill in some particulars in the Answer Sheet as per instructions sent to you with your Admission Certificate.

8.  After you have completed filling in all your responses on the Answer Sheet and the examination has concluded, you should hand over to the Invigilator only the Answer Sheet. You are permitted to take away with you the Test Booklet.

9.  Sheets for rough work are appended in the Test Booklet at the end.
10.  Penalty for wrong answers :
THERE WILL BE PENALTY FOR WRONG ANSWERS MARKED BY A CANDIDATE IN THE OBJECTIVE TYPE QUESTION PAPERS.
(i)   There are four alternatives for the answer to every question. For each question for which a wrong answer has been given by the candidate, one-third of the marks assigned to that question will be deducted as penalty.
(ii)   If a candidate gives more than one answer, it will be treated as a wrong answer even if one of the given answers happens to be correct and there will be same penalty as above to that question.
(iii)    If a question is left blank, i.e., no answer is given by the candidate, there will be no penalty for that question.


http://insightsonindia.com


INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST SERIES FOR CIVIL SERVICES PRELIMINARY EXAM 2014





http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                        Page 1
1.  With  reference to  buffer  stock  of foodgrains, consider  the  following statements


1. Buffer Stock is the stock of foodgrains, namely wheat and rice procured by the government through   Food   Corporation   of India (FCI).
2.   Buffer  stocks   are   required  to
stabilize prices  during  period of production  shortfall  through open market sales.
3.  The seasonality of production and procurement is  a  decisive factor in     determining the  minimum norm of food grains stocks required in a  particular  quarter of the year
4. In  addition to  buffer norms, Government has prescribed Strategic Reserve of wheat and rice

Which     of    the    above    statements    is incorrect?

a.   2 Only b.  3 Only
c.  2 and 4 Only
d.  None




2.   With   reference to  unemployment, consider the following statements


1.  In  case of  rural areas, there  is seasonal and disguised unemployment. Urban areas have
mostly educated unemployment.
2.   Disguised  unemployment usually happens among family members engaged in agricultural activity.
3. According    to    ILO    report, unemployment rate in  India  is increasing since 2011

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  2 Only
d.  All


3. Consider the following statements with reference to National Food for Work programme


1.   It was launched on November 14,
2004 in  150  most  backward districts  of the country with the objective of intensifying the generation  of  supplementary wage employment.
2.   The  programme is  open to  all rural poor  who  are in  need of wage employment and desire to do manual unskilled work.
3.  This   programme,    along   with
NREGA  is still  run in these 150 districts as a supplementary program to benefit the poor

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.  1 and 2 Only c.  2 Only
d.  All




http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 2
4.  Analysis   of   poverty  based  on social exclusion  and vulnerability is  now becoming very common. With  reference to this,   consider the following statements


1.  According to social exclusion concept, poverty must be seen in terms of the poor having to live only in a poor surrounding with other poor people, excluded from enjoying social equality of  better-off people in better surroundings.
2.   The   working  of   the   caste system in India is an example of social exclusion
3.  Social exclusion  may lead to, but  can cause more damage than, having a  very low income.
4.  The N.      C      Saxena Report (from the National Commission for Enterprises in the Unorganised Sector), based on  data   between the period 1993–94  and 2004–05, states that 77% of Indians live on less than   20 a day
5.  Vulnerability  to poverty is  a measure, which  describes the greater  probability of  certain communities or individuals of becoming, or remaining, poor in the coming years.

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 3 Only
b.  1,2,3 and 4 Only c.  1,2,3 and 5 Only
d.  All




5. With     reference   to    Public Distribution System (PDS), consider the following statements


1.  PDS, till  1992, was a  general entitlement scheme for all consumers  without  any specific target.
2.  In     June     1997,     the Government  of  India launched the Targeted  Public Distribution System (TPDS) with  focus  on the poor. The identification of the poor under the scheme is  done by the States as per State-wise poverty estimates of the Planning    Commission      for
1993-94 based on the methodology of  the  “Expert Group on estimation of proportion and number of poor” chaired by Late Prof Lakdawala.
3.  In order to make TPDS more focused and targeted  towards poor, the Antyodaya Anna Yojana (AAY)   was launched in  December,  2000 for  one crore poorest of the poor families.
4.  Under  national food security act 2013, reforms  include door-step delivery of foodgrains to the TPDS outlets, application of information                            and
communication     technology

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 3
tools, diversification of commodities  distributed under the PDS over period of time etc.

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are incorrect?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.  3 and 4 Only c.  2 and 3 Only d.  None




6.  With   reference  to  jet  streams, consider the following statements


1. Over     India,     subtropical easterly  jet  streams blow south of the Himalayas, all through  the  year except  in summer
2.   In  summer,  the  subtropical
easterly jet stream moves north of  the Himalayas  with the apparent movement of the sun.
3.  An  easterly jet stream, called the tropical westerly jet stream blows over peninsular India,     approximately     over
14°N  during the summer months.
4.  Jet  streams are a  narrow belt of high altitude (above 12,000 m) westerly winds in the troposphere. Their speed varies from about 110  km/h in summer to about 184 km/h in winter.
Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1,2 and 3 Only b.  All
c.  2,3 and 4 Only d.  4 Only




7. With  reference to population density in India, consider the following statements


1. The  Northern  Plains and Kerala in the south have high to very high population densities  because of  the  flat plains with fertile soils and abundant rainfall.
2. Assam  and most  of  the Peninsular states  have moderate population densities. Hilly,  dissected and rocky nature of the terrain, moderate to  low  rainfall, shallow  and less  fertile  soils have influenced population densities in these areas.
3.  India   supports   and  sustains
17.5% of the world population and there  is  an increase  of
17.5% population in 2011 over
2001.

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  1 and 2 Only
d.  All



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 4



8. Consider        the        following statements


1. These     are    the     most widespread forests of India. They are also called the monsoon  forests  and spread over the region receiving rainfall between 200 cm and
70 cm.
2. Teak is the most dominant species  of  this  forest. Bamboos, sal, shisham, sandalwood, khair, kusum, arjun, mulberry are other commercially important species.

To  which  type of  forests  in  India  does above description refer to?

a.   Tropical deciduous forests b.  Tropical rain forests
c.  Montane forests
d.  Tropical rain forests




9. Consider        the        following statements  about The Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ)


1.  It is  a  broad  trough   of  high pressure  in  equatorial latitudes.
2.   This  is  where  the  northeast and the southeast trade winds converge.
3.  This  convergence  zone  lies
more  or  less  parallel  to  the
equator  but moves north  or south with the apparent movement of the sun.

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are incorrect?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  3 Only d.  None


10. Which of the following biosphere reserve in India is  not a  part of the World Network of Biosphere Reserves,             based            on the UNESCO Man      and     the Biosphere   (MAB)    Programme list?


a.    Nokrek
b.    Panna
c.    Panchmarhi
d.    Nicobar Islands






11. Soon  after Independence,   India faced many new challenges. From among  the following statements, which  were the most important challenges that  were  important and urgent for India?


1.  To  ensure  the  development and well-being  of the entire society and not only of some sections
2.   To  shape a   nation that  was united, yet accommodative of the diversity in our society.

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 5
3.  To establish democracy.
4. To  develop industries  and bring economic growth

Select the correct answer using the codes below

a.   1,2 and 3 Only b.  1,2,3 and 4
c.  2,3 and 4
d.  2 and 3 Only




12. Consider          the         following statements  about ‘Whips’  in Indian polity


1.  The   main  function   of   the Whips is  to keep members of their  party within  sound  of the  Division   Bell  whenever any important   business is under consideration in the House.


2.   During sessions, the Whips  of different parties  send to their supporters periodic notices, also sometimes called 'Whips', apprising them when important Divisions  are expected, telling them   the hour when a vote will probably take place,    and requesting them to be in attendance  at that time
3.  The   Chief   Whip   of      the
Government Party in the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha  is  the Minister     of     Parliamentary
Affairs.



Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  1 and 2 Only d.  All




13. Consider          the         following statements with reference to Dravidian movement


1.  Though some sections of this movement had  ambitions   of creating   a  Dravid nation, the movement took to arms and violence was inevitable
2.   It used democratic means like public  debates and  the electoral platform  to achieve its ends.
3. The    movement    strongly opposed the Brahmins’ dominance and affirmed regional pride against  the political, economic     and cultural  domination of  the North.

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2and 3 Only c.  3 Only
d.  1 and 3 Only


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 6
14. Consider          the         following statements  about Article  370 of the Indian Constitution


1. Article   370  gives   greater autonomy to  Jammu  and Kashmir compared to   other States of India.
2.   The    State     has    its     own
Constitution.
3. All provisions of the Indian Constitution are applicable  to the State.
4.  Laws passed by the Parliament apply to J&K only if the State agrees.




Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 4 Only
b.  1,2 and 4 Only c.  1,3 and 4 Only d.  All




15. With  reference to reorganization of North Eastern states, consider the following statements


1. Meghalaya,    Manipur   and Tripura  became Indian  states in 1972
2. Arunachal    Pradesh     and Mizoram became separate States only in 1986
3.  Nagaland   State   was  created
after      the      creation       of
Meghalaya,  Manipur, Tripura and Mizoram
4.  At   independence the  entire region except Manipur and Tripura  comprised  the  State of Assam.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1,3 and 4 Only b.  2,3 and 4 Only c.  1,2 and 4 Only d.  All




16. Consider          the         following statements with reference to Goa


1.   In  January  1967,  the Central
Government  held  a    special
‘opinion poll’ in Goa asking people to decide if they wanted    to be part of Maharashtra or  remain separate.
2. This was the only time in independent India  that   a referendum-like procedure was used to ascertain people’s wishes on a subject.
3.  In 1967,  Goa became a  State
of the Indian Union.

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are incorrect?

a.   3 Only
b.  1 and 2 Only c.  2 and 3 Only d.  None

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 7
17. Consider          the         following statements with reference to population growth in India


1.  The period from 1901-1921 is referred to as a  period of stagnant or stationary phase of growth of India’s population, since  in  this  period  growth rate was very low, even recording a negative   growth rate during 1911-1921.
2.   The   decades  1921-1951   are
referred to  as  the  period of steady population growth.
3.  The   decades  1951-1981   are
referred to  as  the  period of population explosion in India, which  was caused by a  rapid fall in the mortality rate but a high  fertility  rate  of population in the country.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  1 and 3 Only c.  2 and 3 Only d.  All


18. Consider          the         following statements


1. Languages     spoken       in Meghalaya, Nicobar Islands belong to  the family of Austric languages
2.   Languages spoken  in  Assam and Jammu and Kashmir belong to the family of Indo-
European
Which of the above statements I incorrect?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  None d.  Both




19. Data from Indian Remote Sensing satellites are used for various applications of  resources  survey and management  under the National Natural Resources Management  System (NNRMS). Which of the following is not one of its applications?


1. Snow-melt              run-off estimates for planning water use  in  down  -stream projects
2.   Land use  and land cover mapping
3.  Urban planning
4.  Forest survey
5.  Wetland mapping
6. Environmental        impact analysis
7.  Mineral Prospecting

Select the correct answer using the codes below

a.   1,2,3,4 and 7
b.  1,2,4,5,6 and 7 c.  2,3,4 and 7
d.  All


20. With  reference to Mumbai port, consider the following statements


1.   It is a natural  harbour  and the biggest port of the country.
2.   It  has  country’s   largest  oil
terminal

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 8
3.  The  port  is  administered by the Mumbai                          Port Trust (MbPT),                     an autonomous corporation belonging to a private   trust of investors
Which    of   the   above  statements is/are incorrect?


a.   1 ad 3 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  3 Only
d.  None




21. With      reference     to      water pollution, consider the following statements


1.   Total dissolved solids (TDS) is the term used to describe the organic  salts and small amounts of  inorganic  matter present in solution in water.
2.   The principal constituents are usually  calcium,  magnesium,
sodium, and potassium cations and carbonate, hydrogencarbonate, chloride, sulfate, and nitrate anions.
3.  Primary sources  for  TDS  in receiving                       waters are agricultural and residential runoff,       leaching       of soil contamination  and point
source water
pollution discharge         from industrial                  or sewage treatment plants.
4.  If     TDS     is      less      than
300mg/litre then it’s graded as
‘excellent’ for drinking

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?
a.   2 and 3 Only
b.  1,2 and 3 Only c.  2,3 and 4 Only d.  All




22. With  reference to latest Human Development  Index  data, consider the following statements


1.  India   has  been  ranked 136 among 187 countries evaluated for human development index (HDI)
2.   India’s   HDI  value went  up
from 0.345 to 0.554 between
1980  and 2012,  an increase of
61  per cent or an average annual increase of 1.5 per cent.
3.  Life  expectancy at  birth  and mean years of schooling have increased
4.  As  for  the  Multidimensional
Poverty Index (MPI), India does worsse  than Bangladesh and Pakistan

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only
b.  2,3 and 4 Only c.  3 and 4 Only
d.  1,2 and 3 Only




23. With    reference   to    gandhiji’s views  on development, consider the following statements


1. He was quite apprehensive about the on-going development particularly the way industrialisation has institutionalised  the  loss   of


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 9
morality, spirituality, self- reliance, non-violence and mutual cooperation and environment.
2. In his opinion, austerity for individual,  trusteeship  of social wealth and non-violence are the key to  attain  higher goals    in    the    life    of    an
individual as  well as that of a nation.
3.  His views were also re-echoed in the Club  of Rome Report “Limits to Growth” (1972), Schumacher’s book “Small is Beautiful” (1974),  Brundtland Commission’s Report “Our Common Future” (1987)  and finally    in    the    “Agenda-21
Report of the Rio Conference”
(1993).

Which     of    the    above    statements    is incorrect?

a.   2 Only b.  3 Only c.  1 Only d.  None


24. With   reference  to  land  usage pattern in  the country, consider the following statements


1.  Share  of  area   under  forest, area  under non    agricultural uses and current fallow lands has shown a decrease  between
1960s  and 2000s (as per reported area)
2.   Barren       and       wasteland,
culturable wasteland, area under pastures and tree crops and net area sown have shown an increase in their areas during the same time
3.  The  increase   in  land under pastures and grazing lands can be explained by the encroachment of  forest  land and water bodies in villages

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  1,2 and 3
c.  3 Only
d.  None




25. Consider          the         following statements  regarding coffee cultivation


1.  Coffee is a  tropical plantation crop.
2.   India   mostly  grows  superior
quality coffee, arabica,  which is  in  great  demand in International market
3. It has become the primary export  and backbone for African countries like Uganda, Burundi, Rwanda,  and Ethiopia

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  1 and 3 Only c.  2 and 3 Only d.  All



26. Consider          the         following statements about satyagraha

1. The   idea    of   satyagraha emphasised   the   power   of truth and the need to search for truth.

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 10
2.    It suggested  that if the cause was true, if  the struggle  was against injustice, then physical force was not necessary to fight the oppressor.
3. According     to     Gandhiji, satyagraha is a passive resistance force
4.   Without   seeking  vengeance
or being aggressive, a satyagrahi could win the battle through non-violence
5. This  could  be  done  by appealing to the conscience of the oppressor. People – including the oppressors – had to  be  persuaded to  see  the truth, instead of being forced to  accept truth  through  the use of violence




Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1,2,3 and 5 Only b.  1,2,4 and 5 Only c.  2,3,4 and 5 Only d.  All


27. Consider          the         following statements with reference to Rowalatt Act of 1919


1. This        act       effectively authorized the government to imprison for up to two years, without trial, any person suspected    of terrorism living in the Raj and gave  the imperial authorities power to deal      with       revolutionary
activities.
2.   The  accused was denied the right to know the accusers and the evidence used in the trial
3.  The act was repealed in 1922
4.  The infamous Jallianwala Bagh massacre of 1919 was a  result of reaction against this act
5.  The Rowlatt act was one of the causes of the civil disobedience movement

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1,3,4 and 5 Only b.  2,3,4 and 5 Only c.  1,2,3 and 4 Only d.  All




28. Consider          the         following statements  about Green Revolution


1. This strategy of agricultural development made the country self-reliant in foodgrain production. But green  revolution was initially confined to irrigated  areas only.
2.   This led to regional disparities in agricultural development in the country till  the seventies, after which the technology spread to the Eastern and Central parts of the country
3. The   Planning Commission initiated agro-climatic planning in  1988   to  induce regionally                  balanced


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 11
agricultural    development  in the country

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?
a.   1,2 and 4 Only b.  1,3 and 4 Only c.  2,3 and 4 Only d.  All

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  1 and 3 Only c.  2 and 3 Only d.  All




29. Consider          the         following statements  about peasant movement during 1920 in India


1.   In Awadh, peasants were led by   Baba    Ramchandra –   a sanyasi who had  earlier been to Fiji as an indentured labourer. The movement here was against  talukdars and landlords who demanded from peasants exorbitantly high rents  and a   variety  of  other cesses.
2.   Peasant   movements    were
completely   peaceful   during
1920-21  and were  integrated with Non-Cooperation movement nationwide
3.  Peasants had  to do begar  and work at  landlords’ farms without any payment
4.  The  Oudh  Kisan  Sabha  was set  up headed by Jawaharlal Nehru, Baba Ramchandra  and a few others.

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?
30. With      reference     to     Inland Emigration Act of 1859, consider the following statements


1. According    to    this    act, plantation workers  were  not permitted to leave the tea gardens without permission, and in  fact they were rarely given such permission
2.   When     plantation   workers
successfully   participated in Non-Cooperation movement and left the plantations altogether

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None


31. Consider          the         following statements


1.  In  the  harvested crop,  the grain seeds need to be separated from the chaff. This process  is  called winnowing. This  is  carried out with  the help   of   a    machine  called
‘combine’ which  is  in  fact a
combined harvester and winnower.


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 12
2.   Farmers  with small holdings of land do the separation of grain and chaff by winnowing

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are incorrect?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None


32. Consider          the         following statements with reference to revenue systems that  were in practice during the British rule in India


1. Among the three revenue systems operational during British  period i.e. Mahalwari, Ryotwari and Zamindari, the last one was most exploitative for the peasants
2.   Under Mahalwari system, for revenue purposes  the  name was applied to  any compact area  containing one or  more villages, which were called “estates.” The  revenue settlement was made with the estate—hence                     the term mahalwari—and     there were          distinct          types of assessment.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are incorrect?

a.   Both b.  None
c.  1 Only
d.  2 Only
33. With reference to some common diseases caused by microorganisms in  plants, consider the following statements


1.   Rust of wheat is  caused by a virus
2.   Citrus   canker  is   caused  by fungi

Which of the above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  None c.  2 Only d.  Both


34. Consider          the         following statements with reference to civil disobedience movment launched by Gandhiji


1.   Mahatma   Gandhi’s  letter  of
31st    January  1930  was,  in  a way, an ultimatum. If the demands were not fulfilled by
11 March, the letter stated, the Congress would launch a civil disobedience campaign.
2. The   letter   had    eleven demands representing peasants to industrialists
3.  The most important demand was to reduce salt tax.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.  2 and 3 Only
c.  1 and 2 Only


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 13
d.  All




35. Consider          the         following statements


1.  Acrylic   is   a   synthetic  fiber made                  of acrylonitrile monomer
2.   Cellulose is a natural polymer
3. Acrylic  fiber  is  sometimes called as artificial silk

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only
c.  2 and 3 Only d.  All


36. Consider   the  statements   about
Haryali programme


1. Haryali   is    a     watershed development project sponsored by the Central Government which aims at enabling the rural population to  conserve  water  for drinking, irrigation, fisheries and afforestation.
2.   The Project is being executed
by   Gram   Panchayats    with
people’s participation.
3.  It was launched by the UPA
government in 2005

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only
b.  1 Only
c.  2 and 3 Only d.  All


37. With  reference to  electroscope, consider the following statements


1.  It     is      an     early scientific instrument that    is    used   to detect the presence and magnitude     of electrons     in space.
2.   Electroscopes   detect  electric
charge by the motion of a test object  due  to  the Coulomb electrostatic force.
3.  Electroscopes  were  used  by the  Austrian  scientist Victor Hess in        the        discovery of cosmic rays.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are incorrect?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  1 Only
c.  2 and 3 Only
d.  All


38. “‘Revolution  is   the  inalienable right of mankind. Freedom is the imprescriptible birthright of all. The labourer is the real sustainer of society … To the altar of this revolution we have brought  our youth as  incense, for no sacrifice is  too great for so magnificent a cause.” Who said these words?


a.   Subhash Chandra Bose b.  Surya Sen
c.  Bhagat Singh

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 14
d.  Aurabindo Ghosh


39. Consider          the         following statements


1.  Alluri   Sitarama   Raju  led  a tribal  uprising  called Rampa rebellion
2.   After the passing of the 1882
Madras Forest Act,  its restrictions on the free movement of tribal peoples in the forest prevented them from engaging in their traditional "Podu" agricultural system. This led to the rebellion.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   Both b.  None c.  1 Only d.  2 Only




40. Gurumahisani,                Sulaipet, Badampahar (Mayurbhaj), Kiruburu (Kendujhar) and Bonai mines are famous for


a.   Bauxite ore b.  Coal
c.  Iron ore
d.  Manganese


41. Consider          the         following statements with reference to bioenergy
1.  Bioenergy is      non-renewable energy made  available from materials derived from biological sources.
2.  Biomass  is   any  organic material which has stored sunlight in the form of chemical energy.
3.   As       a         fuel      it      may include wood,                 wood waste, straw, manure, sugarca ne,      and      many      other byproducts from a  variety of agricultural processes.

Which     of    the    above    statements    is incorrect?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  3 Only d.  None


42. Consider          the         following statements


1. Dr   B.R.  Ambedkar, who organised  the  dalits into  the Depressed Classes Association in 1930, clashed with Mahatma  Gandhi  at  the second Round Table Conference by demanding separate electorates for dalits.
2. Gandhiji     believed     that separate electorates for dalits would slow down getting poorna swaraj from the British
3. Ambedkar             ultimately accepted Gandhiji’s  position and the result was the Poona
Pact of September 1932.

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 15
4.  It gave  the Depressed Classes (later to be known as the Schedule Castes) reserved seats in provincial and central legislative councils,  but  they were to  be voted in  by the general electorate.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   All
b.  1,2 and 4 Only c.  1,3 and 4 Only d.  2,3 and 4 Only


43. “‘Communalism  in   its   higher aspect, then, is  indispensable to the formation of a harmonious whole in a country like India. The units  of  Indian  society  are not territorial  as  in  European countries  … The  principle   of European democracy cannot be applied to India without recognising the fact of communal groups. The Muslim  demand for the creation  of  a   Muslim  India within  India  is,  therefore, perfectly justified…” Who said these words?


a.  Muhammad  Ali Jinnah b.  Liaquat Ali Khan
c.  Muhammad Iqbal d.  Syed Ahmad Khan


44. Consider          the         following statements


1.   In India,  indentured labourers were  hired  under  contracts
which  promised return travel to India after they had worked five years on their employer’s plantation in foreign countries.
2. Indentured  labour was  a bonded labourer under contract to work for an employer for a  specific amount of time within Indian territory
3. Most     Indian     indentured workers came from the present-day regions of eastern Uttar  Pradesh, Bihar, central India and the dry districts  of Tamil Nadu.
4. The  main  destinations  of Indian indentured migrants were the Caribbean islands (mainly Trinidad, Guyana and Surinam), Mauritius and Fiji
5.  Nineteenth-century indenture has been described as a  ‘new system of slavery’.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1,2,3 and 5 b.  2,3 and 5
c.  1,3,4 and 5 d.  All


45. With  reference to intercropping, consider the following statements


1. Intercropping          gives additional yield income/unit  area than sole cropping.

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 16
2. It acts as an  insurance against  failure of  crops  in abnormal year
3.    Inter-crops   maintain the soil fertility as the nutrient uptake is made from both layers of soil.
4.  It helps in reduction in soil runoff and controls weeds.
5.  Higher amount of fertilizer
or  irrigation water cannot be utilized properly as the component crops  vary in their response of these resources.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1,2,3 and 5 b.  All
c.  1,2,4 and 5 d.  1,2,3 and 4


46. With      reference    to     CITES, consider the following statements


1.  Its aim is to ensure that international trade in specimens of wild animals and plants does not threaten their survival.
2.   CITES was drafted as  a result
of   a    resolution  adopted   in
1963 at a meeting  of members of IUCN
3.  Participation is compulsory.

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1,2 and 3
b.  2 and 3 c.  1 and 2 d.  1 and 3
47. Which    one   of   the   following methods is  best to avoid soil erosion on the steep slopes?


a.   Contour barriers
b.  Contour ploughing c.  Rock dam
d.  Terrace farming




48. With     reference   to    ‘earthing’
consider the following statements


1. The  primary  purpose  of earthing is  to reduce the risk of serious electric shock from current leaking into uninsulated metal parts of an appliance, power tool,  or other electrical devices
2. Earthing is  the process  of creating an alternative path for the flow of fault/excessive currents safely into the ground in the presence of minimal resistance or impedance.
3.  Safe  Earthing  Electrode   is  a
metallic device mounted at the highest point of the building to  capture lightning strikes  and direct  it  to  the earth via a  safe path thereby preventing it  from flowing through the building's electrcial circuit.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 17
a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  All
d.  1 and 3 only


49. Regarding trade during the British period in India, consider the following statements


1.  During 1820s, opium was the largest product in India’s exports basket
2.   By helping Britain balance its
deficits, India played   a crucial role in the late-nineteenth- century world economy
3.  Britain  had    a   ‘trade deficit’
with India

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are incorrect?

a.   3 Only
b.  1 and 2 Only c.  2 and 3 Only d.  2 Only




50. With  reference to Warli revolt , consider the following statements


1.  Godavari Parulekar  was  the prominent leader of the revolt
2. Warlis were primitive tribe living in  Madhya Pradesh

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only
c.  Both
d.  None


51. With  reference to the decline of Mughal Dynasty, consider the following statements


1. In  1849,  Governor-General Canning announced  that after the death of Bahadur Shah Zafar, the family of the king would be shifted  out of  the Red  Fort  and given  another place in Delhi to reside in.
2. In 1856,  Governor-General Dalhousie decided that Bahadur Shah Zafar would be the last Mughal king and after his death none of his descendants would be recognized as kings – they would just be called princes.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are incorrect?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  None d.  Both


52. Regarding     a   constitution   of   a country, consider the following statements


1.   It specifies the basic allocation of power in a  society. It decides who gets to decide what the laws will be.
2. It     decides     how     the government  will  be constituted.


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 18
3.  It sets some limits  on what  a government can impose on its citizens.
4.  Some constitutions enable and empower the government  to take positive measures to overcome forms of inequality or deprivation.

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  3 and 4 Only d.  All


53. A    constitution    expresses    the fundamental identity of a people. Which means,


1.  The  people  as  a   collective entity  come  into  being only through the basic constitution
2.   It is by agreeing to a basic set of norms about how one should be governed, and who should be governed  that  one forms a collective identity.
3.  It is by providing a framework
for positive discrimination, an identity is given to the people
4.  The        constitution        sets
authoritative constraints upon what one may or may not do. It defines the fundamental values that  we may not trespass. This is moral identity.

Which of the above statements are correct?

a.   1,2, and 4
b.  2,3 and 1
c.  3 and 4 Only d.  All


54. Amrita   Devi   Bishnoi   Wildlife
Protection Award is given to


a.   Tribal   people  of   Rajasthan who protect wildlife in the desert regions
b. Individuals  or  communities from rural areas that have shown  extraordinary courage and dedication in  protecting wildlife
c.  People        who         practice
transhumance in   the  forest and hilly regions who protect traditional knowledge
d.  None


55. With   reference to  Joint  Forest Management (JFM), consider the following statements


1. the provisions  of National Forest Policy 1988, the Government of India, outlined and conveyed to State Governments a framework for creating massive people’s movement through involvement of village committees for the protection, regeneration  and development of degraded forest lands
2.   Joint     Forest     Management (JFM)  programme in  the present form can be traced to the      Arabari     experiment


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 19
initiated by  foresters  in  the state of West Bengal.
3.  In this scheme, villagers  agree
to assist in the safeguarding of forest resources through protection from fire,  grazing, and illegal  harvesting in exchange for which  they receive non-timber        forest products and a   share of  the revenue     from     the     sale of timber products

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  1 and 3 Only c.  2 and 3 Only d.  All


56. With      reference     to      Jhum cultivation,  consider  the following statements


1. It is also called as shifting cultivation  and slash and burn cultivation
2.   Shifting                cultivation is
an agricultural system           in which plots of land are cultivated  temporarily, then abandoned and  allowed  to revert to their natural vegetation while the cultivator moves on to another plot.
3.  The role of slash-and-burn  is
significant           in            the current Holocene extinction.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are incorrect?
a.   3 Only b.  2 Only c.  None d.  Both


57. The   Indian   Constitution    was never subject to such a referendum, but nevertheless carried enormous public authority. This is because


1. It had  the consensus and backing of leaders who were themselves popular
2.   It  was drawn up  by  people who enjoyed immense public credibility
3.  It was drawn by a completely elected body of representatives

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  1 and 2 Only d.  All


58. Indian our Constitution is a living document. What do you mean by that? Consider the following statements


1. Like  a   living  being, the Constitution responds to experience.
2.   Even after so many changes in the society,  the Constitution continues to work effectively because of  this  ability to  be
dynamic,   to   be   open   to

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 20
interpretations and the ability to respond to the changing situation
3.  Almost like a living being, this document keeps responding to the situations and circumstances arising from time to time.
4. Like  a   living  being,  our constitution  is  also  prone to destruction and it’s  not permanent

Which   of  the  above aptly describe  the statement in the question in the context of Indian constitution?

a.   1,2 and 4 b.  2 and 4
c.  1,2, and 3
d.  All




59. With  reference to the effect of the  British  rule  on  old  Indian cities, consider the following statements


1.   Old trading centres and ports could not survive when the flow  of trade moved to new centres
2.   The British Rule caused rapid
urbanization of old cities

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  Both
c.  2 Only
d.  None
60.With reference to collective farming, consider  the  following statements


1.  A  group  of  farmers form  a collective  society  by  pooling in their resources voluntarily for more efficient and profitable farming.
2.   Collective    farming   or    the
model of Kolkhoz was introduced in erstwhile Soviet Union  to  improve upon the inefficiency of the previous methods of agriculture  and to boost agricultural production for self-sufficiency
3.  The farmers have to pay taxes on  the farm produces, hired machinery etc

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 Only
b.  2 and 3 Only c.  1 and 3 Only d.  All


61. With  reference to  waterlogging, consider the following statements


1. Irrigation   without   proper drainage of   water  leads  to waterlogging in  the  soil. Besides affecting the crops, waterlogging reduces  the salinity of  the surface of the soil
2.   Waterlogging is   one  of  the
problems that  have come in


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 21
the    wake   of    the    Green
Revolution
3.  Soil may    be    regarded    as waterlogged when  the water table of       the groundwater is too high to conveniently permit an anticipated activity, like agriculture.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.  1 and 2 Only c.  2 and 3 Only d.  All


62. In  which  one  of  the  following regions is  extensive  commercial grain cultivation not practised?
a.    American Canadian prairies b.  Pampas of Argentina
c.   European Steppes d.   Amazon Basin


63. Consider   the   statements   with reference to viticulture


1.   It   is    a     speciality   of   the
Mediterranean region
2. When the grapes are used forwinemaking, it  is  also known as viniculture
3.  In    Indian,      viticulture      is
prominent      in     far     eastern region

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?
c.  1 and 3 Only d.  All


64. Dobson unit is a measurement of a.   The thickness of the ozone in
a  column of air from the ground to the top of the atmosphere
b.  The  concentration of  ozone molecules in a litre of air
c.  The intensity of breakdown of
ozone  into  oxygen  and free radicals
d.  None of the above

65. Which   of   the  following   gases contribute more  towards global warming?

a.   N2O
b.  CFCs
c.  Methane d.  CO




66. Truck farming refers to

a. The regions where farmers contribute only towards transportation of  agricultural goods
b. The  regions where farmers specialize in vegetables only
c. The regions where farmers specialize      in      agricultural
marketing
d.  None       of       the       above

a.   1 and 2 Only
b.  2 and 3 Only


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 22
67. Consider          the         following statements with reference to eutrophication


1.   It is the natural aging of a lake by biological enrichment of its water.
2.   As the lake’s fertility increases with more incoming nutrients, plant and animal life burgeons, and organic  remains begin  to be deposited on the lake bottom
3. Eutrophication         increases oxygen and hence contributes to overproduction of phytoplankton

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.  1 and 2 Only c.  2 and 3 Only d.  All




68. With reference to the supremacy of the Parliament, consider the following statements


1.  In a parliamentary  democracy, the Parliament  represents the people and therefore, it is expected  to  have an   upper hand over both Executive and Judiciary
2.   The text of the Constitution and it  has  given  powers  to other organs of the government.    Therefore,    the
supremacy of  the Parliament has  to  operate within   this framework.


3. The Judiciary, in its famous Golaknath ruling found a way out of the existing complications by turning to the spirit  of the Constitution rather than its letter in which it upheld that  the balance  of powers between various organs of the state was a basic structure of the constitution.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  1 and 3 Only d.  3 Only


69. With reference to Sikhs, consider the following statements


1.  The  Khalsa  was  inaugurated on March 30, 1699,  by Guru Gobind Singh, the tenth Sikh Guru
2.   The  Khalsa  is  the collective
body                                     of all initiated Sikhs represented by  the five  beloved-ones and can be called the Guru Panth
3. TheKhalsa   rose  in   revolt against  the Mughal  authority under Banda Bahadur’s leadership, declared their sovereign   rule   by   striking coins  in  the  name of  Guru
Nanak  and   Guru    Gobind

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 23
Singh, and established their own  administration between the Sutlej and the Jamuna.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1,2 and 3 b.  3 Only
c.  2 and 3 Only d.  None


70. With              reference             to biomagnifications, consider the following statements


1. Biomagnification   refers   to increase  in  concentration of the toxicant at successive trophic levels.
2.   This is caused by low or non- existent rate of internal degradation   or  excretion   of the substance – often due to water-insolubility
3.  Species  of  fish  that  arelong- lived and low     on  the food chain,                                such as marlin, tuna, shark   contain
more mercury.
4.  High  concentrations of  DDT disturb calcium metabolism in birds,  which  causes  thinning of eggshell  and their premature breaking, eventually causing decline  in bird populations.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are incorrect?

a.   2 Only b.  3 Only
c.  4 Only
d.  None
71. With   reference  to  CFL   bulbs, consider the following statements


1.  Unlike  other bulbs,  CFL  are consumer friendly and don’t pose health hazard
2.   The luminous    efficacy of    a typical CFL  is  50–70 lumens per watt (lm/W) and that of a typical    incandescent    lamp is 10–17 lm/W
3.  Theluminous           efficacy of
lamps is  the number of lumens produced for each watt of electrical power used.
4.  CFLs  emit light from a  mix of phosphors inside  the  bulb, each  emitting  one  band of color.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 and 4 Only
b.  2,3 and 4 Only c.  3 and 4 Only
d.  All




72. With reference to Harappan sites and agriculture  during its period, consider the following statements


1. Most   Harappan  sites   are located in semi-arid lands, where irrigation was probably not required for agriculture as they were located on the bank of Indus river

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 24
2.   It is  likely that  water drawn from wells was used for irrigation. Besides, water reservoirs found in Dholavira (Gujarat)  may have been used to store water for agriculture.
3.  Traces  of  canals have  been found at the Harappan site of Shortughai in Afghanistan, but not in Punjab or Sind.
4. Archaeologists     have    also found evidence of a ploughed field at Kalibangan (Rajasthan), associated with Early Harappan levels

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1,2 and 4 Only b.  1,2 and 3 Only c.  2,3 and 4 Only d.  All


73. With  reference to  Bharat  stage emission  standards , consider the following statements


1. These are emission standards instituted by the Government of India to regulate the output of air pollutants from internal combustion engine equipment, including  motor vehicles.
2.   The stoppage of production of Maruti-800 is  because of regulation of emissions
3.  At  present India has adopted Bharat  stage  –V  emission norms
4.  Under Bharat stage – III, two wheelers   were   allowed   to emit up to 1 g/km of carbon monoxide

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1,2 and 3 b.  1,3 and 4 c.  1,2 and 4 d.  All




74. Consider          the         following statements  about Indian systems of medicine


1.  It includes only five systems: Ayurveda, Yoga, Unani, Siddha and Naturopathy
2.   Unani medicine first arrived in India  around 12th  or 13th century   with   establishment of Delhi   Sultanate(1206-1527) and Islamic   rule  over North India and            subsequently flourished          under Mughal Empire
3.   Siddha           focused          to
"Ashtamahasiddhi," the  eight supernatural power. Those who attained  or achieved the above said powers are known as Siddhars.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   All
b.  2 and 3 Only c.  1 and 2 Only


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 25
d.  3 Only


75. About whom did Ambedkar said that ‘his “ability to put the most intricate proposals in the simplest and clearest legal form can rarely be  equalled”  during drafting of Indian constitution?
a.   B.N.Rau
b.  S.N.Mukherjee
c.  Alladi Krishnswamy Aiyar d.  K.M.Munshi


76. Which  of the following are vital functions of the environment?


1.   it supplies resources
2.   it assimilates waste
3.  it sustains life by providing genetic and bio diversity
4.   it  provides aesthetic  services like scenery
5.  It serves human needs

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1,2,3,4 and 5 b.  2,3, and 4
c.  1,2,3 and 4
d.  1,3, and 4


77. With     reference    to     judicial activism, consider  the following statements


1. It   has  democratised  the judicial system by giving  not just to individuals but also groups access to the courts
2.   It    has    forced     executive
accountability.
3. Judicial   activism  may  be creating strains on this democratic principle.
4. It   has   overburdened  the courts.
5.  It has also made an attempt to
make  the   electoral  system much more free and fair

Which     of    the    above    statements    is incorrect?

a.   4 Only b.  5 Only c.  None d.  2 Only


78. Consider          the         following statements with regard to sharia
1.   The    shari‘a     is     the    law
governing        the       Muslim community
2.   It is based on the Qur’an and the hadis, traditions of the Prophet including a  record of his   remembered words  and deeds.
3.  With the expansion of Islamic rule  outside Arabia,  in  areas where customs and traditions were different, qiyas (reasoning by analogy)  and ijma (consensus of the community) were recognised as two other sources of legislation. Thus, the shari‘a evolved from the Qur’an, hadis, qiyas and ijma
4.  Every Mughal leader imposed Sharia in the Indian sub continent

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 26
Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1,2 and 3 Only b.  2 and 3 Only
c.  1 and 3 Only d.  All




79. With    reference   to   Lingayats, consider the following statements


1.   The Lingayats also encouraged certain practices  disapproved in the Dharmashastras, such as post-puberty marriage and the remarriage of widows.
2.   They believed in the theory of
rebirth.
3. Lingayats believe  that   on death  the devotee will  be united with Shiva and will not return to this world.
4.  Therefore they do not practise funerary rites  such  as cremation, prescribed in the Dharmashastras. Instead, they ceremonially bury their dead.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1,2 and 3 Only b.  1,3, and 4 Only c.  A and 4 Only d.  All




80. What  is  the  main function  of electrostatic precipitator electrostatic precipitator?
a.   They remove pollutants from river water
b.  They     remove     particulate
matter   from  thermal power exhaust gases
c.  They     are      used     in     air
conditioners
d.  None of the above


81. Ex  Situ  conservation  of  wildlife refers to


a.   Protection of threatened wild animals in biosphere reserves
b. Conservation  of  endangered species  in  zoological gardens, botanical parks
c.  Protection of animals through domestication
d.  None of the above


82. With    reference  to   groundnut, consider the following statements


1.  Groundnut is a rabi  crop and accounts for about half of the major oilseeds produced in the country
2.   China,   India,   Nigeria,   USA
and Myanmar  are  the major groundnut growing countries.
3.  Gujarat is the largest producer
of groundnut  along with Andhra Pradesh  followed  by Tamil  Nadu, Karnataka,  and Maharashtra

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   2 and 3 Only b.  1,2 and 3

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 27
c.  1 and 2 Only d.  1 and 3 Only




83. Which    of   the   following   are narrowly utilitarian arguments for conserving biodiversity?


1.   Biodiversity plays a major role in many ecosystem services that nature provides
2. Humans   derive   countless direct economic benefits from nature -food (cereals, pulses, fruits), firewood, fibre, construction material, industrial products (tannins, lubricants, dyes, resins, perfumes  )  and products  of medicinal importance.
3.  With  increasing resources put into ‘bioprospecting’ nations endowed with  rich biodiversity   can   expect   to reap enormous benefits.

Select the correct answer using the codes below

a.   1 and 2 b.  2 and 3 c.  1 and 3 d.  All


84. Consider          the         following statements


1.  Lignite is  a  low  grade  brown coal, which  is  soft with  high moisture content
2.   Coal  that   has  been  buried deep and subjected to increased temperatures is bituminous coal. It is the most popular coal in commercial use.
3.  Damodar valley (West Bengal- Jharkhand) Jharia, Raniganj, Bokaro are  important coalfields where anthracite is mined abundantly

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   2 and 3 Only b.  2 Only
c.  1 Only
d.  1 and 2 Only




85. The second trophic level in a lake is-


a.   Phytoplankton b.  Zooplankton
c.  Benthos
d.  Fishes


86. Which       of      the      following statements are incorrect?


1. Red    soil     develops    on crystalline igneous rocks in areas of  low  rainfall in  the eastern and southern parts of the Deccan plateau
2.   Red  soils   develop a   reddish colour due to diffusion of iron in            crystalline           and
metamorphic rocks


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 28
Select the correct answer using the codes below

a.   1 b.  2
c.  Both d.  None


87. Watermelon,              muskmelon, cucumber are mainly grown  in which season?


a.   Rabi
b.  Kharif c.  Zaid
d.  None


88. Intervention   by   the   monetary authority of a  country in the money    market to keep the money supply stable against exogenous or sometimes external shocks such as an increase in foreign exchange inflow is known as


a.   Revaluation b.  Sterilization
c.  Open Market operation d.  None of the above


89. Consider          the         following statements  regarding Gold Standard


1. From around 1870  to the outbreak of  the  Second World War in 1946, the prevailing system was the gold
standard   which     was    the
epitome of the fixed exchange rate system.
2.   Each     participant    country
committed to guarantee the free convertibility of its currency into gold   at  a  fixed price.
3. Exchange     rates     were determined by  its  worth  in terms of gold (where the currency was made of gold, its actual gold content).

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  1 and 3 Only d.  All


90.With reference to weathering process, consider the following statements


1. In    weathering,    oxidation means a  combination of a mineral with oxygen to form oxides or hydroxides.
2.   Oxidation occurs where there
is  ready access to the atmosphere and oxygenated waters
3. When oxidised minerals are placed in an environment where oxygen is absent, reduction takes place.
4. Red  colour  of  iron  upon reduction turns  to brown  or yellow.



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 29
5. Red  colour  of  iron  upon oxidation turns to greenish or bluish grey.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1,2 and 3 Only b.  4 and 5 Only
c.  3,4 and 5 Only d.  All


91.  “The novel tells the moving story of  Hori  and his  wife  Dhania, a peasant couple.  Landlords, moneylenders, priests and colonial  bureaucrats –  all those who  hold  power  in  society  – form  a   network  of  oppression, rob  their  land and make them into landless labourers. Yet Hori and Dhania retain their dignity to the end.”  To  which  novel does this description apply to?


a.   Rangbhoomi (The Arena) by
Premchand
b.  Godan (The Gift of Cow) by
Premchand
c.  Chomana  Dudi  by  Shivaram
Karanth
d.  Anguriya  Binimoy by Bhudeb
Mukhopadhyay


92. Cirque is a


a. A   landform  in   glaciated mountains
b.   Landform in desert landscape shaped by wind action
c.  A landform in limestone cave
d.  None
93. The ozone layer is located at


a.   Troposphere b.  Mesosphere c.  Ionosphere
d.  Stratosphere


94. Consider          the         following statements  about Khilafat movement


1. The   Khilafat   Movement, (1919-1920) was a  movement of Indian Muslims,  led by Muhammad  Ali  and Shaukat Ali
2.   The  demand was  that   the Turkish   Sultan   or   Khalifa must retain control  over the Muslim  sacred places in  the erstwhile   Ottoman   empire; the jazirat-ul-Arab (Arabia, Syria,  Iraq,  Palestine) must remain under Muslim sovereignty
3.  Mahatma   Gandhi  sought  to
conjoin    it    to    the    Non- cooperation Movement.

Which     of    the    above    statements    is incorrect?

a.   2 b.  1
c.  None d.  3


95. The  temperature of  air  at  any place is influenced,


1.   The latitude of the place
2.   The longitude of the place

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 30
3.   The altitude of the place
4.  Distance from the sea, the air- mass circulation;
5.   The  presence of  warm and cold ocean currents;

Select the correct answer using the codes below

a.   1,2,3,4 and 5 b.  1,3,4 and 5
c.  2,3,4 and 5 d.  3,4 and 5


96. Consider          the         following statements  about Quit  India movement


1.  “Quit India”  was genuinely   a mass movement, bringing into its  ambit hundreds of thousands of ordinary Indians.
2.   It was in these years that the League began to make  a mark in the Punjab  and Sind, provinces where it had previously had scarcely any presence.


3. It was launched after the failure of the Cabinet mission plan

Which of the above statements is correct?

a.   1 and 2 b.  1 and 3 c.  2 and 3
d.  All
97. Consider          the         following statements


1. The      continental     slope connects the continental shelf and the ocean basins
2.   It begins where the bottom of the  continental shelf  sharply drops off into a steep slope
3.  In     this      region     massive
sedimentary deposits received over a long time by the continental shelves, become the source of fossil fuels.
4. Canyons  and trenches  are observed in this region.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1,2 and 4
b.  1,2,3 and 4 c.  1,2 and 3
d.  1,3 and 4


98. Guyots refer to


a.   These are low islands found in the tropical oceans consisting of  coral  reefs  surrounding a central depression
b.  These are deep valleys, some comparable to  the  Grand Canyon of the Colorado river.
c.  It is a flat topped  seamount d.  None of the above








http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 31
99. Which       of      the      following statements  about ocean salinity is/are correct?


1.  The  salinity of  water in  the surface layer of oceans depend mainly on evaporation and precipitation.
2. Surface salinity  is  greatly influenced  in  coastal  regions by the fresh water flow from rivers, and in polar regions by the processes  of freezing and thawing of ice.
3.   Wind, also influences salinity of an area  by transferring water to other areas
4. The  ocean  currents   have negligible   role   in   affecting
ocean salinity
Select the correct answer using the codes below

a.   1,2 and 3 b.  2,3 and 4 c.  3 and 4
d.  1 and 3


100.   Gel     electrophoresis     is     a technique used for


a.   Cutting  DNA   molecules  to select only wanted fragments
b.  Separating DNA fragments
c.  Joining     fragmented   DNA
molecules
d.  None of the above







































http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 32
