
INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK PRELIMINARY EXAM - 2014


INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST - 4

GENERAL STUDIES

PAPER-I

Time Allowed: Two Hours                                                                               Maximum Marks: 200


INSTRUCTIONS
1.   IMMEDITELY AFTER THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE EXAMINATION, YOU SHOULD
CHECK  THAT  THIS  TEST  BOOKLET  DOES  NOT  HAVE  ANY  UNPRINTED  OR  TORN  OR MISSING PAGES OR ITEMS, ETC. IF SO, GET IT REPLACED BY A COMPLETE TEST BOOKLET.
2.  You have to enter your Roll Number on the Test I Booklet in the Box provided alongside. DO NOT write anything else on the Test Booklet.

4.  This Test Booklet contains 100 items (questions). Each  item is  printed only in  English. Each item comprises four responses (answers). You will select the response which you want to mark on the Answer Sheet. In case you feel that there is more than one correct response, mark the response which you consider the best. In any case, choose ONLY ONE response for each item.
5.  You have to mark all your responses ONLY on the separate Answer Sheet provided. See directions in the
Answer Sheet.
6.  All items carry equal marks.

7.  Before you proceed to mark in the Answer Sheet the response to various items in the Test Booklet, you have to fill in some particulars in the Answer Sheet as per instructions sent to you with your Admission Certificate.

8.  After you have completed filling in all your responses on the Answer Sheet and the examination has concluded, you should hand over to the Invigilator only the Answer Sheet. You are permitted to take away with you the Test Booklet.

9.  Sheets for rough work are appended in the Test Booklet at the end.
10.  Penalty for wrong answers :
THERE WILL BE PENALTY FOR WRONG ANSWERS MARKED BY A CANDIDATE IN THE OBJECTIVE TYPE QUESTION PAPERS.
(i)   There are four alternatives for the answer to every question. For each question for which a wrong answer has been given by the candidate, one-third of the marks assigned to that question will be deducted as penalty.
(ii)   If a candidate gives more than one answer, it will be treated as a wrong answer even if one of the given answers happens to be correct and there will be same penalty as above to that question.
(iii)    If a question is left blank, i.e., no answer is given by the candidate, there will be no penalty for that question.


http://insightsonindia.com


INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST SERIES FOR CIVIL SERVICES PRELIMINARY EXAM 2014





http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                        Page 1
1. Consider the following statements about Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs)


1.   HFCs  cause ozone depletion and are banned under Montreal protocol
2.   HFCs  are super-greenhouse gases with an extremely high global warming potential.
3.  HFCs  also figure in the basket of six     greenhouse     gases    under the Kyoto Protocol

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are incorrect?

a.   1 Only
b.  2 and 3 Only c.  3 Only
d.  None


2.   Consider  the  following  statements with reference to the latitudinal and longitudinal extent of India


1.  The  latitudinal and longitudinal extent of India are roughly about
30 degrees
2.   The   distance  from   North   to South is shorter than the distance from East to West
3.  This  difference is  based on  the fact  that  the  distance between two longitudes increases towards the  poles  whereas the  distance between two latitudes remains the same everywhere.

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only
b.  1 and 3 Only c.  2 and 3 Only d.  None
3.  Consider the following statements:


1. The Indian Constitution does not make ethnic identity a  criterion for citizenship.
2. The  members  of  the  Indian Constituent Assembly that was formed pre-Independence were indirectly elected.
3. The  Constituent  Assembly  was composed  roughly  along the  lines suggested   by  the  Cripps   Mission plan.
4. The   introduction   of   universal suffrage was the only provision that was passed without virtually any debate in the Constituent Assembly.


Which  of  the statements  given  above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only
b.  2, 3 and 4 Only c.  1, 2 and 4 Only d.  1, 2, 3 and 4



4. Consider the following statements about the Harappan Civilization:

1.   The Harappan seals which contained animal motifs  and signs,  most  of them,  were  made of  fine  quality metals.
2.   The evidences show  that  Rice  was the main food grain  consumed by the people.


Which   of  the  above statement/s   is/are correct?

a.   1 only b.  2 only c.  Both d.  None






http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 2
5.  The    purpose    of    Environmental
Impact Assessment (EIA) is:


1.  To identify and evaluate  the potential impacts (beneficial and adverse)of development and projects on the environmental system.
2.   It  is  a   useful  aid for  decision making based on  understanding of the environment implications including social, cultural and aesthetic  concerns  which  could be integrated with the analysis of the project costs and benefits.

Which    of   the   above  statements is/are incorrect?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None


6. December  and January  are the coldest months in the northern plain. The mean daily temperature remains below 21°C  over most parts of northern India. Consider the following reasons,


1.  States   like  Punjab,   Haryana and Rajasthan being far away from the moderating influence of sea experience continental climate.
2.   The snowfall in the nearby Himalayan ranges creates cold wave situation
3.   Around  February, the  cold winds coming from the Caspian  Sea   and Turkmenistan bring cold wave
along with frost and fog over the northwestern parts of India.
Which  of the reasons given above is /are correct?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  3 Only
d.  All Three




7. India    has   adopted  bi-cameral legislature, wherein the Rajya Sabha forms  the  upper  House  and Lok Sabha forms the lower House. Consider  the following with  regard to Rajya Sabha:


1. The number of members to be elected from  each State  has  been fixed by the second schedule of the Constitution.
2.   It is an indirectly elected body.
3.  Members  of  the  Rajya Sabha   are elected for a  term of six  years and they are also eligible for re-election.
4. The Rajya  Sabha  is  never fully dissolved; hence it is called a permanent body.


Which  of the above statements  is/are correct?


a.   1 and 2 Only
b.  2, 3 and 4 Only c.  2 and 3 Only
d.  1, 2, 3 and 4 Only



8.  Consider the following statements about Jainism:



1.  Vardhamana,    who   came   to   be known as Mahavira, founded Jainism in the sixth century BCE.
2.   According  to  Jaina  teachings, the cycle of birth and rebirth is shaped through karma.


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 3
3.  Jaina  scholars produced a  wealth of literature in  a  variety  of  languages including Tamil.



Which of the above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  1 and 3 Only c.  2 and 3 Only d.  All the above



9.  Consider the following data


1.   Total       Coliforms       Organism
MPN/100ml  shall be 50 or less
2.   pH between 6.5 and 8.5
3.  Dissolved Oxygen 6mg/l or more
4.  Biochemical Oxygen  Demand 5 days 20°C 2mg/l or less

The  above criterion  laid by central pollution control board of India  is  meant for?

a.   Outdoor Bathing (organized)
b.  Propagation of Wildlife and fisheries c.  Drinking    water   source    without
conventional  treatment  but   after disinfection
d. Drinking   water   source   after conventional treatment  and disinfection




10. Consider  the  following  statements about Purusha sukta:



1.   1.Purushasukta   is   a   hymn  in  the
Yajur veda
2.   2.The Brahmanas cited Purushasukta to justify  their dominance and superiority in the society



Which of the above is/are correct?
a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None



11. The    constitution    of    India    has provided for certain qualifications in order  to  become members of  the Parliament and  State   legislatures. Which  of the following statements is/are correct?


1. Minimum   and  maximum  age requirements are provided in  the constitution for a candidate contesting for elections.
2. A  person who has undergone imprisonment  for   two   or   more years     for     some     offence     is
disqualified      from       contesting elections.
3. A candidate standing for election should have at least completed his matriculation.
4.  There is a reasonable  restriction on the income of the candidates standing for elections.


Select  the  correct  answer  using  the codes below:


a.   2 Only
b.  1 and 2 Only
c.  1, 2 and 3 Only d.  1, 2 and 4 Only



12. Consider the following statement:


“These plains have characteristic features of mature stage of fluvial erosional and depositional landforms such as sand bars, meanders, ox-bow  lakes and braided channels.”


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 4
To which  part of the Northern Plains of  India,  does the  above description refer to?


a.   Tarai region
b.  Bhangar and Khadar deposits c.  Bhabar region
d.  None of the above

13. Consider  the  following  statements regarding the trends of change in the Urbanization process  in colonial India :



1.   Urbanization in India was sluggish all through  the 19th century and it accelerated sharply  from  the  first decade of the 20th century with the urban population increasing from about 10  per cent of the total population to  about 15   per  cent between 1900 and 1910.
2. The  smaller  towns  had   little opportunity  to  grow  economically
and only a  few cities  developed as the new commercial and administrative centres at the expense of other existing urban centres..



Which of the above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None



14. With reference to Biological Oxygen Demand, consider the following statements


1.  Biochemical                      oxygen demand or B.O.D is   the  amount of dissolved   oxygen needed  by aerobic biological organisms in a body  of  water to  break down inorganic   material  present  in  a
given water sample at  certain temperature over a  specific  time period.
2.   An alternative to measure BOD is the  development of  biosensors, which are devices for the detection of an analyte that combines a biological component with  a  physicochemical detector component.

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2  Only c.  Both
d.  None

15. Consider  the  following  statements with reference to proportional representation system of election:


1.  More  than one representative  may be elected from one constituency
2.   Candidate who  wins   the  election
may not get majority votes.
3.  Voter votes for the candidate rather than the party in this system.
4.  Under the system the entire country may be considered as a  single constituency.
5. Every  party gets  seats   in  the legislature in  proportion to the percentage of votes that it gets.


Select  the  correct  answer  using  the codes below:


a.   2, 3 and 4 Only b.  1, 4 and 5 Only
c.  1, 2, 3and 5 Only d.  1, 2, 3, 4 and 5

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 5
16. Consider the following statements:


1. Members   other  than  ministers cannot introduce bills.
2.   Introduction of any new tax requires
the approval  of the Lok Sabha  and
Rajya Sabha
3.  Budget is  a  mechanism for  checks and balance system adopted in India.
4. A bill proposed by a  minister is described as Private Bill


Which  of the above statements  is/are correct?


a.   2 Only b.  3 Only c.  2 and 3
d.  1, 2, 3 and 4




17. Tamil Nadu witnessed some of the earliest Bhakti movements (c. sixth century) which were led by the Alvars  and Nayanars. Consider  the following  in  relation to  the  Bakti movements in the Tamil region:



1.  Alvars  were the devotees of  Shiva while Nayanars were the devotees of Vishnu.
2.   The Alvars and Nayanars  protested against   the  caste  system  and the
dominance  of       Brahmanas and attempted to reform the system.
3. The Tamil bhakti    poets were opposed to Buddhism and Jainism.



Which of the above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  1 and 3 Only
d.  All of the above
18. Perhaps the most unique feature of the  Harappan civilisation   was  the development of  urban centres. Consider the following statements about Mohenjodaro, the most well- known site:



1.  The settlement is  divided into two sections, one smaller but higher and the other much larger but lower.
2. The upper section (citadel) was walled but   the lower  section  was not walled.
3.  The  bricks   used  for  construction were either sun-dried or baked  and were of a  standardized  ratio where the length,  breadth  and height were in the ratio 4:2:1 respectively.



Which   of  the  above statement/s   is/are correct?

a.   1 only
b.  1 and 2 only c.  1 and 3 only d.  1, 2 and 3



19. Three major geological events in the distant past have shaped the present drainage systems of Peninsular India. They are:


1.  Subsidence   of   the   western flank of the Peninsula leading to its submergence below the sea  during the  early tertiary period.
2.   Upheaval of   the  Himalayas when  the  northern  flank of the Peninsular block was subjected to subsidence and the consequent trough faulting.



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 6
3.  Slight tilting of the Peninsular block  from  northeast to  the southwestern direction.

Which  of  the statements  given  above is
/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 Only
c.  2 and 3 Only d.  All Three




20. The   primary  reasons  behind  de- industrializing India  by  the  British were,


1.   To reduce India to the status of a mere exporter of important raw materials for the upcoming modern industries in Britain.
2.  To turn India into a sprawling market for the finished products of  those industries  so  that  their continued expansion could be ensured to the maximum advantage of their home country
— Britain.
3.  To cater to the needs of few rich businessmen from India who supported the British policies

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  1 Only
d.  2 Only




21. With  reference to All  India Services (AIS), consider the following statements:


1.  Only  the  central  government   can take disciplinary action against them
2.   There are two all India Civil Services of India, namely the Indian Administrative Service (IAS) and the Indian Police Service (IPS)
3.  Power of creation of AIS is vested in the lower house of the Central Legislature


Which  of the above statements  is/are correct?


a.   1 Only
b.  2 and 3 Only c.  1 and 3 Only d.  1, 2 and 3



22. Consider  the  following  features  of the urban settlements in India before the 20th century.



1.  Money was raised for administering towns through the systematic annual collection of municipal taxes.
2.   Surveys, gathering of statistical data, and publishing of various official reports was done regularly.
3.  Towns  dominated over  the  rural population, thriving on the surplus and taxes derived from agriculture.



Which   of  the  above is/are  the  features were non-existant in the pre-colonial India?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  1 and 3 Only c.  3 Only
d.  None



23. Consider  the  following  statements about financial sector reforms in India


1. One of the major aims of financial sector  reforms is  to reduce the role of RBI  from

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 7
regulator   to    facilitator    of financial sector
2. Financial   sector    reforms include reforms of stock exchange operations and foreign exchange market too.

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.   2 Only c.  Both
d.  None




24. Consider  the  following  statements regarding air pollution in India


1.  Adulterated                           fuel increases tailpipe       emissions of hydrocarbons (HC),  carbon monoxide (CO), oxides of nitrogen  (NOx)   and particulate matter (PM)
2. Traffic congestion increases air pollution
3.  Central       Pollution       Control Board now    routinely   monitors four  air  pollutants  namely sulphur dioxide (SO2), oxides of nitrogen (NOx), suspended particulate matter (SPM) and respirable particulate matter (PM10).

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  1 and 3 Only d.  All
25. Supreme Court  is  regarded  as the guardian of Fundamental Rights. For the enforcement of fundamental rights   the  Supreme  Court   issues writs. Which of the following statements is/are correct?


1.  Quo  warranto  is  issued  when  the court  finds  that   a  particular office holder is  not doing legal duty and thereby is infringing on the right of an individual.
2.   Certiorari is issued by a higher court when a lower court has considered a
case going beyond its jurisdiction.
3.  Habeas corpus means that the court orders that  the arrested persons should be presented before it. It can also  order  to  set  free  an arrested person if the manner or grounds of arrest are not lawful or satisfactory.
4.  Mandamus is issued when the court finds that  a person is holding office but is not entitled to hold that office, it issues  the writ of mandamus and restricts  that  person from acting as an office holder.
5.  Prohibition means the court orders a lower court or another authority to transfer  a matter pending  before it to the higher authority or court.


Select  the  correct  answer  using  the codes below:


a.   3 Only
b.  2, 3 and 4 Only c.  1, 3 and 4 Only d.  1, 2, 3, 4 and 5


26. ‘Siricilla’ tragedy in Andhra Pradesh where fifty powerloom workers committed suicide was the outcome of


a.   Power sector reforms initiated by the government

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 8
b.  A steep hike in power tariff.
c. Failure    of    the    power producers in      providing quality power to the powerloom industry.
d.  All the above




27. Consider  the  following  statements about the response of government in a socialist society


1. In a socialist society the government decides what goods  are  to be produced in  accordance with  the needs of society.
2.   The   government   decides how goods are to be produced and how they should be distributed.
3.  Strictly,  a  socialist  society has no private property since  everything is  owned
by the state.




Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2  Only b.   2Only
c.  2  and 3 Only d.  All




28. Consider  the  following  statements about   ITCZ   -   The Intertropical Convergence Zone


1.   It is  known by sailors as the doldrums, and in parts of Asia as Monsoon trough.
2.   By the middle of July, the low pressure         ITCZ       shifts
northwards,  roughly   parallel
to the Himalayas between 20° N and 25° N.
3.   The ITCZ being  a zone of low pressure, attracts inflow of winds  from  different directions. This causes Monsoon.
4.   It  is  generally  believed that there  is   a   cause  and   effect
relationship  between  the ITCZ and Westerly  Jet Stream.




Which  of  the statements  given  above is
/are correct?

a.   1, 2 and 3 Only b.  2 and 4 Only
c.  1 and 4 Only d.  All Four




29. An insight into the social, economic, cultural  and  political  conditions  of the past are provided by the descriptions and accounts of a number of travelers who visited the subcontinent. Consider the following statements  about some of the travelers to India:



1. Al-Biruni     who     came    from Uzbekistan in the eleventh century, called Rihla in Arabic.
2.   Ibn     Battuta     who    came    from
Morocco  in the fourteenth century, wrote Kitab-ul-Hind in Arabic.
3.  François Bernier came from France in  the  seventeenth century  wrote accounts of what he saw, frequently comparing what  he  saw  in  India with the situation in Europe.



Which of the above is/are incorrect?


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 9
a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  1 and 3 Only d.  All the above



30. According  to  Dr.  B.R. Ambedkar the Constitution of Indian has been framed after ransacking all  the  known Constitutions of the World. With reference to  this  statement,  which  of the following statements  is/are incorrect?


1.  Principles  of  Liberty,  Equality and Fraternity were borrowed from United States Constitution.
2.   Written  Constitution  from  United
States.
3.  Both Fundamental  Duties  and Five year plans were borrowed from USSR
4.  The  Federal system  was borrowed from Canada.
5.  Principles  of  Liberty,  Equality and
Fraternity  were borrowed from the
British Constitution.


Select the correct answer using the codes below


a.   1 and 5 Only
b.  1, 2, 3 and 4 Only c.  2, 3, 4and 5 Only d.  3, 4 and 5 Only




31. Consider  the  following  statements with reference to carbon footprint


1.  It  is   defined  as  the  total  sets of greenhouse             gas emissions caused by an organization, event, product or person
2.   Clean  Development Mechanism is       a        mandatory         market
mechanism under Kyoto protocol to reduce carbon footprint
3. The Greenhouse Gas Protocol (GHG  Protocol), a  recent initiative by the UN,  is an international accounting tool for government  and business leaders to  understand, quantify, and manage greenhouse gas emissions

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are incorrect?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 Only
c.  3 Only d.  None




32. Consider  the  following  statements about the followers of Buddha:



1.   Sangha was a body  of disciples of the Buddha to which women were never allowed as members.
2.   chaityas  were  the  shrines   which were  regarded as  sacred  by  the Bhikkus where the prayers were made.



Which of the above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None



33. Which of the following is incorrectly matched?


a.   An Isthumus is a narrow strip of water, usually a  small canal, connecting two larger water bodies


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 10
b.  A  Bay    is  a  large body of water connected  to  an  ocean or  sea formed by an inlet of land
c.  A  Strait  is  a   naturally formed, narrow,
typically navigable waterway  that connects two larger, navigable bodies of water
d.  A  Gulf   is  a large bay that  is  an arm of an ocean or sea




34. Soon  after  India  had   to  play  an extensive role in promoting the industrial sector. Consider the following reasons,


1.  At the time of independence, Indian industrialists did not have the capital to undertake investment in industrial ventures required for the development of our economy.
2.   The   market  was   not   big
enough to encourage industrialists to undertake major projects  even  if  they had the capital to do so.

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.   2 Only c.  Both
d.  None

35. With  regard to rights  of minorities provided in India Constitution, consider the following statements:


1. Right to minorities includes both linguistic and cultural minorities.
2.   All  minorities can set up their own educational institutions.
3. Members of the Sikh community have the  right   to  assemble  at   a public place with their kirpans.
4. Minority   educational institutions have the right to impart education in their own language.


Select  the  correct  answer  using  the codes below:


a.   2 Only
b.  1, and 2Only
c.  1, 2, and 4 Only
d.  1, 2, 3 and 4 Only


36. Consider  the  following  statements about Buddhism:
1.   Dhamma  as taught  by Buddha  was
the path of righteous living.
2.   According  to  Buddhist philosophy, the world is transient and constantly changing and does not have  a soul.
3.  According  to  Buddhist philosophy, happiness is intrinsic  to human existence.
Which of the above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  1 and 3 Only c.  2 and 3 Only d.  All the above



37. Consider the following statements


1.   Tariffs are a  tax on imported goods;   they  make imported goods more expensive and discourage their use.
2.   Quotas specify the quantity of goods which can be imported.
3.  These are  instruments by the
government to protect the domestic industries from foreign competition.
4.  The policy aimed  at replacing or  substituting imports  with domestic production is also called as inward looking trade strategy

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 11
Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only
b.   1,2and 3 Only c.  2, 3 and 4 Only d.  All




38. Consider  the  following  statements about capital goods


1. They are primary factors of production
2. Capital goods industry means industries which can produce machine tools which are, in turn,
used  for  producing articles  for current consumption.
3.  Aerospace, defense, construction and machinery businesses  make up  most  of  the  capital goods sector.
4.  During the British  period, there was hardly any capital goods industry to help promote further industrialization in India.
considered   as   a    most   potent
GHG
3. Water    vapor    and     clouds contribute more to greenhouse effect than ozone and carbon dioxide combined

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only
b.  1 and 3 Only c.  1 and 2 Only d.  All


40. Depletion of groundwater levels in India  can be attributed to which of the following reasons?
1.  Legally Groundwater  is  a community resource in India.
2.    Subsidized   electricity   is
given to farmers for irrigation purposes.
3. Increasing commercialization of water supply services in India.

Select   the  correct   answer  using  codes below.


Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only
b.  1, 2 and 3 Only c.  3 and 4 Only
d.  All




39. Consider  the  following  statements about Green House Gases(GHG)


1.   They   absorb and emit  radiation within the thermal infrared range.
2. Along                                   with Perfluorotributylamine (PFTBA), Carbon     Monoxide      is      also
a.   1 only
b.  1 and 3 only c.  2 and 3
d.  All of the above


41. Consider          the         following definitions


1.  Geology is  the science which deals with the physical structure and substance of the earth, their  history,  and the processes which act on them.
2.  ‘Physiography’ of an area is the outcome of structure, process and the stage of development.
3.  Geography is      the     branch
of knowledge that  studies the


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 12
lands, the features, the inhabitants, and the phenomena of the Earth.

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are incorrect?

a.   2 Only b.  1 Only c.  None d.  3 Only




42. With  regard to the First Past the Post (FPTP)  system  adopted in India, consider the following statements:


1.  The  winning  candidate need  not secure a majority  of the votes.
2.   This   method  is   also   called  the
Plurality System.
3.  The  FPTP  system  offers  voters  a choice  not  simply  between parties but specific candidates.
4.  FPTP system is adopted in both the houses  of  parliament and state legislative assemblies.


Which  of the above statements  is/are correct?


a.   2 and 4 Only b.  1 and 4 Only
c.  1, 2 and 3 Only d.  1, 2, 3 and 4


43. Consider the following statement regarding the  agricultural technologies of the Harappan settlers:

1.  Evidences   suggest    that    different crops were grown together.
2.   Oxen were not used for ploughing as the bull was not known to them.



Which of the above is/are correct?




a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None



44. Consider          the         following statements  about ‘economic growth’


1. It refers to increase in the country’s capacity to produce the output of goods and services within the country.
2.   A steady increase in GDP is a good indicator of economic growth
3. Economic    growth    always brings about economic development

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only
b.  1 and 2Only
c.  2  and 3 Only d.  All




45. The  Harappans were  strongly devoted towards craft production,  consider  the following statements with regard to it:



1.   All    the   materials    for   the   craft production were procured locally.
2.   Metals like copper, bronze and gold were used but not steel.
3.  Weight making was well known to them with precise system of weights,

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 13
usually made of a stone called chert and the weights did not have any markings.
Which of the above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  1 and 3 Only d.  All the above



46. Consider          the         following statements with reference to functions  of  Election Commission:


1.   It determines the timing of elections and prepares the election schedule.
2.   It   can   postpone   or   cancel   the election in  the entire country or a specific State or constituency on the grounds  that a  free and fair election may not be possible.
3.  During   the  election   process,   the
Election Commission can transfer or even stop the transfers ofthe administrative officers   ofthe  State and central governments.
4. The        Election        Commission implements model code of conduct for both parties and candidates


Which of the statements is/are correct?


a.   1, 2 and 4 Only b.  1, 3 and 4Only c.  1, 2 and 3 Only
d.  1, 2, 3 and 4 Only



47. Consider          the         following statements
1.  Srinagar,  capital city  of  the state of Jammu and Kashmir is located on the banks of Chenab river.
2.   Jhelum     in     Jammu      and
Kashmir  state  is  still   in  its
youth stage and yet forms meanders – a  typical feature associated with the mature stage   in   the   evolution   of fluvial land form.

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None




48. Consider          the         following statements  about Baba  Guru Nanak:



1.   Baba Guru Nanak did not believe in Hinduism and Islam and so he wished to   establish a  new religion, which he named as Sikhism
2.   He  rejected sacrifices,  ritual baths, image  worship,  austerities and the scriptures.
3.  He defined five symbols: uncut hair, a dagger,  a pair  of shorts, a comb and a   steel  bangle which  need  to  be worn by his followers.



Which of the above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only
c.  1 and 3 Only d.  2 and 3 Only



49. Consider the following about the recent Doha Conference on Climate Talks :


1. Supported  new  ideas  of  geo- engineering to  tackle  the  climate change

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 14
2.  Supported  implementation  of simple solutions  like  energy efficiency  to curb climate change.

Which   of  the  following  is  true  in  this connection?

a.   Only 1 b.  Only 2 c.   Both d.  None

50. Consider    the   following    with regard to the Vice  President of India:


1.   The Vice  President is elected by the electoral college consisting of members  of  the  Parliament, State Legislatures.
2.   The Vice President may be removed from his office by a resolution of the Lok Sabha passed by a majority and agreed to by the Raj Sabha.
3.  The Vice  President acts as the ex- officio Chairman of the Rajya Sabha
4.  The  decision  of  Supreme Court  is final with regard  to any disputes in the election of the Vice President


Which  of the above statements  is/are correct?


a.   2 and 3 Only b.  3 and 4 Only
c.  1, 2 and 3 Only
d.  1, 2, 3 and 4 Only


51. Consider          the         following statements


1.   Bhotia’s, inhabitants of valleys of Greater Himalays, are a nomadic group  who  migrate to ‘Bugyals’ (the summer grasslands in the higher reaches)     during     summer
months   and  return  to   the valleys during winters.
2.   The higher reaches of Sikkim Himalayan region  are inhabited by Lepcha tribes.
3.  The Dooars or Duars formations,       the floodplains and foothills, are prominent in the Shiwalik ranges




Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  1 Only
d.  All Three




52. Consider          the         following statements about Kayals of Kerala


1.   They are soft water lagoons formed by  the  rivers  just before flowing into the Arabian Sea.
2. Vembanad Kayal  is  the largest  one and unlike others  it  is  completely made of brackish water

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are incorrect?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None

53. Consider the following saints:


1.   Kabir
2.   Guru Nanak
3.  Mirabai


Who  among the  above used  ideas and terms    drawn   from    Islam,     Vedantic

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 15
traditions as well as yogic traditions in their poems?

a.   1 Only
b.  1 and 2 Only c.  1 and 3 Only d.  All the above



54. Which  of  the following  can be
the causes of ‘Coral bleaching’ :


1.   Dumping   of   industrial   waste  in ocean water
2.   Increased    sedimentation   of   coral
inhabited areas
3.  Decline in Zooplankton levels
4.  Elevation of sea water levels
5.  Rise in ocean water temperature

Select   the  correct   answer  using  codes below

a.   1, 3 and 5 b.  1,2 and 3
c.  4 and 5 only
d.  All of the above


55. Consider          the         following statements about subsidies


1.   Subsidies provide an incentive for efficient  use of resources.
2. According        to        some economists, subsidies do not allow  prices  to  indicate the supply of a good.

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.   2 Only c.  Both
d.  None




56. Which       of      the      following statements is/are correct?


1.  The   Ritchie’s    archipelago and the Labrynth island are two groups of island in the Arabian Sea
2.   Barren Island, the only active volcano in  India  is  situated in the Andaman Islands.

Select  the  right  answer using  the  codes below?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None




57. The   National   Human   Rights Commission (NHRC) is the watchdog of  the  human rights guaranteed by the Constitution of India. Consider the following statements with reference to NHRC:


1.   It is a constitutional body.
2.   It has suo motu power.
3. It does not have the power of prosecution.
4.  It can intervene in  any proceeding involving allegation  of  violation  of human rights pending  before  a court.


Select  the  correct  answer  using  the codes below:


a.   3 and 4 Only
b.  2, 3 and 4 Only c.  1, 3 and 4 Only d.  1, 2, 3 and 4





58. Chistis  were the most influential group  of  sufis  who  migrated to India  in the late twelfth century.

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 16
Consider  the following statements  related to the Chisti saints:

1.   They  adopted several  features   of
Indian devotional traditions.
2.   All the compositions of Chistis  were in Persian language.
3.  The Sufis never accepted any grants and donations from the political elites.



Which of the above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only
b.  1 and 2 Only c.  1 and 3 Only d.  all the above



59. Consider          the         following statements with reference to antecedent rivers


1.  An antecedent   stream is     a stream that  maintains its original course and pattern despite the changes in underlying rock topography.
2.   The Subansiri and the Kosi are examples of antecedent rivers in India

Which  of  the statements  given  above is
/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None
60.Consider  the  following statements with reference to Delimitation  Commission  of India:


1.   Delimitation Commission decides on reservation of constituencies for scheduled castes/scheduled tribes both in house of the people and Legislative Assemblies.
2.  Delimitation  Commission decides on boundaries of constituencies all over the country.
3. Delimitation   Commission   is   an independent body.
4. Delimitation  Commission’s  orders have the force of law and cannot be called in question before any court.


Select  the  correct  answer  using  the codes below:


a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only
c.  1, 2 and 3Only d.  1, 2, 3 and 4



61. The   Save  Our   Species   (SoS) initiative by the IUCN will support  the  conservation  of which of the following Indian species:



1. Red-crowned roof turtle

2. Four-toed  terrapin

3. Gangetic Dolphins

Select the correct answer using the codes below

a.   3 only b.  2 and 3
c.  All of the above
d.  1 only



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 17
62. In  order to ensure free and fair elections the constitution of Indian has provide for an independent Election Commission. Which of the following  statements  is/are correct about Election Commission?


1.  The  Election  Commission  of  India can either be a  single member or a multi-member body.
2. The Chief Election Commissioner (CEC)  presides over the Election Commission  and has more powers than the other Election Commissioners.
3.  The  Chief  and the  other  Election Commissioners are appointed by the President on the recommendation of the Prime Minister.
4.  The removal of the Chief  Election commissioner requires absolute majority


Select  the  correct  answer  using  the codes below:


a.   1 Only
b.  1 and 2 Only
c.  1, 2 and 3 Only d.  1, 2 and 4 Only



63. The pattern of flow of water in a river channel over a  year is known as its regime. Consider the river regime of Ganga river,


1.  The Ganga  has  its  minimum flow  during the January-June period.
2. The   maximum  flow   is attained either in August or in September.
3.  After  September, there  is  a
steady fall in the flow.
The main reason for the statement number
3 is,

a.   The  weakening of   Monsoon over the Ganga basin after September
b.  Arrival           of           Western
Disturbance
c.  Excessive  storage of  water in dams upstream
d.  None of the above




64. The   Sufis   were   a    group     of religious  minded people turned to  asceticism  and mysticism  in protest against the growing materialism of the Caliphate as a religious and political institution. Which of the following about Sufism is incorrect?



a.   The Sufi saints were critical of the dogmatic  definitions  and scholastic methods of interpreting the Qur’an and sunna (traditions of the Prophet) adopted by theologians.
b.  Sufis  regarded  Prophet Muhammad as a perfect human being.
c. Sufi silsilas were special rituals of initiation in which the devotees took an oath of allegiance, wore a patched garment, and shaved their hair.
d.  The Sufis sought an interpretation of the Quran on the basis of their personal experience.



65. Which  of  the following  is  true about Permafrost:


1.  It is soil frozen for a  long period of time.
2. Melting permafrost releases long- frozen   carbon  accelerating global warming.

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 18
3.  Most  of the permafrost is  found in higher latitudes.

Select the correct answer using the codes below

a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.  1 only
d.  1,2 and 3




66. Hill  stations  were a   distinctive feature of colonial urban development. Consider the below statements   related to  the  Hill stations:



1.  1.The  founding and settling of  hill stations was initially connected with the needs of the Governors-General and viceroys.
2.   Hill    stations   remained  exclusive racial enclaves for Europeans in India
till India got independence.
3. Darjeeling  became  the   official residence of the commander-in-chief of the Indian army.



Which of the above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  3 Only d.  None



67. Which  of  the following  is  true about Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) in India:


1.  Except  Karnataka,  all  coastal states have MPAs.
2. Extraction of marine resources is partially or fully prohibited here.
3.  Marine  biodiversity  ‘hotspots’  are
also found in MPAs.



Select the correct answer using the codes below

a.   2 and 3 only b.  1 and 2 only c.  1,2 and 3
d.  3 only




68. Consider          the         following statements,


1. Land  Reforms   and  Land Ceiling are measures adopted to bring equity in the agricultural sector
2. Eliminating  subsidies   will increase the inequality between rich  and poor farmers and violate the goal of
equity.
3.  The  goal  of  equity was  not fully served by abolition of intermediaries.

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.  1 and 2Only c.  3 Only
d.  All




69. Below  are the  instances   where government has taken certain steps  or  the  individuals or  the society have taken certain actions. Which of the following is/are violation of Fundamental Rights?


1.   The district court has banned the use of  loudspeakers by the temples, mosques,  and gurudwaras  after 10 pm.

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 19
2. Karnataka society runs Kannada medium schools outside Karnataka.
3.  A   director  makes a   documentary film that criticises the policies of the government.


Select  the  correct  answer   using  the codes below:


a.   1 Only
b.  2 and 3Only c.  1 and 3 Only d.  None


70. Consider          the         following statements  about Western cyclonic disturbances


1. The      western      cyclonic disturbances which  enter the Indian subcontinent from the west and the northwest during the winter months, originate over the Mediterranean Sea.
2.   An  increase in the prevailing night   temperature generally indicates  an advance   in  the arrival of these cyclones disturbances.
3.  They are brought  into India by the Easterly jet stream.

Which  of  the statements  given  above is
/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  3 Only
d.  All Three




71. The     "Objectives     Resolution” introduced in the Constituent Assembly  on 13  December 1946 was a momentous resolution that outlined the defining ideals of the Constitution     of     Independent
India, and provided the framework within  which  the work of constitution-making was to  proceed. consider  the following statements with respect to the "Objectives Resolution” :



1.   It was introduced by Sardar Patel in the Constituent Assembly.
2. It proclaimed India  to be an “Independent Sovereign, Socialist, Secular Republic”.



Which of the above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None



72. Consider          the         following statements


1.   This river occupies the eastern margins of  the  Chotanagpur Plateau where  it  flows through  a rift valley.
2. The  Barakar  is  its  main tributary.

To which river does the above description refer to?

a.   Damodar b.  Hugli
c.  Subarnarekha
d.  Brahmani


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 20
73. The  government  from  time  to time has given effect to some Directive  Principles  of  State Policy (DPSP). Which of the following  statements  is/are correct   with   reference  to  the steps taken by government in this regard?


1.   Abolition of Zamindari system
2.  Nationalisation  of banks
3.  Fixed minimum wages
4.  Formation       of      Panchayat       raj institutions
5.  Mid-day meal scheme.
6.  Abolition of Privy Purses


Select  the  correct  answer  using  the codes below:


a.   1, 3, 4 and 6 Only b.  1, 2, 3 and 4 Only
c.  1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 Only
d.  1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6




74. Consider          the         following statements


1.  The  Second  Plan laid down the basic ideas regarding goals of Indian planning.
2.   The essence of the Feldman–
Mahalanobis model    adopted during the  Second Plan is  a shift     in    the    pattern   of industrial investment towards building                               up a domestic consumption
goods sector.
3.  The   First   Five   Year   Plan stressed investment for capital accumulation in  the spirit  of the one-sector Harrod–Domar model.
4.  The Harrod – Domar model suggests  that the economic rate of growth depends on the level of savings, and the productivity of investment

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1, 2 and 3 Only b.  1 and 2Only
c.  2, 3 and 4 Only d.  All




75. Consider          the         following statements  about the  Himalaya mountains’ orientation


1.  Himalayas  in  the  Darjeeling and Sikkim  regions lie  in  an east-west direction
2.    While  in  Arunachal Pradesh they  are from  southwest  to the northwest direction.
3.  In   Nagaland, Manipur   and Mizoram, they are in the north-south direction.

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  1 and 3 Only c.  None
d.  All


76. Consider          the         following statements


1. The Kashmir Himalayas are famous for  Karewa formations,  which  are  useful for  the cultivation  of Zafran, i.e. pure saffron.
2.  Karewas are the thick deposits of   glacial    clay   and   other



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 21
materials  embedded with moraines.
3. Karewas are  predominantly lacustrine in origin
4.  The    remains   of    Buddhist
Stupas  and even  artefacts f stone age  man have been found in the Karewas




Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only
b.  1,2 and 3 Only c.  3 and 4 Only
d.  All




77. In the Indian  context,  which  of the following  situation demands reasonable restriction on the right to freedom?


1.  Workers go on strike as their demands are not met.
2.   Dalits  are denied entry in  a temple. A march is being organised to forcibly enter the temple.
3.  Hundreds   of   tribals   armed with their traditional weapons (bows arrows and axes)  have blocked the road. They are demanding that   the  surplus land taken for an industry be returned to them.
4.  People     of      a        minority
community   have   assembled for a  peace march after communal riots in the city.
5. Government              officials expressing their grievances against the government through media.
Select  the  correct  answer  using  the codes below:


a.   2 and 3 Only
b.  1, 2, and 3 Only
c.  1, 2, 3 and 5 Only d.  1, 2, 3, 4 and 5




78. The      Constituent      Assembly deliberated on  a   number of important issues  with  many differences among the members in their views and ideas. Continuation of separate electorates for Muslims  was one such issue. Consider the following statements related to it:



1. 1.all the Muslim  members of the Constituent Assembly supported the demand for  separate  electorates which was rejected by others.
2.   It was Begum Aizaas Rasul, the lone Muslim  woman member of the Constituent Assembly  who made a powerful plea for continuing separate electorates.



Which of the above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None



79. Consider          the         following statements


1. Rivers  Mahanadi, Narmada, Tapi and Yamuna flow through rift valleys
2.   A rift valley is a  linear-shaped lowland between several highlands or mountain  ranges

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 22
created   by  the  action  of  a geologic fault.
3.  Lake Tanganyika,   the second largest  freshwater lake in  the world     by     volume,     and the second  deepest,  in  both cases, is located in a rift valley

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  1 and 3 Only c.  2 and 3 Only d.  All



80. Consider       the       following statements on Northern Plains of India


1. It was a geo-synclinal depression
2.   It  has  been  gradually filled  by the sediments brought by the Himalayan and Peninsular rivers.
3. Average    depth    of alluvial  deposits  in these plains ranges from
1 – 2 km.

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  1 and 3 Only c.  2 and 3 Only d.  All
81. Consider the following statements with reference  to  Fundamental Rights provided in Constitution of India:


1.  The Motilal  Nehru committee had demanded  a bill of rights as far back as in 1928.
2.   Sometimes a  person can be arrested simply out of an apprehension  that he or she is likely to engage in unlawful activity.
3.  Right  to  Strike  is  a   Fundamental
Right.
4. The    government    can   impose restrictions in certain areas declaring the assembly of five or more persons as unlawful.


Which  of  the statements  given  above is/are correct?

a.   3 Only
b.  1 and 3 Only
c.  1, 2 and 4 Only d.  1, 2, 3 and 4



82. Consider          the         following statements with reference to the Industrial Policy Resolution 1956,


1. This policy  was used for promoting industry in backward regions; it was easier to obtain a  license if  the industrial unit was established in  an economically backward area.
2.   This  resolution  formed  the basis of the Third Five Year Plan, the plan which  tried to build the basis for a  socialist pattern of society.
3. Under this policy even an existing industry had to obtain a license for expanding output or for diversifying production.


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 23
Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.   1 Only
c.  1 and 3 Only d.  All




83. Consider          the         following statements  about Small Scale Industries in India


1.   An  industrial undertaking in which the investment in fixed assets in plant and machinery whether held on ownership terms on lease or on hire purchase does not exceed Rs 1 million is called a  Small Scale industry in India.
2.   In 1955, the Village and Small- scale   Industries   Committee,
also called the Karve Committee, noted the possibility of using small-scale industries for promoting rural development.
3.  The production of a  number of products was reserved for the small-scale industry to protect them from big industries.

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.   1 and 3 Only c.  2 and 3 Only d.  All
84. Which of the following about the Constituent  Assembly  is incorrect?



a. Rajendra Prasad  was  the President of  the  Constituent Assembly  and Dr.  B R Ambedkar served as the Chairman of the Drafting Committee of the Constitution.
b. The  Constituent  Assembly never debated the important
issues of cultural rights and social justice  on the floor  of the Assembly.
c. The discussions  within the Constituent Assembly were also  influenced  by  the opinions expressed by the public.
d.  The   Constituent    Assembly that   came  into   being  was
dominated by  congress  with more than 80 per cent of the
members of  the  Constituent Assembly being Congress members.



85. Consider          the         following statements:


1.  First  Past the Post (FPTP)system is followed  for   all  the  elections   in India.
2.   The  Central  Election  Commission does not supervise Panchayat and Municipal elections.
3.  The Election Commissioners  can be removed by Chief  Election Commissioner.
4. Appointment of  more than one Election Commissioners in the Election Commission is mandatory.




http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 24
5. State    Election    Commission    is independent of  Central Election Commission.


Which  of the above statements  is/are correct?


a.   1, and 4 Only
b.  2, 4 and 5 Only c.  1, 4 and 5Only d.  1, 2 and 4 Only



86. Consider    the   following    with regard to the President of India.


1. The President does not exercise his/her  discretion on the advice given by the Council of Ministers.
2. Only  elected members of  the Legislative Assemblies  and both the Houses  of the Parliament  take part in electing the President.
3.  The President can send the bill back to   the   Parliament asking  it   to reconsider the bill.
4.  The  President’s  ordinance  making
power is not a discretionary power.


Which  of the above statements  is/are correct?


a.   1, and 4 Only
b.  1, 2 and 3 Only c.  2 and 3 Only
d.  2, 3 and 4 Only




87. Consider          the         following statements about Barak river


1.   It  is   an  important river  in
Manipur and Mizoram.
2. Silchar, important town of Manipur is  located on the banks of Barak river
3.  Tipaimukh         Dam is         a proposed embankment
dam on   the   river Barak  in
Manipur




Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  1 and 3 Only d.  All Three




88. Consider          the         following statements  with  reference to rivers


1. A  river drains the water collected from a  specific area, which is called its ‘catchment area’.
2.   An area drained  by a river and its tributaries is called a drainage basin.
3.  The boundary line separating one drainage  basin from  the other is known as the watershed. T
4.  Watersheds are small in  area while  the basins cover larger areas.

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are incorrect?

a.   1 and 2 Only
b.  1, 2 and 3 Only c.  1 and 3 Only
d.  None


89. Consider the following,
On  the basis of the size  of the watershed, the drainage basins of India are grouped into three categories:

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 25
1.  Major river basins with more than 20,000 sq.  km  of catchment area.
2. Medium river basins with catchment     area       between
2,000-20,000 sq. km
3. Minor  river  basins with catchment area   of  less  than
2,000 sq. km

To  which  of  the  categories  do rivers Tapi and Pennar belong to?

a. 1 b. 2 c.  3
d.  None


90.The  set  of  policies   under  the New Economic Policy of 1991-92 can broadly be classified into two groups: the stabilization measures and the structural reform measures. Now  consider the following statements,


1. Stabilization  measures  are short term      measures, intended to  correct  some  of the weaknesses that have developed in  the  balance of payments and bring inflation under control
2.   Structural reform policies  are long-term measures, aimed at
improving  the  efficiency   of the economy and increasing  its
international competitiveness by removing the rigidities  in various segments of the Indian economy
3.  Maintaining sufficient  foreign exchange reserves was part of structural reforms.
Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only
b.   1,2and 3 Only c.  2 Only
d.  All


91. The river Kosi frequently changes its course. It is because,


1.  The Kosi brings huge quantity of  sediments from  its  upper reaches and deposits it in the plains. The course gets blocked, and consequently, the river changes its course.
2.   Extensive
soil erosion and landslides in
its    upper   catchment   have produced a  silt yield of about
19 m³/ha/year
(10 cu yd/acre/yr),  one of the highest in the world.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None




92. Consider          the         following statements with reference to India’s peninsular bloc


1.  The  Peninsula is   formed essentially by a great complex of very ancient gneisses   and  granites, which  constitutes a  major part of it.
2.   The     Thar      desert     in
Rajasthan is also an extension of the Peninsular block

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 26
3.  A  part of the West  coast was submerged in  the ocean in the past

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  1 and 3 Only c.  2 and 3 Only d.  All

93. Article  74 provides for a  council of ministers with the Prime Minister  at  the head  to aid and advice the  President. Which   of the following is/are  correct with regard to council of ministers?


1.  The size of the Council of Ministers should not exceed 15 percent of total number of members of the House of People and this is also applicable to the Legislative Assembly  in the States.
2. The  Council   of  Ministers   is collectively  responsible to both the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha.
3.  Vote of no confidence even against a single minister leads to the resignation  of the entire Council  of Ministers.
4.  The  death   or   resignation   of   the Prime Minister  automatically  brings about the dissolution of the Council of Ministers.


Select  the  correct  answer  using  the codes below:


a.   1 Only
b.  1, 2 and 4 Only c.  1, 3 and 4Only
d.  1, 2, 3 and 4 Only
94. Which  of the following are the factors responsible for the land degradation in India?


1.    Unsustainable fuel wood and fodder extraction
2.   Shifting cultivation
3. Encroachment   into   forest lands
4.  Improper crop rotation
5. Improper    planning     and management of irrigation systems
6.  Open access resource
7. Poverty of the agriculture- dependent people

Select  the  right  answer using  the  codes below.

a.   1,2,3,5,6 and 7 Only b.  2,3,4 and 5 Only
c.  1,2,3,4 and 6 Only d.  All


95. Consider the following important characteristics of India’s foreign trade throughout  the colonial period,
1.  Foreign   trade  generated     a    large export surplus.
2.   This export surplus did not result in any flow of gold or silver into India.
3. This surplus was used to make payments for the expenses incurred by an office set up by the colonial government in Britain, such as expenses   on  war  fought   by  the British government itself.

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  1 and 3 Only c.  2  and 3 Only d.  All



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 27
96. Consider          the         following statements  about the impact of introduction  of  railways by  the British on Indian economy


1. It    enabled   people    to undertake long distance travel and thereby break geographical  and cultural barriers
2.   It expanded volume of India’s exports  and helped farmers get profit
3.  It fostered commercialization of  Indian   agriculture   which
adversely affected the comparative self-sufficiency of the village economies in India

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.  1 and 2Only
c.  2  and 3 Only d.  All



97. Consider          the         following statements:


1.   It is the constitutional obligation of the Prime Minister  to communicate to the President all decisions of the Council  of Ministers  relating to the administration of  the affairs of  the Union and proposals for legislation.
2. The     Governor     has     more discretionary  powers  compared to the President.
3.  The writ jurisdiction of the Supreme
Court is  narrower compared to the
High Court.


Which  of the above statements  is/are correct?


a.   1 Only
b.  2 and 3Only c.  1 and 3Only d.  1, 2 and 3


98. Consider          the         following statements  on different types of capital (economic)


1.   Physical capital is  completely mobile between countries except for some artificial trade restrictions. Whereas Human capital is not perfectly mobile between countries.
2.   Both forms of capital (human
and physical) depreciate with time, but physical depreciates fast whereas  human capital’s depreciation can be  reduced through investment.
3. Human capital benefits the society whereas, physical capital benefits the owner

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.   2 and 3 Only c.  3 Only
d.  All



99. The power wielded by the Prime Minister flows from various sources. Which  of the following are such sources of power of the Prime Minister?


1.   Control    over    the    Council     of
Ministers
2.  Leadership  of the Lok Sabha
3.  Command  over   the   bureaucratic machine
4.  Access to media
5.  Projection  of   personalities  during elections

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 28
6.  Projection as national leader during international   summitry    and foreign visits.


Select  the  correct  answer  using  the codes below:


a.   1, 2, 3 and 4 Only b.  1, 2, 5 and 6Only
c.  1, 2, 3, 5 and 6Only
d.  1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 Only



100.   Consider       the       following statements


1.   The Environmental
Performance Index (EPI)  is  a
method of  quantifying and numerically marking the environmental performance of a state's policies.
2.   It was designed to supplement the environmental targets set forth       in       the      United Nations Millennium Development Goals.

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are incorrect?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None















































http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 29
