INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 20 - SOLUTIONS







1.   Solution: b)

Resources and assets (such as quality and diversity of environment) which do not
'belong' to any generation but are to be administered and preserved in trust for all future generations. That is inter-generational equity.



2.   Solution: c)

Both statements are incorrect.

Vachana Sahitya is a form of rhythmic writing in Kannada that evolved in the 11th
Century C.E. and flourished in the 12th century, as a part of
the Lingayatha 'movement'. Vachanas literally means "(that which is) said". These are readily intelligible prose texts.



3.   Solution: d)

The sulphur cycle is mostly sedimentary except two of its compounds hydrogen
Sulphide and sulphur dioxide.



4.     Solution: d)

http://www.firstpost.com/india/the-importance-of-goods-and-services-tax-all- you-need-to-know-1602531.html



5.   Solution: a)

Mahanadi is a major river in East Central India. It drains an area of around 141,600 square kilometres (54,700 sq mi) and has a total course of 858 kilometres
(533 mi).[1] The river flows through the states of Chhattisgarh and Odisha.

The Mahanadi proper enters the sea via several channels near Paradeep at False
Point, Jagatsinghpur.



6.    Solution: a)

Basel III norms aim at making most banking activities such as their trading book activities more capital-intensive. The guidelines aim to promote a more resilient
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 20 - SOLUTIONS


banking system by focusing on four vital banking parameters viz. capital, leverage, funding and liquidity.


Capital
The capital requirement (as weighed for risky assets) for Banks was more than
doubled. ( e.g. 4.5% from 2% in Basel-II accord for common equity)

Leverage
Leverage basically means buying assets with borrowed money to multiply the gain. The underlying belief is that the asset will return the investor more than the interest he has to pay on the loan.

Obviously doing so is risky business. Thus the Basel III puts a limit on the banks for doing this. The numbers are not important here. Getting the concept is important.


Funding and liquidity
Banks can be subjected to a lot of risk if all depositors come and ask all their money
at the same time. This is a hypothetical situation but it has happened in real with
Lehman Brothers – the bank whose collapse gave us the 2008 recession.

So, Basel III puts a requirement for the banks to maintain some liquid assets all the time. Liquid assets are those which can be easily converted to cash.

In India, this practice can be correlated with that of maintaining CRR and SLR.




7.    Solution: c)

Kisan Vikas Patra is a saving scheme that was announced by the Government of India that doubles the money invested in eight years and seven months. The Directorate of Small Savings Government of India, sells these saving bonds through all Post Offices in the country so that the scheme can be accessed by citizens from all over the country. A KVP can be encashed after two and a half years from the date of issue at the value it has been bought and the interest accrued for the period.
The ―kisan‖ in Kisan Vikas Patra  does not mean  that only farmers can buy these saving certificates but means that the revenue mobilized by this scheme will be used by the Government of India in welfare schemes for farmers. Any individual can safely invest and save their money in the form of Kisan Vikas Patra.

How to Invest
Kisan Vikas Patra can be purchased from any Post Office by filling a form and
depositing the amount in cash or by cheques or demand drafts with the filed form and your photographs. The Post Office will issue a Certificate called Kisan Vikas Patra with your name, amount, date of maturity and amount on the date of maturity.
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 20 - SOLUTIONS



Who Can Invest
You can invest in Kisan Vikas Patra if you are a citizen of India and an adult; in your
own name, or on behalf of a minor. A trust is also eligible to invest in KVP. Two
adults can jointly buy KVP.

Who is not Eligible
Kisan Vikas Patra is not for business entities such as a company or institutions. NRIs or HUF (Hindu Undivided Family) are also not eligible to invest in KVP.




8.    Solution: d)

http://guj-nwrws.gujarat.gov.in/showpage.aspx?contentid=1474&lang=english http://tribal.guj.nic.in/





9.    Solution: a)



10.  Solution: d)


FM’s statement:


There is an imminent need  to further bridge the divide between digital ―haves‖ and
―have-nots‖.  For this it is proposed to launch a pan India  programme ―Digital India‖. This would ensure Broad band  connectivity at village level, improved access to services through IT enabled platforms, greater transparency in Government processes and increased indigenous production of IT hardware and software for exports and improved domestic availability. Special focus would be on supporting software product startups. A National Rural Internet and Technology Mission for services in villages and schools, training in IT skills and E-Kranti for government service delivery and governance scheme is also proposed. I have provided a sum of
`500 crore for this purpose.




11.   Solution: a)

There is no fund like Rurban renewal fund. Warehouse infrastructure fund was launched in previous budgets.
All others have been launched in this budget only.
Price stabilization fund is for containing the price volatilities of agricultural produce.
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 20 - SOLUTIONS





12.  Solution: b)

See the article

http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/business/india-business/3P-India-to- streamline-project-rollouts/articleshow/38939991.cms





13.  Solution: d)
http://www.prashanthdudi.in/2013/12/super-critical-technology-in-power.html http://www.ukessays.com/essays/engineering/supercritical-technology-and-
clean-development-mechanism-engineering-essay.php



14.  Solution: d)

It is covered quite comprehensively in http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coalbed_methane


Methane is associated with coal as a by-product of the coal formation process.  It is trapped in coal beds and released during and after mining.  This methane does cause disasters in underground coal mines.

If effectively recovered, coal bed methane associated with coal reserves and emitted during coal mining could be a significant potential source of energy.

Methane capture and its utilization from coal mines is not being undertaken in India due to:



     Lack of latest technology
     Lack of expertise and experience
     Pervasive perception that commercial viability of exploitation and utilization of Methane is doubtful.



15. Solution: c)

Duty Free Quota Free Market Access for Least Developed Countries (LDC)
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 20 - SOLUTIONS


One of the elements of the Hong Kong Ministerial Declaration of December 2005 was to extend duty free quota free (DFQF) access to the LDCs. The Ministerial decision taken at the Ministerial Conference in Bali in December 2013 on this issue states that countries that have not provided such access for at least 97 per cent of products 'shall seek to' improve the number of products covered. India became the first developing country to extend this facility to LDCs when it announced a Duty Free Tariff Preference (DFTP) Scheme for LDCs in 2008. The scheme was announced to give support to the LDCs in their trade initiatives and granted duty-free access on about
85 per cent of India's total tariff lines and preferential access (Positive List) on about
9 per cent of tariff lines. Only 6 per cent tariff lines were under the Exclusion List.
Moreover, to fully meet the obligations under the Hong Kong Ministerial Mandate
of 2005 as well as to meet the requests from some of the LDCs for additional product
coverage under the duty-free list and simplification of the rules of origin procedures, the government has, of late, come out with an expanded version of the Scheme. Effective from 1 April 2014, the DFTP Scheme will provide duty-free market access on 96.4 per cent of India’s tariff lines and 2 per cent of the lines would be enjoying preferential duties. Only 1.6 per cent of the tariff lines have been retained in the Exclusion List, with no duty concessions. The new expanded Scheme will also bring in several procedural simplifications with reference to the Rules of Origin. At
present, 31 out of 48 LDCs have become beneficiaries of the scheme. Out of this, 21
LDCs beneficiaries are from Africa.



16.  Solution: a)

There was a recent natural gas pipeline tragedy in AP. The local residents could smell something but they could hardly identify it and compliant about it.


Since natural gas is odourless, ethyl mercaptan (a chemical that has a sulphur-like odour) is added before distribution, to give it a distinct odour. This is similar to the odour of LPG and serves as a safety device by allowing it to be detected in the atmosphere in cases of leak.

Odourant called mercaptan makes natural gas smell like rotten eggs. It helps make even the smallest leak easy to smell.



17.  Solution: b)

Rupee appreciates when there is inflow of FDI and foreign currency, which makes it competitive. Outflow of dollars is a sign of increasing imports and decreasing exports. It is a sign of widening current account deficit. Outflow occurs when foreign investors sell their equities here. Thus, rupee depreciates whenever dollar outflow is maximum.

You can see this trend in August 2014 reports:
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 20 - SOLUTIONS


http://in.reuters.com/article/2014/08/06/markets-india-rupee- idINKBN0G607L20140806


18.  Solution: a)

http://archive.indianexpress.com/news/hc-orders-shutdown-of-kanpur-tanneries- for--polluting--ganga/854272/


http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pollution_of_the_Ganges



19. Solution: c)

India’s trade to China  has increased from US$ 2.3 billion in 2000-01 to US$ 68.9 billion in 2013-14. The share  of China  in India’s total trade increased from 2.5 per cent in 2000-01 to 8.6 per cent in 2013-14 and India’s share  in China’s  total trade increased from 0.7 per cent in 2001 to only 1.6 per cent in 2013. India’s imports from China grew at a CAGR of
31.2 per cent which is higher than 24.9 per cent CAGR of exports to China.


Though India’s current exports to China  constitute a small proportion of China’s overall imports ( around 1 per cent share), the total bilateral export potential of India was estimated at US$ 28.4 billion in 2008 and expected to increase to US$ 53.4 billion in 2012 (Table 1). Actual exports from India to China were US$ 14.9 billion in 2013-
14. The export potential of India was nearly three times the actual bilateral export to
China in 2008 and increased further to three and a half times in 2012 owing to the
decline  in India’s exports to China  in 2012. China  is one of the important market destinations where India’s export  potential has not been adequately realized. India’s large trade potential is yet to be tapped in diversified sectors of the Chinese market ranging from primary and labour-intensive products to various levels of technology- intensive products.

The major potential items of exports to China other than mineral products are machinery and mechanical appliances and products of chemicals where around one- third of India’s bilateral export potential lies. India’s export  potential is highly concentrated in certain sectors with nearly seven major sectors accounting for
around 90.2 per cent in the medium term, with most of them being in the
manufacturing sector. A comprehensive Indo-China trade strategy which also takes note of India’s domestic concerns like dumping of cheap  Chinese goods  could be mutually beneficial.



20.  Solution: a)

In agriculture "green manure" refers to crops which have already been uprooted
(and have often already been stuffed under the soil). The then dying plants are of a
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 20 - SOLUTIONS


type of cover crop often grown primarily to add nutrients and organic matter to the soil. Typically, a green manure crop is grown for a specific period of time, and then plowed under and incorporated into the soil while green or shortly after flowering. Green manure crops are commonly associated with organic farming, and are considered essential for annual cropping systems that wish to be sustainable.

Cowpea, Mustard, Millet, Alfa Alfa, Clover, Sorghum, Soyabean are some of the green manure crops.





21. Solution: b)

India’s external debt continues to preponderantly consist of long-term borrowings. Long-term external debt at US$ 333.3 billion at end December 2013, accounted for
78.2 per cent of total external debt, the remaining 21.8 per cent being constituted of short-term debt. Long-term debt at end December 2013 increased by US$ 25.1 billion (8.1 per cent) over the level at end March 2013, while short-term debt declined by US$ 4.0 billion (4.1 per cent), reflecting the fall in the levels of imports.

ECBs, NRI deposits, and multilateral borrowings, which are the major components of long-term debt, accounted for 67.0 per cent of total external debt, while the other components (namely bilateral borrowings, export credit, and IMF and rupee debt) accounted for 11.2 per cent. Thus long-term debt, all its components taken together, accounted for 78.2 per cent of total external debt, while the remaining 21.8 per cent comprised short-term debt at end December 2013.



22. Solution: c)

The poems belonging to the Sangam literature were composed by Tamil poets, both men and women, from various professions and classes of society. These poems were later collected into various anthologies, edited, and with colophons added by anthologists and annotators around 1000 AD.


Sangam Poems falls into two categories: the 'inner field' (Agam ), and the 'outer field'(Puram) as described even in the first available Tamil grammar, the Tolkappiyam. The 'inner field' topics refer to personal or human aspects, such as love and sexual relationships, and are dealt with in a metaphorical and abstract manner. The 'outer field' topics discuss all other aspects of human experience such
as heroism, valour, ethics, benevolence, philanthropy, social life, and customs.




23.  Solution: d)
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 20 - SOLUTIONS



A variety of policies have been used to achieve protectionist goals. These include:
1.   Tariffs: Typically, tariffs (or taxes) are imposed on imported goods. Tariff rates usually vary according to the type of goods imported. Import tariffs will increase the cost to importers, and increase the price of imported goods in the local markets, thus lowering the quantity of goods imported, to favour local producers Tariffs may also be imposed on exports, and in an economy
with floating exchange rates, export tariffs have similar effects as import tariffs. However, since export tariffs are often perceived as 'hurting' local industries, while import tariffs are perceived as 'helping' local industries,
export tariffs are seldom implemented.
2.   Import quotas: To reduce the quantity and therefore increase the market price
of imported goods. The economic effects of an import quota is similar to that of a tariff, except that the tax revenue gain from a tariff will instead be distributed to those who receive import licenses. Economists often suggest that import licenses be auctioned to the highest bidder, or that import quotas be replaced by an equivalent tariff.
3.   Administrative barriers: Countries are sometimes accused of using their various administrative rules (e.g. regarding food safety, environmental standards, electrical safety, etc.) as a way to introduce barriers to imports.
4.   Anti-dumping legislation: Supporters of anti-dumping laws argue that they
prevent "dumping" of cheaper foreign goods that would cause local firms to close down. However, in practice, anti-dumping laws are usually used to impose trade tariffs on foreign exporters.
5.   Direct subsidies: Government subsidies (in the form of lump-sum payments or cheap loans) are sometimes given to local firms that cannot compete well against imports. These subsidies are purported to "protect" local jobs, and to help local firms adjust to the world markets.
6.   Export subsidies: Export subsidies are often used by governments to increase exports. Export subsidies have the opposite effect of export tariffs because exporters get payment, which is a percentage or proportion of the value of exported. Export subsidies increase the amount of trade, and in a country with floating exchange rates, have effects similar to import subsidies.
7.   Exchange rate manipulation: A government may intervene in the foreign exchange market to lower the value of its currency by selling its currency in the foreign exchange market. Doing so will raise the cost of imports and lower
the cost of exports, leading to an improvement in its trade balance. However, such a policy is only effective in the short run, as it will most likely lead
to inflation in the country, which will in turn raise the cost of exports, and reduce the relative price of imports.
8.   International patent systems: There is an argument for viewing national patent systems as a cloak for protectionist trade policies at a national level. Two strands of this argument exist: one when patents held by one country form part of a system of exploitable relative advantage in trade negotiations against another, and a second where adhering to a worldwide system of patents confers "good citizenship" status despite 'de facto
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 20 - SOLUTIONS


protectionism'. Peter Drahos explains that "States realized that patent systems could be used to cloak protectionist strategies. There were also reputational advantages for states to be seen to be sticking to intellectual property systems. One could attend the various revisions of the Paris and Berne conventions, participate in the cosmopolitan moral dialogue about the need to protect the fruits of authorial labor and inventive genius...knowing all the while that
one's domestic intellectual property system was a handy protectionist weapon."
9.   Employment-based immigration restrictions, such as labor certification requirements or numerical caps on work visas.
10. Political campaigns advocating domestic consumption (e.g. the "Buy American" campaign in the United States, which could be seen as an extra- legal promotion of protectionism.)
11. Preferential governmental spending, such as the Buy American Act, federal legislation which called upon the United States government to prefer U.S.- made products in its purchases.



24.  Solution: d)

It is applicable to all classes of investors. However, On 27th September, 2013, GoI issued notification and as per this notification  GAAR would be applicable to only to foreign institutional investors that have not taken the benefit of an agreement under Section 90 or Section 90A of the I-T Act or Double Taxation Avoidance Agreement (DTAA).  Thus now  (a) investments made by foreign investors prior to August 2010 will not attract GAAR; (b) GAAR provisions that will come into effect from April
2016 and (c) apply only  to business arrangements with a tax benefit exceeding Rs3
crores.



25. Solution: c)

Refer page no – 149, Economic Survey – 2014



26. Solution: c)

Besides the five great vows for ascetics and twelve vows for laypeople, Jainism lays great emphasis on observance of five rules of conducts (Samitis) and three rules of avoidance of misconducts (Guptis).


A person must be careful in walking, sitting, standing, and lying down. He must speak only gentle, sweet, and righteous speech. He must be careful in placing and removing articles of his use. He must be clean and should not make himself instrumental in the growth or death of germs and insects.
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 20 - SOLUTIONS


Five Samitis
1.   Iriya Samiti - regulation of walking
2.   Bhasa Samiti - regulation of speaking
3.   Esnna Samiti - regulation of begging
4.   Adana Nikshepana Samiti - regulation of taking or keeping
5.   Utsarga Samiti - regulation of disposal
Three Guptis
1.   Mana Gupti - regulation of mind
2.   Vachana Gupti - regulation of speech
3.   Kaya Gupti - regulation of bodily activity



27.    Solution: b)

Statement 1: There is an arrangement and one of the main purposes is a tax benefit. However, this is a case of tax mitigation where the tax payer is taking advantage of a fiscal
incentive offered  to  him by  submitting  to  the  conditions  and economic consequ ences of the provisions in the legislation e.g., setting up the business only in the under developed area. Revenue would not invoke GAAR as regards this arrangement.

Statement 2: There is an arrangement and there is a tax benefit, the main purpose or one of the
main purposes of  this  arrangement  is  to  obtain  a  tax  benefit.  The  transaction  la cks commercial substance and there is misuse of the tax provisions. Revenue would invoke GAAR as regards this arrangement.




28.  Solution: b)

Himalayan vegetation can be broadly classified into four types—tropical, subtropical, temperate, and alpine—each of which prevails in a zone determined mainly by elevation and precipitation. Local differences in relief and climate, as well as exposure to sunlight and wind, cause considerable variation in the species present within each zone. Tropical evergreen rainforest is confined to the humid foothills of the eastern and central Himalayas. The evergreen dipterocarps—a group of timber- and resin-producing trees—are common; their different species grow on different soils and on hill slopes of varying steepness. Mesua ferrea (Ceylon ironwood) is
found on porous soils at elevations between 600 and 2,400 feet (180 and 720 metres); bamboos grow on steep slopes; oaks and chestnuts grow on the lithosol, covering sandstones from Arunachal Pradesh westward to central Nepal at elevations from
3,600 to 5,700 feet (1,100 to 1,700 metres). Alder trees are found along the watercourses on the steeper slopes. At higher elevations these species give way to mountain forests in which the typical evergreen is Pandanus furcatus, a type of screw
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 20 - SOLUTIONS


pine. Besides these trees, some 4,000 species of flowering plants, of which 20 are palms, are estimated to occur in the eastern Himalayas.


With decreasing precipitation and increasing elevation westward, the rainforests give way to tropical deciduous forests, where the valuable timber tree sal is the dominant species; wet sal forests thrive on high plateaus at elevations of 3,000 feet (900 metres), while dry sal forests prevail higher up, at 4,500 feet (1,400 metres). Farther west, steppe forest (i.e., expanse of grassland dotted with trees), steppe, subtropical thorn steppe, and subtropical semidesert vegetation occur successively. Temperate mixed forests extend from about 4,500 to roughly 11,000 feet (1,400 to
3,400 metres) and contain conifers and broad-leaved temperate trees. Evergreen forests of oaks and conifers have their westernmost outpost on the hills above Murree, some 30 miles (50 km) northwest of Rawalpindi, in Pakistan; these forests are typical of the Lesser Himalayas, being conspicuous on the outer slopes of the Pir Panjal, in Jammu and Kashmir state. Pinus roxburghii (chir pine) is the dominant species at elevations from 2,700 to 5,400 feet (800 to 1,600 metres). In the inner valleys this species may occur even up to 6,300 feet (1,900 metres). Deodar cedar, a highly valued endemic species, grows mainly in the western part of the range. Stands of this species occur between 6,300 and 9,000 feet (1,900 and 2,700 metres) and tend to grow at still higher elevations in the upper valleys of the Sutlej and
Ganges rivers. Of the other conifers, blue pine and spruce first appear between about
7,300 and 10,000 feet (2,200 and 3,000 metres). (Source: Britannica)



29.   Solution: d)

Please refer to the compulsory provisions in Laxmikanth polity in the chapter on urban local bodies.
Authority to taxation can be granted only by the respective state governments.



30.   Solution: b)

In the voluntary provisions, the state can confer powers to implement schemes for economic development and social justice. Managing and supervising public local schools also comes under a voluntary provision. They can not maintain law and order, however, even in petty matters.



31.  Solution: d)

Right knowledge, right faith, and right conduct are the three most essentials for attaining liberation.
In order to acquire these, one must observe the five great vows:
1.   Non-violence - Ahimsa
2.   Truth - Satya
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 20 - SOLUTIONS


3.   Non-stealing - Achaurya or Asteya
4.   Celibacy/Chastity - Brahmacharya
5.   Non-attachment/Non-possession - Aparigraha

32.   Solution: b)

While the governor can appoint the state election commissioner, he can only be removed in the same manner as that of a high court judge. That is the Governor can not remove him. Advocate general holds office during the pleasure of the Governor. Chief justice of a high court is appointed by the President.
The governor has the authority to remove the CM but only when he has lost the
confidence of the legislative assembly of the state.






33.    Solution: c)

He nominates only one member of the Anglo-Indian community. The state finance commissions were added by the 73rd amendment and are hence mentioned in the Part IX of the constitution. The governor establishes it.




34.  Solution: d)

The constitution also makes clear that wherever a situation arises as to whether a matter falls within the Governor’s discretion or not, the decision of the Governor will be final and the validity of anything done by him can not be questioned on the ground that he ought not have acted in his discretion.



35. Solution: a)


Over the years, India’s external debt stock has witnessed a structural change in composition. The share of concessional in total debt has declined on account of the shrinking share of official creditors and government debt and the surge in non- concessional private debt. The proportion of concessional debt in total debt declined from 42.9 per cent (average) during the period 1991-2000 to 28.1 per cent in 2001-10 and further to 10.6 per cent at end December 2013. The increasing importance of
non-government debt is evident from the fact that such debt accounted for 65.6 per
cent of total debt during the 2000s as against 45.3 per cent in the 1990s. Non- government debt accounted for over 70 per cent of total debt in the last five years
and stood at 82.1 per cent as at end December 2013.
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 20 - SOLUTIONS


36.  Solution: d)

It can discuss but not vote for demands for grants. The council can be abolished on the recommendation of the state assembly.



37.   Solution: d)

Apart from these, it also fixes the maximum number of Directors. It is not only to ensure autonomy but also accountability of the cooperatives to its members.



38. Solution: a)

The outlay for this programme is 2,142 crores for this FY. It is intended for watershed development.



39.  Solution: b)

Cooperative Societies is a state subject under entry 32 state list of the Seventh schedule of the Indian Constitution.
• According to the Constitutional (97th Amendment) Act, 2011 forming a
Cooperative Society is a fundamental right under article 19(1)(i).
• Constitutional (97th Amendment) Act, 2011 added the words ―or co-operative societies‖ after the word ―or unions‖ in Article 19(l)(i) and insertion of article 43B i.e., Promotion of Co-operative Societies and added Part-IXB i.e., The Co-operative Societies.

40. Solution: c)


Taiga also known as boreal forest or snowforest, is abiome characterized by coniferous forests consisting mostly of pines, spruces and larches.

The taiga is the world's largest terrestrial biome. In North America it covers most of inland Canada and Alaska as well as parts of the extreme northern continental United States (northern Minnesota through the Upper Peninsula of
Michigan toUpstate New York and northern New England) and is known as
the Northwoods.





41. Solution: b)
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 20 - SOLUTIONS


Right to vote is a constitutional right mentioned in Article 326 of the constitution. This is outside part III of the constitution.
Right To Information and has been given the status of a fundamental right under Article 19(1) of the Constitution. Article 19 (1) under which every citizen has freedom of speech and expression and have the right to know how the government works, what role does it play, what are its functions and so on.



42. Solution: c)

http://www.bbc.co.uk/religion/religions/buddhism/beliefs/karma.shtml



43.  Solution: d)

These criteria are established by customs. The constitution does NOT mention any of them. It is on the discretion of the President.





44.  Solution: d)

Fifth schedule can be amended by ordinary legislation of the Parliament.
It is the President who is empowered to alter scheduled areas, not the Governor.
However, the President consults the governor in this regard.




45.  Solution: a)

Chairman, UPSC and Chairman, CVC can be removed by the President after a due inquiry by the SC. The Attorney general holds office during the pleasure of the President.





46.  Solution: c)

Statement 1 i.e. ―Principles for the division of plan and non-plan expenditure‖ has been a major point of debate between policymakers. Presently planning commission and the Central government decide on these as per the five year plans and the annual budgets based on them. However, an argument has consistently been made that the line dividing plan and non-plan expenditure is getting increasingly blurred. And it will be best to do away with such distinction.
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 20 - SOLUTIONS



47.  Solution: d)

Other two cases are:
a) Selection of chief Ministers and other ministers can be made from council too.
b) Introduction and passage of ordinary bills. However, in case of disagreement, the will of assembly prevails.




48.  Solution: a)

The constitutionality of local bodies has nothing to do with the powers of the Parliament. In fact, the local bodies themselves rely on the State government for power and authority.



49. Solution: c)

High tax buoyancy means a better tax-GDP ratio as compared to GDP growth. It is not the reason.
The collection of indirect taxes has in fact increased. However, due to only a moderate increase, it was difficult to achieve fiscal consolidation.





50.  Solution: b)

Repugnancy with existing laws will now invoke the constitutional validity of a law or order. It may however be dealt with by the court in a different manner.





51.   Solution: b)




52.  Solution: c)

Both the statements are true.
The cases when  the governor requires President’s assent  are:
a) If the bill would have required the permission of the President if it were to be enacted in the assembly.
b) If such a bill would have to be reserved for the consideration of the President.
c) In an act of state legislature would have been invalid without receiving President’s
assent.
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 20 - SOLUTIONS





53. Solution: d)



Buddhism began by encouraging its practitioners to engage in smrti (sati) or mindfulness, that is, developing a full consciousness of all about you and within you
-- whether seated in a special posture, or simply going  about  one’s life.  This is the kind of meditation that Buddha himself engaged in under the bodhi tree, and is referred to in the seventh step of the eightfold path.

Soon, Buddhist monks expanded and formalized their understanding of meditation.  The bases for all meditation, as it was understood even in the earliest years of Buddhism, are shamatha and vipashyana.

Shamatha is often translated as calm abiding or peacefulness.  It is the development of tranquility that is a prerequisite to any further development.  Vipashyana is clear seeing or special insight, and involves intuitive cognition of suffering, impermanence, and egolessness.

Only after these forms were perfected does one go on to the more heavy-duty kinds of meditation.  Samadhi is concentration or one-pointed meditation.  It involves intense focusing of consciousness.

Samadhi brings about the four dhyanas, meaning absorptions.  Buddha refers to samadhi and the dhyanas in the eighth step of the eightfold path, and again at his death.  Dhyana is rendered as Jhana in Pali, Ch’an in Chinese, Son in Korean,
and Zen in Japanese, and has, in those cultures, become synonymous with meditation as a whole.

http://webspace.ship.edu/cgboer/buddhaintro.html




54.  Solution: b)

A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chairman unless he is, or has been, a judge of a High Court.
Appeal can be made first only in the High courts and then the SC can be moved.




55.  Solution: a)

The question is self-explanatory. In mammals, we often test milk produced by females, since it contains some fat which is susceptible to pollution by bio- magnifiers.
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 20 - SOLUTIONS






56.  Solution: d)

The amount of nitrogen fixed by man has far exceeded the level fixed by natural cycles. Nitrogen in excess can become a pollutant and cause acid rain. Eutrophication, algal blooms etc.



57.  Solution: d)

Sedimentary cycle follows a pattern of erosion sedimentation, rock/mountain building, volcanic activity and biological transport through the excreta of marine birds. It does not cycle through the atmosphere.




58.  Solution: c)

http://businesstoday.intoday.in/story/fourteenth-finance-commission-insulate-the- economy-from-politics/1/191594.html


http://pib.nic.in/newsite/erelease.aspx?relid=91309






59.  Solution: b)

Soil found in Tropical deciduous forest rich in nutrients. In the other two, because of the heavy rainfall the soil becomes nutrient less and acidic.



60. Solution: c)

Transfer pricing is the setting of the price for goods and services sold between controlled (or related) legal entities within an enterprise. For example, if a subsidiary company sells goods to a parent company, the cost of those goods is the transfer price. Legal entities considered under the control of a single corporation include branches and companies that are wholly or majority owned ultimately by the parent corporation. Certain jurisdictions consider entities to be under common control if they share family members on their boards of directors. It can be used as a profit allocation method to attribute a multinational corporation's net profit (or loss)
before tax to countries where it does business. Transfer pricing results in the setting of prices among divisions within an enterprise.
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 20 - SOLUTIONS


In principle a transfer price should match either what the seller would charge an independent, arm's length customer, or what the buyer would pay an independent, arm's length supplier. While unrealistic transfer prices do not affect the overall enterprise directly, they become a concern when they are misused to lower profits in a division of an enterprise that is located in a country that levies high taxes and raise profits in a country that is a tax haven that levies no or low taxes. Transfer pricing is the major tool for corporate tax avoidance.



61.   Solution: d)

Apart from these, it is a nesting ground of flamingoes and the only known home of Asiatic wild ass (Run of Kutch, Gujarat). Chinkara, Caracal, Sandgrouse and Desert fox are also found here.




62.  Solution: a)

It is self-explanatory.
This is one of the reasons why an increasing water body temperature, in including oceans, is a major cause of concern today. Less supply of oxygen is not good for
aquatic life. Besides, since water temperatures are less subject to change, as compared to terrestrial systems, the aquatic organisms have narrow temperature tolerance limit.



63. Solution: d)


The Act provided a dual form of government (a "dyarchy") for the major provinces. In each such province, control of some areas of government, the "transferred list", were given to a Government of ministers answerable to the Provincial Council. The
'transferred list' included Agriculture, supervision of local government, Health and
Education. The Provincial Councils were enlarged.

At the same time, all other areas of government (the 'reserved list') remained under the control of the Viceroy. The 'reserved list' included Defence (the military), Foreign Affairs, and Communications.



64. Solution: a)

Fresco is a technique of mural painting executed upon freshly laid lime
plaster. Water is used as the vehicle for the pigment and, with the setting of the
plaster, the painting becomes an integral part of the wall. The word fresco) is derived
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 20 - SOLUTIONS


from the Italian Adjective fresco meaning "fresh". Fresco may thus be contrasted with secco mural painting techniques, on plasters of lime, earth, or gypsum, or applied to supplement painting in fresco. The fresco technique has been employed since antiquity and is closely associated with Italian Renaissance painting.

Ajanta paintings are the examples of frescoe in India.



65.   Solution: a)

Red tide is a common name for a phenomenon known as an algal bloom (large concentrations of aquatic microorganisms) when it is caused by a few species
of dinoflagellates and the bloom takes on a red or brown color. Red tides are events in which estuarine, marine, or fresh water algae accumulate rapidly in the water column, resulting in coloration of the surface water. It is usually found in coastal areas. It kills many manatees every year.
These algae, known as phytoplankton, are single-celled protists, plant-like organisms that can form dense, visible patches near the water's surface. Certain species of phytoplankton, dinoflagellates, contain photosynthetic pigments that vary in color from green to brown to red.
When the algae are present in high concentrations, the water appears to be discolored or murky, varying in color from purple to almost pink, normally being red or green. Not all algal blooms are dense enough to cause water discoloration,
and not all discolored waters associated with algal blooms are red. Additionally, red tides are not typically associated with tidal movement of water, hence the preference among scientists to use the term algal bloom.
Some red tides are associated with the production of natural toxins, depletion of
dissolved oxygen or other harmful effects, and are generally described as harmful algal blooms. The most conspicuous effects of these kinds of red tides are the associated wildlife mortalities of marine and coastal species of fish, birds, marine mammals, and other organisms.



66.  Solution; d)

Other functions include
    filtration of sediments
    water purification
    ground water recharge
    stabilization of local climate etc.




67.  Solution: d)

Other areas where Mangroves are largely found are
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 20 - SOLUTIONS


a) Krishna Godavari delta b) Ratnagiri
c) Goa
d) Mahanadi delta



68. Solution: c)


Due to Ambedkar's prominence and popular support amongst untouchable community, he was invited to attend Round Table Conference in London in
1932.[26] Gandhi fiercely opposed a separate electorate for untouchables, saying he feared that such an arrangement would split Brahmins and Dalits, dividing the Hindu community into two groups.

In 1932, when the British had agreed with Ambedkar and announced a Communal Award of a separate electorate, Gandhi protested by fasting while imprisoned in the Yerwada Central Jail of Poona. The fast provoked huge civil unrest across India and orthodox Hindu leaders, Congress politicians and activists such as Madan Mohan Malaviya and Palwankar Baloo organised joint meetings with Ambedkar and his supporters at Yerwada. Fearing a communal reprisal and genocidal acts against untouchables, Ambedkar was forced into agreeing with Gandhi.[28] This agreement, which saw Gandhi end his fast and Ambedkar drop his demand for a separate electorate, was called the Poona Pact. Instead, a certain number of seats were reserved specifically for untouchables (who in the agreement were called the "Depressed Class")



69.  Solution: b)

The rotation of the earth reduces the effective weight of the body. The weight of a body is basically the substraction of the gravitational force exerted on the body by the earth  with the centrifugal force due to earth’s  rotation.
When earth stops rotating, body at the equator would weigh more. But since the rotation of the earth at poles is effectively zero, it would remain unchanged even after the earth stops rotating.




70.  Solution: b)

The cube with least density would have a higher volume. IT would displace more water. Hence the buyonant force on it upwards will be higher. Thus, lesser weight.
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 20 - SOLUTIONS



71.  Solution: d)

http://www.theaftermatter.com/2012/04/physics-of-cricket-what-is-swing.html




72.  Solution: c)

When we press the nozzle the air at the top is squeezed out creating low pressure at the top. But, at the bottom of the sprayer the pressure is the same. Hence due to higher pressure at the bottom the liquid tends to move up.



73. Solution: a)

In agriculture sector, sugarcane shared is about 7% of the  total value of agriculture out put  and occupied about 2.6% of India’s gross cropped area  during 2006-07. Sugarcane provides raw material for the second largest agro-based  industry after textile. About 527 working sugar factories with total installed annual sugar production capacity of about 242 lakh tonnes are located in the country during 2010-
11.

Scientific name of Sugarcane:

The genus Saccharum has five important species viz.,
1. Saccharum officinarum, 2. S. Sinense, 3. S.barberi, 4. S.robustum, 5. S.spontanuem. The first three species are the cultivated species and the last two are wild ones.
S. officinarum species is widely cultivated in India because of high sucrose content.



74.  Solution: c)

When a lake starts freezing, only the top layer freezes as ice is a bad conductor of heat and in fact can act as an insulator in such cases. This protects the fish living at the bottom of the lake.



75. Solution: d)

http://ibm.gov.in/IMYB%202011_Bauxite.pdf



76.  Solution: a)
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 20 - SOLUTIONS


On 15 August 1947, the Dominion of India and Dominion of Pakistan became independent nations, and the members of the Constituent Assembly who had not withdrawn to Karachi became India's Parliament. Only 28 members of the Muslim League finally joined the Indian Assembly.

On 26 January 1950, the Constitution took effect, a day now commemorated in India as Republic Day. At this point, the Constituent Assembly became the Provisional Parliament of India, which continued in existence until after the first elections under the new Constitution took place in 1952.

77.  Solution: a)

Starch becomes soluble in water when heated. The granules swell and burst, the semi-crystalline structure is lost and the smaller amylose molecules start leaching out of the granule, forming a network that holds water and increasing the mixture's viscosity. This process is called starch gelatinization.


Most of the food value of a potato is in the form of starchy carbohydrates. Carbohydrates are one of the human body's primary fuels, but we digest raw starches poorly. Like those in grain, the starches in potatoes are indigestible and provide little nutritional value unless they have first been cooked.



78. Solution: a)

India, China, Indonesia, Malaysia and Philippines.

The megadiverse countries are a group of countries that harbor the majority of the Earth's species and are therefore considered extremely biodiverse. Conservation International identified 17 megadiverse countries in 1998. All are located in, or partially in, tropical or subtropical regions.






79.  Solution: c)

In botany and horticulture, parthenocarpy (literally meaning virgin fruit) is the natural or artificially induced production of fruit without fertilization of ovules.


When sprayed on flowers, any of the plant
hormones gibberellin,   auxin  and cytokinin can often stimulate the development of parthenocarpic fruit. This is termed artificial parthenocarpy. Plant hormones are seldom used commercially to produce parthenocarpic fruit. Home gardeners
sometimes spray their tomatoes with an auxin to assure fruit production.
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 20 - SOLUTIONS





80.  Solution: d)

Self-explanatory.

81. Solution: a)


The Secretary of State for India, or India Secretary, was the British Cabinet minister and the political head of the India Office responsible for the governance
of Aden, British India and Burma. The post was created in 1858 when the East India Company's rule in Bengal ended and British India was brought under the direct administration of the government in London, beginning the official colonial period under the British Empire.

In 1937, the India Office was reorganised which separated Burma and Aden under a new Burma Office, but the same Secretary of State headed both Departments and a new title was established as the Secretary of State for India and Burma. The India Office and its Secretary of State were abolished in August 1947, when the United Kingdom granted independence to British India resulting in the creation of two new independent dominions, the Dominion of India and the Dominion of
Pakistan. Myanmar (Burma) soon achieved independence separately in early 1948.




82. Solution: c)

http://orissa.gov.in/e-magazine/Orissareview/2010/August/engpdf/74-76.pdf http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nellie_Sengupta

83.  Solution: b)

http://www.colourblindawareness.org/colour-blindness/inherited-colour-vision- deficiency/

84. Solution: a)

High Conservation Value Areas (HCVAs) are natural habitats, which are of outstanding significance or critical importance due to their high environmental, socioeconomic, biodiversity or landscape values. These areas need to be appropriately managed in order to maintain or enhance those identified values.

It is now a keystone principle of sustainability standards for palm oil, soy, sugar, biofuels and carbon, as well as being widely used for landscape mapping, and in
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 20 - SOLUTIONS


conservation and natural resource planning and advocacy. HCVAs may be part of larger habitats or may be an entire habitat.


High Conservation Value Resource Network, led by organisations including industry (e.g. Tetra Pak, Mondi, World Business Council for Sustainable Development); conservation groups (International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) and World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF)); standard setting and certification organisations (Forest Stewardship Council, Rainforest Alliance); and intergovernmental organisations (the World Bank and International Tropical Timber Organisation).

85.  Solution: c)

Light can damage a photo plate if it is exposed to it before taking a picture. Answer
C explains the mechanism.




86.  Solution: d)

Trans fats are unsaturated fats which are uncommon in nature but can be created artificially.
Fats contain long hydrocarbon chains, which can either be unsaturated i.e. have double bonds, or saturated i.e. have no double bonds. In nature, fatty acids generally have cis (as opposed to trans) configurations


Avoid trans fats as much as possible. They're bad for your heart health.
Trans fats raise LDL "bad" cholesterol and make you more likely to get heart disease. They also lower HDL "good" cholesterol.
Food makers use artificial trans fats to enhance the flavor, texture, and shelf life of
processed foods. You might have seen those trans fats listed as "partially hydrogenated oils."



87.  Solution: d)

http://searchengineland.com/what-is-a-qr-code-and-why-do-you-need-one-27588

The medical researchers want to use QR codes to store parts of the human genetic code. They will be called biometric QR codes.



88.  Solution: b)

The Bagh Caves are a group of nine rock-cut monuments, situated among the southern slopes of the Vindhyas in Kukshi tehsil of Dhar district in Madhya Pradesh
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 20 - SOLUTIONS


state in central India. The paintings on the walls and ceilings of the viharas of Bagh, the fragments of which are still visible in Cave 3 and Cave 4 (remnants seen also in Caves 2, 5 and 7), were executed in tempera. The ground prepared was a reddish- brown gritty and thick mud plaster, laid out on the walls and ceilings. Over the plaster, lime-priming was done, on which these paintings were executed. Some of the most beautiful paintings were on the walls of the portico of Cave 4. To prevent further loss of the values of Indian classical art, most paintings were carefully removed in 1982 and today can be seen in Archaeological Museum of Gwalior.



89.  Solution: d)

These are the advantages of tubeless tyres: i) Maintenance of air pressure; ii) Puncture proof; iii) Withstand abuses, shocks etc better; iv) Heat is produced during landing.

As there is no tube, there is no possibility of the tube stretching; v) No chance of pinching action between tyre and tube; vi) An air-retaining lining is provided between tyre and steel rim which does not have spokes or holes.



90. Solution: c)

http://makaias.gov.in/biography.html



91. Solution: c)


The weighted average of a country's currency relative to an index or basket of other major currencies adjusted for the effects of inflation. The weights are determined by comparing the relative trade balances, in terms of one country's currency, with each other country within the index.



This exchange rate is used to determine an individual country's currency value relative to the other major currencies in the index, as adjusted for the effects of inflation. All currencies within the said index are the major currencies being traded today: U.S. dollar, Japanese yen, euro, etc.


This is also the value that an individual consumer will pay for an imported good at the consumer level. This price will include any tariffs and transactions costs associated with importing the good.
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 20 - SOLUTIONS



92.  Solution: a)

Food absorbs microwave radiation by excitation of molecular bonds, which cause the atoms to vibrate. Typically, microwaves excite the OH bond in water.

The metal will reflect microwaves, and (by itself, i.e. not in contact with a hydrogen- bearing organic substance (usually containing water)) it can cause electrical discharges if the power density is high enough. Any discharge can damage the microwave.

Actually, if one puts a metal object (e.g. spoon) in a piece of food or in liquid containing water (e.g. coffee, tea, soup, stew) there is no problem.

But put a metal object on a plate and one will likely see electrical discharges, like lightning.

If one wraps (completely surrounds) food in Al foil, the food will not heat in the mircrowave, but one will get electrical discharges.

Putting food on a metal plate is OK in some microwave models. The microwaves are simply reflected into the food.


93. Solution: d) Tirthankara
One who establishes the four fold order (Monk, Nun, Layman, and Laywoman) of
religion.
Arihant
One who destroys his inner enemies like anger, greed, passion, ego, etc.
Jina
One who conquers his inner enemies like anger, greed, passion, ego, etc. The
followers of Jina are known as Jains.



94.  Solution: a)

In LCD screens all the pixels are turned off or on together, but in AMOLED individual pixels can be turned off or on. This allows power saving in AMOLED screens. Besides, as the screen can be turned totally or partially black, colours are seen richer on AMOLED display panel.



95. Solution: a)
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 20 - SOLUTIONS


http://geology.about.com/cs/basics_roxmin/a/aa011804c.htm



96.  Solution: c)

Both are wrong.

India’s external debt continues to preponderantly consist  of long-term borrowings. Long-term external debt at US$ 333.3 billion at end December 2013, accounted for
78.2 per cent of total external debt, the remaining 21.8 per cent being constituted of short-term debt. Long-term debt at end December 2013 increased by US$ 25.1 billion (8.1 per cent) over the level at end March 2013, while short-term debt declined by US$ 4.0 billion (4.1 per cent), reflecting the fall in the levels of imports.

ECBs, NRI deposits, and multilateral borrowings, which are the major components of long-term debt, accounted for 67.0 per cent of total external debt, while the other components (namely bilateral borrowings, export credit, and IMF and rupee debt) accounted for 11.2 per cent. Thus long-term debt, all its components taken together, accounted for 78.2 per cent of total external debt, while the remaining 21.8 per cent comprised short-term debt at end December 2013.



97. Solution: d)


A severe threat to the tundras, specifically to the permafrost, is global warming. The melting of the permafrost in a given area on human time scales (decades or centuries) could radically change which species can survive there.

Another concern is that about one third of the world's soil-bound carbon is
in taiga and tundra areas. When the permafrost melts, it releases carbon in the form of carbon dioxide and methane, both of which are greenhouse gases. The effect has been observed in Alaska. In the 1970s the tundra was a carbon sink, but today, it is a carbon source.[9]Methane is produced when vegetation decays in lakes and wetlands.





98. Solution: c)


The share  of the top 15 trading partners of India  in India’s trade at 58 per cent in
2013-14 was more or less the same as in earlier years. The top three trading partners of India are China, the USA, and the UAE, with the top slot shifting between the three. Export- import ratios reflecting bilateral trade balance show that among its top
15 trading partners, India had bilateral trade surplus with four countries, namely the
USA, UAE, Singapore, and Hong Kong, in 2013-14 with high increase in the export-
import ratio with the USA. India’s bilateral trade deficit with Switzerland declined
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 20 - SOLUTIONS


sharply from US$ 31.1 billion in 2012-13 to US$ 17.6 billion in 2013-14 owing to a fall in gold imports. India has high and rising bilateral trade deficit with China, which however fell by 6.6 per cent in 2013-14. Given the growing importance of these two Asian giants, India needs to formulate a comprehensive trade strategy for China keeping in view India’s export  potential in China.



99. Solution: c)

From Times of India Report:

Birds, one of the best indicators of the environment, have slipped deeper into the danger zone in India, thanks to relentless habitat destruction. The latest International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red List (2014) indicates 173 species in the country are now threatened.

The latest IUCN list shows that the newly discovered small and colourful bird, Bugun Liocichla, from the northeast, is now critically endangered, as compared to the earlier safer status of vulnerable. Moreover, based on studies conducted by the Bombay Natural History Society (BNHS)-India, BirdLife International (UK) and other partner organizations, eight other bird species have now entered the threatened list, a statement issued by the BNHS on Saturday said.

The eight species of birds newly added to the list are woolly-necked stork, Andaman teal (both uplisted from least concern to vulnerable), Andaman green pigeon, ashy- headed green pigeon, red-headed falcon, Himalayan griffon, bearded vulture and yunnan nuthatch (all uplisted from least concern to near threatened). When a species is "uplisted", it means it has moved up the threatened ladder.

In an earlier revision of the IUCN list in November 2013, five species had been added to the threatened list, which includes great stone plover, Alexandrine parakeet, grey-headed parakeet, blossom-headed parakeet and red-breasted parakeet.

Bugun liocichla, first described by modern science in the 1990s, has till now been reported from a few areas such as Eaglenest Sanctuary and Bomdila in Arunachal Pradesh. It may exist in other areas of the state and some neighbouring areas
of Bhutan and China. The woolly-necked stork, although found in most parts of
India, is facing rapid population decline. The Andaman teal is found only on the Great Coco Island and Andaman Islands with less than 1,000 recorded till now. The Andaman green pigeon is also endemic to the Andaman and Nicobar islands and a couple of thousand individuals may exist. The ashy-headed green pigeon is confined to the northeastern states of India. The red-headed falcon is still found in declining numbers in most parts of India (except the Himalayan ranges) and several neighbouring countries. But it has disappeared from many areas and in Pakistan it has declined partly due to the falconry .
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 20 - SOLUTIONS



Found only in the Himalayan ranges, the Himalayan griffon is likely to decline further due to the impact of diclofenac use in livestock, as in the case of several other vulture species. The bearded vulture or lammergeyer is also found in the Himalayan ranges in India and similar habitats in parts of Asia, Africa and Europe. It has been facing moderately rapid population decline. The Yunnan nuthatch found in Yunnan province of China, has been recorded only in Arunachal Pradesh. Habitat loss from factors such as infrastructure development and forest fires and poaching and use of chemicals are jeopardizing the existence of these and other threatened species.

Worldwide phenomenon

A similar situation exists globally with 13% of all bird species on the threatened list. Moreover, from among the 350 species, newly recognized and assessed the world over by BirdLife International and IUCN, over 25% have been listed as threatened.


Species such as belem curassow from Brazil and desertas petrel from Madeira Islands have been listed as threatened. In the case of the blue-bearded helmetcrest, a beautiful hummingbird fromColombia, it may already be too late, as the species has not been seen for nearly 70 years. The Somali ostrich, which is found in Somalia, Ethiopia, Djibouti and Kenya, is now recognised as a distinct species and listed as vulnerable. Its population is thought to be in rapid decline because of hunting and egg-collection. The latest IUCN study also helps identify the places most important for birds, which needs urgent protection.

Several areas of southeast Asia are still expected to host extremely rare and endemic species such as Sangihe Dwarf Kingfisher and Cebu Brown Dove and many others not yet documented. Newly recognised species such as Javan flameback and Javan blue-banded kingfisher are now severely threatened. These areas need immediate conservation attention to protect the remaining habitat.




100.           Solution: d)

CAD lowered from 4.7% to 1.7% essentially due to lower aggregate demand and restrictions on the import of non-essential items.
