Insights Mock Test Series – 2015: Test – 18 Solutions



1.  Solution: a)

Every state shall constitute at the district level, a district planning committee to consolidate the plans prepared by panchayats and municipalities in the district, and to prepare a draft development plan for the district as a whole. The state legislature may make provisions with respect to the following:

•   The composition of such committees;
•   The manner of election of members of such committees;
•   The functions of such committees in relation to district planning; and
•   The manner of the election of the chairpersons of such committees.

The act lays down that four-fifths of the members of a district planning committee should be elected by the elected members of the district Panchayat and municipalities in the district from amongst themselves. The representation of these
members in the committee should be in proportion to the ratio between the rural and
urban populations in the district.

The chairperson of such committee shall forward the development plan to the state government.




2.  Solution: d)

Municipal corporations are created for the administration of big cities like Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Hyderabad, Bangalore and others. They are established in the states by the acts of the concerned state legislatures, and in the union territories by the acts of the Parliament of India. There may be one common act for all the municipal corporations in a state or a separate act for each municipal corporation.

A municipal corporation has three authorities, namely, the council, the standing committees and the commissioner.

The Council is the deliberative and legislative wing of the corporation. It consists of the Councillors directly elected by the people, as well as a few nominated persons having knowledge or experience of municipal administration. In brief, the composition of the Council including the reservation of seats for SCs, STs and women is governed by the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act.

The Council is headed by a Mayor. He is assisted by a Deputy Mayor. He is elected in a majority of the states for a one-year renewable term. He is basically an ornamental figure and a formal head of the corporation. His main function is to preside over the meetings of the Council.







http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    


    
2  
The standing committees are created to facilitate the working of the council, which is too large in size. They deal with public works, education, health, taxation, finance
and so on. They take decisions in their fields.

The municipal commissioner is responsible for the implementation of the decisions taken by the council and its standing committees. Thus, he is the chief executive authority of the corporation. He is appointed by the state government and is generally a member of the IAS.




3.  Solution: b)

Articles 239 to 241 in Part VIII of the Constitution deal with the union territories. Even though all the union territories belong to one category, there is no uniformity in their administrative system.

Every union territory is administered by the President acting through an administrator appointed by him. An administrator of a union territory is an agent of the President and not head of state like a governor. The President can specify the designation of an administrator; it may be Lieutenant Governor or Chief Commissioner or Administrator. At present, it is Lieutenant Governor in the case of Delhi, Puducherry and Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Administrator in the case of Chandigarh, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu and Lakshadweep. The President can also appoint the governor of a state as the administrator of an adjoining union territory. In that capacity, the governor is to act independently of his council of ministers.




4.  Solution: c)

The Parliament can make laws on any subject of the three lists (including the State List) for the union territories. This power of Parliament also extends to Puducherry and Delhi, which have their own local legislatures. This means that, the legislative power of Parliament for the union territories on subjects of the State List remain unaffected even after establishing a local legislature for them. But, the legislative assembly of Puducherry can also make laws on any subject of the State List and the Concurrent List. Similarly, the legislative assembly of Delhi can make laws on any subject of the State List (except public order, police and land) and the Concurrent List.




5.  Answer: d.

Explanation:





http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    
Insights Mock Test Series – 2015: Test – 18 Solutions


The National Tiger Conservation Authority is a statutory body under the Ministry
of Environment, Forests and Climate Change constituted under enabling provisions of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, as amended in 2006, for strengthening tiger conservation, as per powers and functions assigned to it under the said Act. The National Tiger Conservation Authority is set up under the Chairmanship of the Minister for Environment and Forests.

The National Tiger Conservation Authority has been fulfilling its mandate within the ambit of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 for strengthening tiger conservation in the country by retaining an oversight through advisories/normative guidelines, based on appraisal of tiger status, ongoing conservation initiatives and recommendations of specially constituted Committees. ‘Project Tiger’ is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme of the Environment, Forests and Climate Change, providing funding support to tiger range States, for in-situ conservation of tigers in designated tiger reserves, and has put the endangered tiger on an assured path of recovery by saving it from extinction, as revealed by the recent findings of the All India tiger estimation using the refined methodology.

The authority approves the tiger conservation plan prepared by the State Government. It also evaluates and assesses various aspects of sustainable ecology and disallows any ecologically unsustainable land use such as, mining, industry and other projects within the tiger reserves.




6.  Solution: a)

The Congress met at Karachi on 29 March 1931 to endorse the Gandhi-Irwin or Delhi Pact. Bhagat Singh, Sukhdev and Rajguru had been executed six days earlier. Even though Gandhiji had made every attempt to save their lives, there was anger among the people, especially the youth, as to why he had not refused to sign the Pact on this question. All along Gandhiji’s route to Karachi he was greeted with black flag demonstrations. The Congress passed a resolution drafted by Gandhiji by which it,
‘while dissociating itself from and disapproving of political violence in any shape or form,’ admired ‘the bravery and sacrifice’ of the three martyrs.’ The Congress endorsed the Delhi Pact and reiterated the goal of Poorna Swaraj.

The Karachi session became memorable for its resolution on Fundamental Rights and the National Economic Programme. Even though the Congress had from its inception fought for the economic interests, civil liberties and political rights of the people, this was the first time that the Congress defined what Swaraj would mean for the masses. It also declared that, ‘in order to end the exploitation of the masses,
political freedom must include real economic freedom of the starving millions.’








http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    


    
4  
7.  Solution: a)

http://www.thehindu.com/business/budget/comprehensive-bankruptcy-code- proposed/article6946327.ece




8. Solution: c)

http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/editorial/welcome-push-on- infrastructure/article6972017.ece




9.  Solution: d)

http://www.business-standard.com/article/news-ani/budget-2015-16-self- employment-and-talent-utilization-setu-to-be-established-115022800913_1.html




10.     Solution: a)















http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    
Insights Mock Test Series – 2015: Test – 18 Solutions







11. Solution: b)












































12.Solution: b)

http://www.dailypioneer.com/sunday-edition/sunday-pioneer/moneywise/govt-to- set-up-5-umpps-via-plug-and-play-mode.html






13.Solution: a)

http://www.thehindu.com/business/budget/public-debt-management-agency-will- bring-indias-external-and-domestic-debt-under-one-roof-finance-minister-arun- jaitley/article6946273.ece



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    


    
6  
http://businesstoday.intoday.in/story/union-budget-2015-16-public-debt- management-agency-proposed/1/216338.html






14.Solution: d)

http://www.prsindia.org/parliamenttrack/report-summaries/financial-sector- legislative-reforms-commission-2792/

http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/2014-07-10/news/51301270_1_fslrc- financial-sector-indian-financial-code




15. Solution: d)

The Ministry comprises of all the above mentioned departments.









16.Solution: d)






17. Solution: d)

The Central Statistical Office which is one of the two wings of the National Statistical Organisation (NSO) is responsible for coordination of statistical activities in the country and for evolving and maintaining statistical standards. Its activities include compilation of National Accounts; conduct of Annual Survey of Industries and Economic Censuses, compilation of Index of Industrial Production, as well as Consumer Price Indices. It also deals with various social statistics, training, international cooperation, Industrial Classification etc.




18.Solution: a)

The Constitution of India directly to ensure free and fair elections in the country. Article 324 of the Constitution provides that the power of superintendence, direction and control of elections to parliament, state legislatures, the office of president of
India and the office of vice-president of India shall be vested in the election



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    
Insights Mock Test Series – 2015: Test – 18 Solutions


commission. Thus, the Election Commission is an all-India body in the sense that it is common to both the Central government and the state governments.

It must be noted here that the election commission is not concerned with the elections to panchayats and muncipalities in the states. For this, the Constitution of India provides for a separate State Election Commission.




19.Solution: a)

It is important to keep track of important fiscal indicators in every year’s budget.






























20.     Solution: a)

CO2 being the predominant GHG, an analysis (of the World Bank) of its emissions across countries in per capita terms in 2009, compared to 2005 presents an interesting picture. Although the G20 is referred to as a group, there are stark disparities on the ground between member countries in terms of incomes, stages of development as well as respective per capita CO2 emissions. In 2005 –

• the USA had the highest CO2 emissions in metric tons per capita at 19.7, followed by Australia (18.0).

• the lowest per capita emitters in 2005 were Brazil (1.9), Indonesia (1.5), and India
(1.2) who continued to be the bottom three in 2009 as well.

• In 2009, Australia ranked first within the G20, followed by the USA.





http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    


    
8  



21.Solution: a)

The PAT (perform - achieve - trade) is a scheme for trading energy-efficiency certificates in large energy-intensive industries under the National Mission for Enhanced Energy Efficiency

• Identified industries are required to improve their specific energy consumption
(SEC) within the specified period of three years or face penalty provisions.

• At the same time this mechanism facilitates efficient industries to trade their additional certified energy savings (that go beyond the assigned target) with other designated consumers who could use these certificates to comply with their SEC- reduction targets.

• In the Twelfth Five Year Plan, the PAT scheme is likely to achieve about 15 million tonnes oil equivalent of annual savings in coal, oil, gas, and electricity (including
6.686 million ton of oil-equivalent energy savings of first phase).




22.     Solution: c)

The Lt. Governor is empowered to promulgate ordinances during recess of the assembly. An ordinance has the same force as an act of the assembly.

Every such ordinance must be approved by the assembly within six weeks from its reassembly. He can also withdraw an ordinance at any time. But, he cannot promulgate an ordinance when the assembly is dissolved or suspended. Further, no such ordinance can be promulgated or withdrawn without the prior permission of the President




23.     Solution: d)




24.     Solution: d)

There are 18 Biosphere Reserves in India. They protect larger areas of natural habitat (than a National Park or Animal Sanctuary), and often include one or more National Parks and/or preserves, along buffer zones that are open to some economic uses. Protection is granted not only to the flora and fauna of the protected region, but also to the human communities who inhabit these regions, and their
ways of life. Animals are protected and saved here.







http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    
Insights Mock Test Series – 2015: Test – 18 Solutions


•   Nine of the eighteen biosphere reserves are a part of the World Network of Biosphere Reserves, based on the UNESCO Man and the Biosphere (MAB) Programme list.
•   The Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve was the first biosphere reserve in India established in the year 1986. It is located in the Western Ghats and includes 2 of the 10 biogeographical provinces of India.






25.     Solution: c)

The National Biodiversity Authority (NBA) is a statutory autonomous body under the Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India established in 2003 to implement the provisions under the National Biological Diversity Act, 2002, after India signed Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) in 1992.

It acts as a facilitating, regulating and advisory body to the Government of India "on issues of conservation, sustainable use of biological resources and fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the use of biological resources." Additionally, it advises State Governments in identifying the areas of biodiversity importance (biodiversity hotspots) as heritage sites.




26.     Solution: d)

The Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) is a legally binding multilateral environmental agreement that has 193 contracting Parties (Countries) as its members with three objectives – conservation of biological diversity, sustainable use of the diversity and ensuring fair and equitable sharing of benefits of such use. It has entered into force on 29th December 1993.

The CBD provides sovereign rights over their biological resources, and requests countries would facilitate access to the genetic resources by other parties subject to national legislation and on mutually agreed terms. The CBD also provides for equitable sharing of benefits arising from the utilization of traditional knowledge, and practices, with holders of such knowledge. This has made it necessary for a legislation to be put in place, which lays down the framework for providing access, for determining the terms of such access and for ensuring the equitable sharing of benefits.






27.     Solution: d)




http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    
1
    
Union Government has merged Green India Mission (GIM) with the Mahatma
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) Scheme.

By merging GIM with MGNREGA Scheme government seeks to increase 10 million hectares of forest cover.

•    National Mission for a Green India aims for afforestation at 10 million hectares of land over the next decade in order to increase and improve the country’s forest cover. It also aims at improving ecosystems services, forest based livelihood income of about three million households and to enhance annual CO2 sequestration.

•    At present under MGNREGA Scheme green works such as water harvesting, afforestation and farm forestry are undertaken which are implemented by Union Ministry of Rural Development.

•    Government will also use modern technology like remote sensing to monitor the progress of this initiative regularly.

Union Government also has set out convergence guidelines in this regard after consulting both Ministry of Environment & Forest (MoEF) and Rural Development Ministries.




28.     Solution: c)

This species of alga is originally inhabitant to the seas around the British Isles and the East China Sea. It belongs to a type known as endophytic which means that they are microscopic in size and generally found living inside macroscopic seaweeds.

•    Endophytic alga has ecological advantage to the host such as disease resistance.

•    It contains anticancer compounds such as Taxol and can be used for treatment of many cancers including ovarian cancer, breast cancer, lung cancer and pancreatic cancer.




29.     Solution: c)

The British policy of ‘Divide and Rule’ found another expression in the announcement of the Communal Award in August 1932. The Award allotted to each minority a number of seats in the legislatures to be elected on the basis of a separate electorate that is Muslims would be elected only by Muslims and Sikhs only by Sikhs, and so on. Muslims, Sikhs and Christians had already been treated as minorities. The
Award declared the Depressed Classes (Scheduled Castes of today) also to be a




http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    
Insights Mock Test Series – 2015: Test – 18 Solutions


minority community entitled to separate electorate and thus separated them from the rest of the Hindus.




30.     Solution: d)

Scientists believe that this finding could potentially support life. Hubble Space Telescope’s finding was published in the Journal of Geophysical Research: Space Physics.

The finding was based on the results obtained after analyzing Ganymede’s magnetic field and aurorae created and controlled by it and its interaction with Jupiter’s magnetic field.

Scientists estimate that

•    This ocean is 100 kms thick.

•    10 times deeper than Earth’s oceans.

•    It is buried under a 150-kilometre crust of mostly ice.

In 1970s, for first time scientists had suggested that ocean is present inside Ganymede based on its models. NASA’s Galileo mission also had provided first evidence of ocean in Ganymede after measuring its magnetic field in 2002.

About Ganymede

•    Ganymede is the largest moon in our solar system. It is also the only moon with its own magnetic field.

•    The magnetic field causes aurorae, which are ribbons of glowing, hot electrified gas, in regions circling the north and south poles of the moon.






31.Solution: a)

Pakistan successfully tested its first indigenously built all-weather armed drone named Burraq and a laser guided missile named Barq.

By successfully testing of Burraq, Pakistan became the 9th country in the World to develop an unmanned combat aerial vehicle (UCAV) domestically.

About Burraq

•    Dveloped by a venture of the Pakistan Air Force (PAF) and the National
Engineering and Scientific Commission (NESCOM).



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    
1
    




•    It is named after the flying horse of Islamic tradition.

•    Burraq has ability to fly in all types of weather conditions.

•    It has capability to strike its targets with pinpoint accuracy.

•    With Barq laser-guided missile mounted on it, Burraq can hit moving targets as well as stationary targets with pinpoint accuracy.

•    UCAV Burraq was first flight tested in May 2009.

At present, Pakistan has several types of unarmed surveillance drones in operation but Burraq and Shahpar are its domestically developed UCAVs.




32.     Solution: a)

The defence pact seeks to boost cooperation and joint development between both countries in order to strengthen security ties.

The agreement will also pave the way for Japan to develop drones and other unmanned equipment together as it seeks to play a greater international military role. It will also promote joint projects in several fields including unmanned technologies for underwater search missions or surveillance.

Japan and France also have agreed to step up broader military cooperation and anti- terrorism efforts. In the past, Japan had signed similar arms equipment and technology transfer agreements with the Britain, United States and Australia.





33.     Solution: d.

Right to Education (RTE) Act

The Constitution (Eighty-sixth Amendment) Act, 2002 inserted Article 21-A in the Constitution of India to provide free and compulsory education of all children in the age group of six to fourteen years as a Fundamental Right in such a manner as the State may, by law, determine. The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education (RTE) Act, 2009, which represents the consequential legislation envisaged under Article 21-A, means that every child has a right to full time elementary education of satisfactory and equitable quality in a formal school which satisfies certain essential norms and standards. Article 21-A and the RTE Act came into effect on 1 April 2010.

•   With this, India has moved forward to a rights based framework that casts a legal obligation on the Central and State Governments to implement this




http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    
Insights Mock Test Series – 2015: Test – 18 Solutions


fundamental child right as enshrined in the Article 21A of the Constitution, in accordance with the provisions of the RTE Act.
•   It is seen as the most historic development in universalisation of elementary education in the country. It implies that every child in the age group of 6 to
14 years has Right to elementary education. They are entitled for free and compulsory education.

The RTE Act provides for the:

•   Right of children to free and compulsory education till completion of elementary education in a neighbourhood school.
•   It clarifies that ‘compulsory education’ means obligation of the appropriate government to provide free elementary education and ensure compulsory admission, attendance and completion of elementary education to every child in the six to fourteen age group. ‘Free’ means that no child shall be liable to pay any kind of fee or charges or expenses which may prevent him or her from pursuing and completing elementary education.
•   It makes provisions for a non-admitted child to be admitted to an age appropriate class.
•   It specifies the duties and responsibilities of appropriate Governments, local authority and parents in providing free and compulsory education, and sharing of financial and other responsibilities between the Central and State Governments.
•   It lays down the norms and standards relating inter alia to Pupil Teacher Ratios (PTRs), buildings and infrastructure, school-working days, teacher- working hours.
•   It provides for rational deployment of teachers by ensuring that the specified pupil teacher ratio is maintained for each school, rather than just as an average for the State or District or Block, thus ensuring that there is no
urban-rural imbalance in teacher postings. It also provides for prohibition of
deployment of teachers for non-educational work, other than decennial census, elections to local authority, state legislatures and parliament, and disaster relief.
•   It provides for appointment of appropriately trained teachers, i.e. teachers with the requisite entry and academic qualifications.

The Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) is the main vehicle for implementation of the RTE Act. It is one of the largest programmes of its kind in the world. It is primarily funded from central budget and it covers the whole country.

•   Under SSA, special attention has been given to urban deprived children, children affected by periodic migration and children living in remote and scattered habitations. Attempts have also been made to reach out to children
suffering from autism. It involves their identification, preparation of





http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    
1
    




individualized Education Plan, teacher training on Autism and therapeutic support.
•   The programme has been implemented in order to narrow down gender and social gaps in elementary education. Special efforts have been made to reach out to girls and children belonging to SC/ST and Muslim minority
communities.






34.     Solution: a)

Pursuant to the objectives of the NPE, 1986, the Mahila Samakhya Scheme was started in 1989 to translate the goals enshrined in the NPE into a concrete programme for the education and empowerment of women in rural areas particularly those from socially and economically marginalized groups. The MS scheme recognizes the centrality of education in empowering women to achieve equality.

Salient features of the Programme:

•   The Mahila Sanghas or women's collectives at the village level provide the women a space to meet, reflect, ask questions and articulate their thoughts and needs and make informed choices.
•   The Mahila Sanghas though various programmes and awareness campaigns have brought about a change in the outlook of rural women and the effects can how be seen in various facets of life at home within the family, the community and at the block and Panchayat levels.
•   The programme has also focused on awareness of the need to educate the children, especially girls, to give the equal status and opportunities which
has resulted in a direct impact on enrolment and retention of girls in schools.

The Mahila Samakhya Scheme is currently being implemented in Ten States viz., Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chattisgarh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand.




35.     Solution: a)

The problems in the Indian banking system lie elsewhere and fall into two categories:
policy and structure.

The policy challenge relates to financial repression.

The Indian banking system is afflicted by what might be called “double financial repression” which reduces returns to savers and banks, and misallocates capital to



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    
Insights Mock Test Series – 2015: Test – 18 Solutions


investors. Financial repression on the asset side of the balance sheet is create by the statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) requirement that forces banks to hold government securities, and priority sector lending (PSL) that forces resource deployment in less- than-fully efficient ways. Financial repression on the liability side has arisen from high inflation since 2007, leading to negative real interest rates, and a sharp reduction in household savings. As India exits from liabilityside repression with declining inflation, the time may be appropriate for addressing its asset-side counterparts.

Also refer to :

http://www.thehindu.com/business/budget/4d-solution-for-banking- industry/article6941953.ece






36.     Solution: d)

The Constitution visualises the UPSC to be the ‘watch-dog of merit system’ in India. It is concerned with the recruitment to the all-India services and Central services— group A and group B and advises the government, when consulted, on promotion and disciplinary matters. It is not concerned with the classification of services, pay and service conditions, cadre management, training, and so on. These matters are
handled by the Department of Personnel and Training—one of the three departments
of the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions. Therefore, UPSC is only a central recruiting agency while the Department of Personnel and Training is the central personnel agency in India.

The role of UPSC is not only limited, but also recommendations made by it are only of advisory nature and hence, not binding on the government. It is upto the Union government to accept or reject that advise. The only safeguard is the answerability of the government to the Parliament for departing from the recommendation of the Commission. Further, the government can also make rules which regulate the scope of the advisory functions of UPSC .




37.     Solution: a)

It is a quasi-judicial body as its work involves fixing the fair share of states in the overall grant from Centre. Since it uses both legal principles and administrative dictums in making decisions, it is called a quasi-judicial body. It is constituted by the president of India every fifth year or at such earlier time as he considers necessary.

The Finance Commission consists of a chairman and four other members to be appointed by the president. And since it is a Quasi-judicial body, the Chairman is a



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    
1
    
person having experience in public affairs. Other members are judges,
administrators or experts. So both administrative side and judicial sides are balanced in the Commission.




38.     Solution: a)

The Constitution authorises the Parliament to determine the qualifications of members of the commission and the manner in which they should be selected. Accordingly, the Parliament has specified the qualifications of the chairman and members of the commission. The chairman should be a person having experience in public affairs and the four other members should be selected from amongst the following:

•   A judge of high court or one qualified to be appointed as one.
•   A person who has specialised knowledge of finance and accounts of the government.
•   A person who has wide experience in financial matters and in administration.
•   A person who has special knowledge of economics.




39.     Solution: c)

It must be clarified here that the recommendations made by the Finance Commission are only of advisory nature and hence, not binding on the government. It is up to the Union government to implement its recommendations on granting money to the states.

To put it in other words, ‘It is nowhere laid down in the Constitution that the recommendations of the commission shall be binding upon the Government of India or that it would give rise to a legal right in favour of the beneficiary states to receive the money recommended to be offered to them by the Commission.




40.     Solution: a)

The National Commission for Scheduled Castes (SCs) is a constitutional body in the sense that it is directly established by Article 338 of the Constitution.

On the other hand, the other national commissions like the National Commission for Women (1992), the National Commission for Minorities (1993), the National Commission for Backward Classes (1993), the National Human Rights Commission (1993) and the National Commission for Protection of Child Rights (2007) are
statutory bodies in the sense that they are established by acts of the Parliament.





http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    
Insights Mock Test Series – 2015: Test – 18 Solutions







41.Solution: b)

The separate National Commission for SCs came into existence in 2004. It consists of a chairperson, a vice-chairperson and three other members. They are appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal. Their conditions of service and tenure of office are also determined by the President.

The commission presents an annual report to the president. It can also submit a report as and when it thinks necessary.

The President places all such reports before the Parliament, along with a memorandum explaining the action taken on the recommendations made by the Commission. The memorandum should also contain the reasons for the non- acceptance of any of such recommendations.




42.     Solution: d)

Perspiration and inspiration, investment and efficiency, respectively, determine long-run growth.

But the Indian private investment climate is clouded by the experience of the last decade. A combination of factors—weak corporate balance sheets, an impaired banking system, difficulty of exit, the deficiencies of the public private partnership (PPP) model in infrastructure—could hold back private investment going forward.

Private investment must remain the main engine of long-run growth. But, in the short to medium term, as the near-intractable problems get slowly resolved, public investment, especially by the railways, will have to play a catalytic role.




43.     Solution: b)

Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana

In order to attain National Common Minimum Programme (NCMP) goal of providing access to electricity to all rural households and electrification of all villages, Government of India, in April, 2005 conceived “Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana” (RGGVY) to electrify all un-electrified villages / habitations and to provide access to electricity to all rural households in un-electrified and
electrified villages in the entire country.







http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    
1
    




•   The scheme covers electrification of all the villages in the country except the villages under the programme of Ministry of Non-conventional Sources (MNES) for providing electricity from non-conventional energy sources under their remote village electrification programme. With the launch of this scheme the existing “Accelerated Electrification of One lakh Villages and One Crore Households” and the Minimum Needs Programme for rural electrification got merged with RGGVY.
•   The scheme has been launched to fulfil the commitment of the National Common Minimum Programme (NCMP) of completing the household electrification in next 5 years and modernizing the rural electricity infrastructure.
•   The scheme is being implemented through the Rural Electrification Corporation (REC) which has been designated as Nodal Agency by Ministry of Power.
•   The scheme provides for free of cost connection to all rural households living below poverty line. The programme aims at a qualitative transformation of the rural electricity infrastructure. It envisages that there will not be any discrimination between urban and rural areas in respect of hours of supply.
24 hours supply of good quality power would also enable dispersal of small industries, khadi and village industries in the rural areas. It will also facilitate delivery of modern health care, education and application of information technologies. This is aimed at accelerated rural development,
employment generation and poverty alleviation.

SALIENT FEATURES

The scheme has the following important features:

•   Ninety per cent capital subsidy is provided towards overall cost of the projects under the scheme. 10% of the project cost is contributed by States through own resources / loan from financial institutions.
•   Prior commitment of the States has been obtained before sanction of projects under the scheme for:
•   Guarantee by State Government for a minimum daily supply of 6- 8 hours.
•   Free of cost service connection to all families Below Poverty Lines.

Under the programme 90% grant is provided by Govt. of India and 10% as loan by
REC to the State Governments.




44.     Solution: d)

https://www.climateinvestmentfunds.org/cif/node/11900






http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    
Insights Mock Test Series – 2015: Test – 18 Solutions







45.     Solution: c)

As per the IMF, every fast-growing Asian economy in recent years has accelerated as it underwent a demographic transition. In India itself, the high growth states (Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, and Gujarat) in the period 1991-2001 had a dependency ratio which was 8.7 percentage points lower than that of the low growth states (Bihar,
Madhya Pradesh, and Uttar Pradesh) and an average annual growth rate that was 4.3
percentage points higher. Looking ahead, the low growth states will benefit more from the demographic dividend, as higher incomes and lower fertility alter demographics. Indeed, over the period 2001-11, the hitherto laggard states have grown at an average of around 5 per cent annually.

The difference between their growth and that of the leaders in the period 2001-11 is just 1.5 percentage. So demographic transition seems to be correlated with growth, with some reasons to believe that causality flows both ways i.e., lower dependency ratios increase growth and higher growth reduces fertility and consequently dependency ratios.




46.     Solution: a)

Options B and C are wrong cycles. Only option A completes the cycle.

The low growth states will benefit more from the demographic dividend, as higher incomes and lower fertility alter demographics. Indeed, over the period 2001-11, the hitherto laggard states have grown at an average of around 5 per cent annually.

The difference between their growth and that of the leaders in the period 2001-11 is just 1.5 percentage. So demographic transition seems to be correlated with growth, with some reasons to believe that causality flows both ways i.e., lower dependency ratios increase growth and higher growth reduces fertility and consequently dependency ratios.




47.     Solution: d)

Gandhiji’s entire campaign was based on the grounds of humanism and reason. But he also argued that untouchability, as practised at present, had no sanction in the Hindu Shastras. But even if this was not so, the Harijan worker should not feel daunted. Truth could -not be confined within the covers of a book. The Shastras
should be ignored if they went against human dignity.





http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    
2
    
A major running theme in Gandhiji’s writings and speeches was the need for caste Hindus to do ‘penance’ and ‘make reparations . . . for the untold hardships to which we have subjected them (the Harijans) for centuries.’ For this reason, he was not hostile to Dr. Ambedkar and other Harijans who criticized and distrusted him. ‘They have every right to distrust me,’ he wrote. ‘Do I not belong to the Hindu section miscalled superior class or caste Hindus, who have ground down to powder the so called untouchables?’ At the same time, he repeatedly warned caste Hindus that if this atonement was not made, Hinduism would perish: ‘Hinduism dies if
untouchability lives, and untouchability has to die if Hinduism is to live.’ (This strong theme of ‘penance’ largely explains why caste Hindus born and brought up in pre-
1947 India so readily accepted large scale reservations in jobs, enrolment in professional colleges and so on for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes after independence).




48.     Solution: a)

Growth in per capita income is driven by growth in labour productivity (what the average worker produces), growth in working age population (fewer the people who are in the dependent age group in the population, greater the output), growth in the fraction of those who can work and that actually look for work (labour force participation rate), and growth in those looking for work who actually find it (employment rate).

Because accurate employment data are hard to find for developing countries, studies typically ignore the employment rate in decomposing the sources of growth.






49.     Solution: a)

In economics, total-factor productivity (TFP), also called multi-factor productivity, is a variable which accounts for effects in total output not caused by traditionally measured inputs of labor and capital. If all inputs are accounted for, then total factor productivity (TFP) can be taken as a measure of an economy’s long-term technological change or technological dynamism.

The increase in the fraction of people working is probably not the main consequence of the demographic dividend. Instead, the effects of the demographic dividend are channelled through the increase in labour productivity, which comes from more physical capital employed per worker (in turn resulting from greater saving and investment), more human capital per worker (which comes from more education as smaller families lead to greater spending on education per child), and greater TFP
(total factor productivity).




http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    
Insights Mock Test Series – 2015: Test – 18 Solutions




50.     Solution: d)

Following initiatives have been taken wrt agriculture in the Budget

•   ‘Pradhanmantri Gram Sinchai Yojana’ to provide ‘Per Drop More Crop’.
•   `5,300 crore to support micro-irrigation, watershed development and the
‘Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchai Yojana’.
•   States urged to chip in. `25,000 crore in 2015-16 to the corpus of Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF) set up in NABARD; `15,000 crore for Long Term Rural Credit Fund; `45,000 crore for Short Term Co-operative Rural Credit Refinance Fund; and `15,000 crore for Short Term RRB Refinance Fund.
•   Target of `8.5 lakh crore of agricultural credit during the year 2015-16. ¾ Focus on improving the quality and effectiveness of activities under MGNREGA.
•   Need to create a National Agriculture Market for the benefit farmers, which will also have the incidental benefit of moderating price rises. Government to work with the States, in NITI, for the creation of a Unified National Agriculture Market.




51. Solution: d)

A major debate on strategy occurred among the nationalists in the period following the withdrawal of the Civil Disobedience Movement. In the first stage of the debate, during 1934-35, the issue was what course the national movement should take in the immediate future, that is, during its phase of non-mass struggle. How was the political paralysis that it had sunk into to be overcome? There were two traditional responses. Gandhiji emphasized constructive work in the villages, especially the revival of village crafts.

Constructive work, said Gandhiji, would lead to the consolidation of people’s power, and open the way to the mobilization of millions in the next phase of mass struggle.’ Another section of Congressmen advocated the revival of the constitutional method
of struggle and participation in the elections to the Central Legislative Assembly to be held in 1934. Led this time by Dr. M.A. Ansari, Asaf Ali, Satyamurthy, Bhulabhai Desai and B.C. Roy, the new Swarajists argued that in a period of political apathy and depression, when the Congress was no longer in a position to sustain a mass movement, it was necessary to utilize elections and work in the legislative councils to keep up the political interest and morale of the people. This did not amount, they
said, to having faith in the capacity of constitutional politics to achieve freedom.







http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    
2
    
52.     Solution: d)


•   The salient features of the Scheme are: assistance under AREP will be available for electrification by conventional and non-conventional sources of energy and the interest subsidy under the Scheme is four per cent.
•   Interest subsidy under AREP Scheme will be provided to State Governments/Power Utilities on loan availed by it from any financial institutions like Rural Electrification Corporation, Power Finance Corporation, Rural Infrastructure Development Fund, National Agricultural Bank and Rural Development for carrying out rural electrification programmes which help to achieve national objectives of the Government for complete electrification of villages by 2007 and coverage of all households by
2012.
•   Funds would be provided under the scheme on the basis of Net Present Value of the interest subsidies applicable on disbursement under Accelerated Rural Electrification Programme.




53.     Solution: c)

Provisions related to Captive Power Plants under the Electricity Act, 2003:

•   No sanction is required under the provisions of the Electricity Act, 2003 for setting up captive power plants.
•   Under the Electricity Act, 2003, captive power plants, including group captive, have been freely permitted.
•   The Act provides that any person may construct, maintain or operate a captive generating plant and dedicated transmission lines.
•   Under the provisions of the Act, every person, who has constructed a captive generating plant and maintains and operates such plant, shall have the right to open access for the purposes of carrying electricity from his captive generating plant to the destination of his use subject to the availability of transmission capacity.




54.     Solution: b)


•   The Central Electricity Authority of India (CEA) is a statutory organisation constituted under section 3(1) of Electricity Supply Act 1948, which has been superseded by section 70(1) of the Electricity Act 2003.
•   The CEA advises the government on matters relating to the National
Electricity Policy and formulates short-term and perspective plans for the development of electricity systems.




http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    
Insights Mock Test Series – 2015: Test – 18 Solutions


•   Under the Electricity Act 2003, CEA prescribes the standards on matters such as construction of electrical plants, electric lines and connectivity to the grid, installation and operation of meters and safety and grid standards.
•   The CEA is also responsible for concurrence of hydro power development schemes of central, state and private sectors taking into consideration the factors which will result in efficient development of the river and its tributaries for power generation, consistent with the requirement of drinking water, irrigation, navigation and flood control.
•   Preparation of technical standards for construction of electrical plants, electric lines and connectivity to the grid is the responsibility of CEA as per section 73 (b) of the Electricity Act, 2003. However as per section 7 of this Act, a generating company may establish, operate and maintain a generating station if it complies with the technical standards only relating to connectivity to the grid as given in clause (b) of section 73. This implies that generating stations need not follow compulsory the CEA technical standards specified for construction of electrical plants and electric lines.
•   The CEA plays a lead role in promoting the integrated operations of the regional power grids and the evolution of a national grid. The eastern, western and north-eastern grids have been integrated and are operating in
a synchronous mode. The eastern grid is connected to the northern as well as
southern grid through HVDC back to back links. The western grid is also connected to the northern and southern grid through similar arrangements. The CEA facilitates exchange of power within the country from surplus to deficit regions and with neighbouring countries for mutual benefits.
•   The CEA advises central government, state governments and regulatory commissions on all technical matters relating to generation, transmission and distribution of electricity. It also advises state governments, licensees or generating companies on matters which enable them to operate and maintain the electricity system under their ownership or control in an improved manner.






55.     Solution: a)

SJVN Limited, a Mini Ratna & Schedule 'A' CPSU under the Ministry of Power, Govt. of India, is a joint venture between the Govt. of India & Govt. of Himachal Pradesh. Incorporated in the year 1988, the Company is fast emerging as a major power player in the country. The present authorized capital of SJVN is INR 7000 crores.

SJVN is successfully operating the country’s largest 1500 MW Nathpa Jhakri
Hydropower Station and is setting new benchmarks in generation and




http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    
2
    
maintenance year after year, after having tackled the silt erosion problems in under-water turbine parts.




56.     Solution: c)

The Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission was launched on the 11th January,
2010. The Mission has set the ambitious target of deploying 20,000 MW of grid connected solar power by 2022 is aimed at reducing the cost of solar power generation in the country through (i) long term policy; (ii) large scale deployment goals; (iii) aggressive R&D; and (iv) domestic production of critical raw materials, components and products, as a result to achieve grid tariff parity by 2022. Mission will create an enabling policy framework to achieve this objective and make India a global leader in solar energy. The Mission is under the aegis of Ministry of New and Renewable Energy.




57.    Solution: d)




58.     Solution: a)

A recent study ‘Preliminary Modeling Studies on Carbon Taxes and GDP Loss’ was conducted by the Ministry of Environment and Forest, GoI. The results of the study are given as below:

Undiscounted cumulative GDP loss: Carbon tax is revenue positive when it involves no adjustment to other tax rates in the economy. It is revenue neutral when other tax rates are adjusted so that the revenue inflow from carbon tax is exactly balanced by
an equal reduction in yields from reduced taxes.

The assessment and quantification of the costs of adaptation and mitigation is a difficult task. However, it is clear that these costs are significant and will likely be higher in the future as initiatives are taken in line with the goals outlined in the NAPCC.




59.     Solution: a)

Rice, wheat, pulses, sugar, kerosene, LPG, naphtha, water, electricity, fertiliser, iron ore, railways – these are just a subset of the products and services that the government subsidises. The estimated direct fiscal costs of these (select) subsidies are about ` 378,000 crore or about 4.2 percent of GDP. This is roughly how much it would cost to raise the expenditure of every household to that of a household at the
35th percentile of the income distribution.



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    
Insights Mock Test Series – 2015: Test – 18 Solutions









60.     Solution: d)

Price subsidies, no doubt provide help, but they may not have a transformative effect on the economic lives of the poor. For many subsidies, only a small fraction of the benefits actually accrue to the poor. For example, electricity subsidies benefit mainly the (relatively wealthy) 67.2 percent of households that are electrified. A large fraction of subsidies allocated to water utilities are spent on subsidising private taps when 60 percent of poor households get their water from public taps.

Moreover, the implementation of subsidies can be fiendishly complex. In the case of fertilizers, they are firm-specific and import-consignment specific, they vary by type of fertilizer, and some are on a fixed-quantity basis while others are variable.






61.Solution: d)

The changing fortunes of India have been nothing short of dramatically positive. Inflation has declined by over 6 percentage points since late 2013, and the current account deficit has shrivelled from a peak of 6.7 percent of GDP (in Q3, 2012-13) to an estimated 1.0 percent in the coming fiscal year. Foreign portfolio flows (of US$
38.4 billion since April 2014) have stabilized the rupee, exerting downward pressure on long-term interest rates, reflected in the yield on 10-year government securities, and contributed to the surge in equity prices (31 percent since April in rupee terms, and even more in US dollars, ranking it the highest amongst emerging markets).

In a nearly 12-quarter phase of deceleration, economic growth averaged 6.7 percent but since 2013-14 has been growing at 7.2 percent on average.






62.     Solution: b)

India ranks amongst the most attractive investment destinations, well above other countries. It ranks well above the mean for its investment grade category, and also above the mean for the investment category above it (on the basis of the new growth estimates). Amongst BRICS (and other comparable countries) only China scores
above India.





http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    
2
    
(Sources: European Travel Commission and World Tourism Organisation for the following)

•    Brazil: in 2012 they issued a total of 8.6 million tourists. It is estimated that long-distance trips will grow on an average of 9.5% per year. In 2012 tourist spending in this market was €17 billion, ranking the country 12th in the world in terms of tourist spending.

•    Russia: in 2012 they issued 33.8 million tourists, of which 79% travelled to Europe. They occupy the 5th position regarding tourism expenditure worldwide and in 2012 tourist spending reached 42.2 billion USD.

•    India: in 2012 they issued 10.9 million tourists, of which 95.1% went on long distance trips. It is expected that the choice of remote destinations by international tourists will increase by an annual average of 8.6% until 2017.

•    China: is one of the main global tourist markets, reaching a total of 83 million tourists in 2012. They are also currently top of the table for tourism spending with a figure of 102 billion USD.

During the first half of 2013, global tourism increased by 5% in terms of international arrivals. This growth was more significant in emerging economy destinations. From January to July 2013, China (up 31%) and Russia (up 22%) led the growth of foreign travel spending.




63.     Solution: d)

The 69th Constitutional Amendment Act of 19915 provided a special status to the Union Territory of Delhi, and re-designated it the National Capital Territory of Delhi and designated the administrator of Delhi as the lieutenant (lt.) governor. It created a legislative assembly and a council of ministers of Delhi. Previously, Delhi had a metropolitan council and an executive council.

The strength of the assembly is fixed at 70 members, directly elected by the people. The elections are conducted by the election commission of India. The assembly can make laws on all the matters of the State List and the Concurrent List except the three matters of the State List, that is, public order, police and land. But, the laws of Parliament prevail over those made by the Assembly.






64.     Solution: a)

The chief minister of Delhi is appointed by the President (not by the lt. governor). The other ministers are appointed by the president on the advice of the chief



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    
Insights Mock Test Series – 2015: Test – 18 Solutions


minister. The ministers hold office during the pleasure of the president. The council of ministers is collectively responsible to the assembly.

The council of ministers headed by the chief minister aid and advise the lt. governor in the exercise of his functions except in so far as he is required to act in his discretion. In the case of difference of opinion between the lt. governor and his ministers, the lt. governor is to refer the matter to the president for decision and act accordingly.




65.     Solution: d)

The Left failed to make a deep study of Indian reality. With the exception of Jawaharlal Nehru, the Left saw the dominant Congress leadership as bourgeois its policy of negotiations as working towards a compromise with imperialism any resort to constitutional work as a step towards the ‘abandonment of the struggle for independence’. It took recourse to a simplistic model of analysing Indian social classes and their political behaviour. It saw all efforts to guide the national movement in a disciplined manner as imposing restrictions on the movement. It constantly counterposed armed struggle to nonviolence as a superior form and
method of struggle, rather than concentrating on the nature of mass involvement and
mobilization and ideology. It was Convinced that the masses were ever ready for struggles in any form if only the leaders were willing to initiate them. It constantly overestimated its support among the people. Above all, the Left failed to grasp the Gandhian strategy of struggle.




66.     Solution: a)

As the Economic Survey correctly points out - Indeed, one of the paradoxes of recent banking history is that the share of the private sector in overall banking aggregates barely increased at a time when the country witnessed its most rapid growth and one that was fuelled by the private sector. It was an anomalous case of private sector growth without private sector bank financing. Even allowing for the over- exuberance of the PSBs that financed this investment-led growth phase, the reticence of the private sector was striking






67.     Solution: a)

Minimum Support Price (MSP) for Minor Forest Produce (MFP) has been fixed for ten MFP namely Tamarind, Honey, Gum Karaya, Karanj Seed, Sal Seed, Mahuwa Seed, Sal Leaf, Chironjee, Myrobalan, and Lac. The Scheme has been implemented



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    
2
    
in eight States having Schedule areas as listed in the Fifth Schedule of the constitution of India

The scheme provides for non-nationalization of MFP by the State concerned, so that the collectors of MFP are free to sell the MFP in open market if the market price is more than the MSP declared. States of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana are still continuing with the practice of nationalization of MFP. Therefore, the scheme has not been implemented in these two States.






68.     Solution: d)

The UPSC consists of a chairman and other members appointed by the president of India. The Constitution, without specifying the strength of the Commission has left the matter to the discretion of the president, who determines its composition. Usually, the Commission consists of nine to eleven members including the chairman. Further, no qualifications are prescribed for the Commission’s membership except that one-half of the members of the Commission should be such persons who have held office for at least ten years either under the Government of India or under the government of a state. The Constitution also authorises the president to determine the conditions of service of the chairman and other members of the Commission.

The chairman and members of the Commission hold office for a term of six years or until they attain the age of 65 years, whichever is earlier.






69.     Solution: b)

The UPSC presents, annually, to the President a report on its performance. The President places this report before both the Houses of Parliament, along with a memorandum explaining the cases where the advice of the Commission was not accepted and the reasons for such non-acceptance. All such cases of non-acceptance must be approved by the Appointments Committee of the Union cabinet. An individual ministry or department has no power to reject the advice of the UPSC.






70.     Solution: a)

Impetus to growth will be provided by declining oil prices and increasing monetary easing facilitated by ongoing moderation in inflation.



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    
Insights Mock Test Series – 2015: Test – 18 Solutions


Simulating the effects of tax cuts, declining oil prices will add spending power to households, thereby boosting consumption and growth. Oil is also a significant input in production, and declining prices will shore up profit margins and hence balance sheets of the corporate sector.

Further declines in inflation and the resulting monetary easing will provide policy support for growth both by encouraging household spending in interest-sensitive sectors and reducing the debt burden of firms, strengthening their balance sheets. The final favourable impulse will be the monsoon which is forecast to be normal compared to last year.




71. Solution: d)

About ZSI:

Established in 1961, it is a premier organisation in zoological research and studies.

•   It was established to promote the survey, exploration and research of the fauna in the region.
•   The activities of the ZSI are coordinated by the Conservation and Survey
Division in the Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India. Main objectives:
•   Exploration and Survey of Faunal Resources
•   Taxonomic Studies
•   Status Survey of Endangered Species
•   Publication of Results through Departmental Journals
•   Publication of Fauna of India
•   Maintenance and Development of National Zoological Collections

Red Data Book:

•   Similar to the Red Data Book produced by IUCN, ZSI also releases a Red
Data Book on Indian Animals. It was first published in 1983.

The ZSI also participates in the Indian Antarctic Program, since its inception in
1989.




72.     Solution: d)

Mangroves in India:

Mangroves in India account for about 3% of the world’s mangrove vegetation. Mangrove cover in India is 4,662 sq. km, which is 0.14% of the country’s total



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    
3
    
geographical area. Sundarbans in West Bengal accounts for almost half of the total area under mangroves in the country. Mangrove in India is famous for its rich variety of flora and fauna.

The forest survey report, 2013, notes down that the overall Mangrove cover in the county in 2013 has decreased compared to 2011.The reasons for the decrease in the mangrove cover may be:

•   Grazing by domestic cattle and exploitation of mangrove woods for fuel and timber.
•   The neo-tectonic movement of river courses.
•   Abatement of upstream freshwater discharges due to construction of dams and reservoirs.
•   Rapid trend of reclamation of mangrove forests for habitations.
•   Pollutant discharges from cities and industries etc.

Composition of Mangroves in India: The very dense mangrove comprises 1,403 sq. km (30.10% of the total mangrove cover), moderately dense mangrove is 1,658.12 sq. km (35.57 %) while open mangroves cover an area of 1,600.44 sq. km (33%).




73.     Solution: d)

Recommendations of 255th Report of Law Commission with respect to ECI

•    Appointments of Chief Election Commissioners (CEC) and all Election Commissioners (ECs) - It should be made by the President in consultation with a three-member collegium or selection committee.

•    The collegium or committee shall consist of the Prime Minister, the Leader of the Opposition of the Lok Sabha (or the leader of the largest opposition party in the Lok Sabha) and the Chief Justice of India (CJI).

•    Seniority based elevation- The elevation of an EC should be on the basis of seniority. If senior EC is not appointed due to unfit reasons, the three member collegium or a committee give reasons in writing.

•    Equal constitutional protection to all members of the ECI- Equal constitutional protection must be given to all members of the ECI in matters of removability from office.

•    In this regard, Article 324(5) of the Constitution should be amended.






74.     Solution: a)



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    
Insights Mock Test Series – 2015: Test – 18 Solutions


•    The scheme is a web-enabled system created by National Pharmaceutical
Pricing Authority (NPPA).

•    It seeks to serve as a robust E-governance tool for protection of interests of consumers through effective implementation of the price of drugs.

•    The scheme will provide consumers with an online facility to redress their complaints related to over-pricing of medicines, non-availability of medicines and refusal of supply for sale of any medicine without good and sufficient reason.

•    After receiving the complaint, NPPA will initiate action on any complaint within 48 hrs.

•    The scheme also seeks to create awareness among the people and act as a deterrent against black-marketing, spurious medicines and inflated cost of drugs by creating phama-literacy initiative.






75.Solution: a)

Directorate General of Civil Aviation has restricted civil use of drones/unmanned aircraft systems (UAS) vide public notice dated 07.10.2014 available on DGCA`s website www.dgca.nic.in. As of now, the Aircraft Rules do not cover use of drones as well as its sale and purchase.

However, DGCA is in the process of developing an interim operations guideline for civil use of UAS. Till such regulations are issued, no non government agency, organization or an individual will launch a UAS in Indian Civil Airspace for any purpose whatsoever.

PIB Releases






76.     Solution: a)

The power of growth to lift all boats will depend critically on its employment creation potential. The data on longer-term employment trends are difficult to interpret because of the bewildering multiplicity of data sources, methodology and coverage. One tentative conclusion is that there has probably been a decline in long run employment growth in the 2000s relative to the 1990s and probably also a decline in the employment elasticity of growth: that is, a given amount of growth leads to fewer
jobs created than in the past.



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    
3
    
http://www.livemint.com/Opinion/zAcuIvXlzIfML7N2Q10L2H/Employment- elasticity-almost-zero.html






77.Solution: a)

Refer to Box 1.2 of the First Chapter – Volume 1 of the Economic Survey 2014-15. There are several other steps that have been taken to boost growth in the country. These are important and you should be aware of it.









78.     Solution: d)

Reforms of labor and land laws and reducing the costs of doing business will need to be a joint endeavor of the States and Center. The game-changing potential of implementing the GST and moving to technology enabled Direct Benefit Transfers— which we call the JAM (Jan Dhan-Aadhaar-Mobile) Number Trinity solution-should not be underestimated.

The objective should be to create a competitive, predictable, clean, and exemptions- light tax policy regime that will lower the cost of capital, incentivize savings, and facilitate taxpayer compliance.




79.     Solution: a)

JAM is an abbreviation for Jan Dhan Yojana, Aadhaar and Mobile number. The government is pinning its hopes on these three modes of identification to direct benefits transfers to poor. It will help to stop and control the lekages in subsudy. The Aadhaar Number is linked to an active bank account is key to implementing income transfers. With the introduction of Jan Dhan Yojana, the number of bank accounts is expected to increase further and offering greater opportunities to target and transfer financial resources to the poor.

The Centre and States pay wages such as MGNREGA, supply rice, wheat, pulses, cooking oil, sugar and kerosene at heavily subsidised prices through the PDS. Then, sectors such as power, fertilisers and oil sell their products to people below market prices. When all these are linked with JAM trinity then the corruption will be
reduced.





http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    
Insights Mock Test Series – 2015: Test – 18 Solutions







80.     Solution: a)

The persistence of moderated oil prices seems highly probable for at least three reasons: weaker global demand, increased supplies, and the global monetary and liquidity environment.

Demand will remain soft because of slow growth in major areas of the world economy, including China and Europe. Supply shifts are occurring related to the increase in crude-oil and shale gas production in the US and the concomitant decline in the oligopolistic power of OPEC, notably its swing producer, Saudi Arabia (which decided not to react to the increase in supply from other sources). Going forward, prices could increasingly be determined by the marginal cost of shale production estimated at around US$ 60-65 per barrel.






81.Solution: d)

The outlook is favourable for the current account and its financing. A likely surfeit, rather than scarcity, of foreign capital will complicate exchange rate management. Risks from a shift in US monetary policy an turmoil in the Eurozone need to be watched but could remain within control.

One source of concern is muted export growth and rising non-oil, non-gold imports which could be affected by India’s deteriorating competitiveness, reflected in the appreciation of the real effective exchange rate by 8.5 per cent since January 2014.






82.     Solution: a)

The Election Commission has been functioning as a multi-member body consisting of three election commissioners. It can be more too.

The chief election commissioner and the two other election commissioners have equal powers and receive equal salary, allowances and other perquisites, which are similar to those of a judge of the Supreme Court. In case of difference of opinion amongst the Chief Election Commissioner and/or two other election commissioners, the matter is decided by the Commission by majority. They hold office for a term of six years or until they attain the age of 65 years, whichever is earlier. They can resign
at any time or can also be removed before the expiry of their term.



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    
3
    








83.     Solution: d)

He cannot be removed from his office except in same manner and on the same grounds as a judge of the Supreme Court. In other words, he can be removed by the president on the basis of a resolution passed to that effect by both the Houses of Parliament with special majority, either on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity. Thus, he does not hold his office till the pleasure of the president, though he is appointed by him. The service conditions of the chief election commissioner cannot be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.




84.     Solution: a)

Some flaws can be noted in the Constitution with regard to the ECI, viz.,

•   The Constitution has not prescribed the qualifications (legal, educational, administrative or judicial) of the members of the Election Commission.
•   The Constitution has not specified the term of the members of the Election
Commission (the term of the Chief EC has been prescribed though).
•   The Constitution has not debarred the retiring election commissioners from any further appointment by the government.






85.     Solution: d)

In details, these powers and functions are:

•   To determine the territorial areas of the electoral constituencies throughout the country on the basis of the Delimitation Commission Act of Parliament.
•   To prepare and periodically revise electoral rolls and to register all eligible voters.
•   To notify the dates and schedules of elections and to scrutinise nomination papers.
•   To grant recognition to political parties and allot election symbols to them.
•   To act as a court for settling disputes related to granting of recognition to political parties and allotment of election symbols to them.
•   To appoint officers for inquiring into disputes relating to electoral
arrangements.



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    
Insights Mock Test Series – 2015: Test – 18 Solutions


•   To determine the code of conduct to be observed by the parties and the candidates at the time of elections.
•   To prepare a roster for publicity of the policies of the political parties on radio and TV in times of elections.
•   To advise the president on matters relating to the disqualifications of the members of Parliament.
•   To advise the governor on matters relating to the disqualifications of the members of state legislature.
•   To cancel polls in the event of rigging, booth capturing, violence and other irregularities.
•   To request the president or the governor for requisitioning the staff necessary for conducting elections.
•   To supervise the machinery of elections throughout the country to ensure free and fair elections.
•   To advise the president whether elections can be held in a state under president’s rule in order to extend the period of emergency after one year.
•   To register political parties for the purpose of elections and grant them the status of national or state parties on the basis of their poll performance






86.     Solution: a)

The Election Commission is assisted by deputy election commissioners. They are drawn from the civil service and appointed by the commission with tenure system. They are assisted, in turn, by the secretaries, joint secretaries, deputy secretaries and under secretaries posted in the secretariat of the commission.

At the state level, the Election Commission is assisted by the chief electoral officer who is appointed by the chief election commissioner in consultation with the state government. Below this, at the district level, the collector acts as the district
returning officer. He appoints a returning officer for every constituency in the district
and presiding officer for every polling booth in the constituency.









87.     Solution: a)

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) in its recent report – the
Fifth Assessment Report (AR5), published in 2014 — has observed that, there has





http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    
3
    
been an increasing trend in the anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse gases (GHG)
since the advent of the industrial revolution.

The change in the climate system is likely to have adverse impacts on livelihoods, cropping pattern and food security. Extreme heat events are likely to be longer and more intense in addition to changes in the precipitation patterns. Adverse impacts are likely to be felt more acutely in tropical zone countries such as India, and within India, the poor will be more exposed.




88.     Solution: a)

The move towards the formation of a socialist party was made in the jails during
1930-31 and 1932-34 by a group of young Congressmen who were disenchanted with Gandhian strategy and leadership and attracted by socialist ideology. Many of them were active in the youth movement of the late 1920s. In the jails they studied and discussed Marxian and other socialist ideas. Attracted by Marxism, communism and Soviet Union, they did not find themselves in agreement with the prevalent political line of the CPI. Many of them were groping towards an alternative. Ultimately they came together and formed the Congress Socialist Party (CSP) at Bombay in October
1934 under the leadership of Jayaprakash Narayan, Acharya Narendra Dev and
Minoo Masani. From the beginning, all the Congress socialists were agreed upon four basic propositions: that the primary struggle in India was the national struggle for freedom and that nationalism w..s a necessary stage on the way to socialism; that socialists must work inside the National Congress because it was the primary body leading the national struggle and, as Acharya Narendra Dev put it in 1934, It would
be a suicidal policy for us to cut ourselves 3ff from the national movement that the
Congress undoubtedly represents; that they must give the Congress and the national movement a socialist direction; and that to achieve this objective they must organize the workers and peasants in their class organizations, wage struggles for their economic demands and make them the social base of the national struggle.”




89.     Solution: a)



















http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    
Insights Mock Test Series – 2015: Test – 18 Solutions




































90.     Solution: a)

In simple words Gross Capital Formation is Investment. When people save, they tend to invest. The percentage of the investment made each year out of the total GDP is called Gross Capital Formation.

The importance of the Gross Capital formation lies in the fact that this is that part of GDP which helps in the growth of the GDP itself. This is a must for achieving high rate of production, capital formation, changes in production techniques and changing in the outlook of the people themselves.




91.Solution: d)

The various features of administration contained in the Fifth Schedule are as follows:

•   Declaration of Scheduled Areas: The president is empowered to declare an area to be a scheduled area. He can also increase or decrease its area, alter its boundary lines, rescind such designation or make fresh orders for such redesignation on an area in consultation with the governor of the state concerned.
•   Executive Power of State and Centre: The executive power of a state extends
to the scheduled areas therein. But the governor has a special responsibility



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    
3
    




regarding such areas. He has to submit a report to the president regarding the administration of such areas, annually or whenever so required by the president. The executive power of the Centre extends to giving directions to the states regarding the administration of such areas.
•   Tribes Advisory Council: Each state having scheduled areas has to establish a tribes advisory council to advise on welfare and advancement of the scheduled tribes. It is to consist of 20 members, three-fourths of whom are to be the representatives of the scheduled tribes in the state legislative assembly. A similar council can also be established in a state having scheduled tribes but
not scheduled areas therein, if the president so directs.




92.     Solution: b)

The tribal areas in the four states of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram have been constituted as autonomous districts. But, they do not fall outside the executive authority of the state concerned.

The governor is empowered to organise and re-organise the autonomous districts. Thus, he can increase or decrease their areas or change their names or define their boundaries and so on.

Each autonomous district has a district council consisting of 30 members, of whom four are nominated by the governor and the remaining 26 are elected on the basis of adult franchise.

The elected members hold office for a term of five years (unless the council is dissolved earlier) and nominated members hold office during the pleasure of the governor. Each autonomous region also has a separate regional council.









93.     Solution: a)

The district and regional councils administer the areas under their jurisdiction. They can make laws on certain specified matters like land, forests, canal water, shifting cultivation, village administration, inheritance of property, marriage and divorce, social customs and so on. But all such laws require the assent of the Governor.

The district and regional councils within their territorial jurisdictions can constitute village councils or courts for trial of suits and cases between the tribes. They hear appeals from them. The jurisdiction of high court over these suits and cases is
specified by the governor.




http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    
Insights Mock Test Series – 2015: Test – 18 Solutions







94.     Solution: b)

In assessing the risks and rewards of competing destinations, rational investors take into account not just macroeconomic stability (which proxies for risks) but also growth which crucially determines rewards and returns.

The RIRI is computed by averaging a country’s GDP growth rate and its macro- economic indicators; the latter measured as the average of the fiscal deficit, current account deficit, and inflation (all with negative signs). Thus, equal weight is given to growth and macroeconomic stability. The greater the number, the better should be its investor rating. Since, updated WEO forecasts are not publicly available for all countries, data are from Citi Group and have been updated in January assuming an
oil price in the range of US$ 58-60 per barrel for 2015. Data from other sources yield very similar estimates for the RIRI.






95.     Solution: a)

Gujarat has a ‘land-pooling’ model whereby 50 per cent of the land is acquired while the remaining 50 per cent is left with the original owners giving them a stake in the upsides generated by land monetisation. Maharashtra allows for ‘negotiated purchase’ involving various stakeholders. In Haryana and Rajasthan, trunk and industrial infrastructure are created by the state governments but private developers directly participate in the other activities. The value increase is captured by the states through development fees. Furthermore, in the initial DMIC master-planning process, the attempt was made to identify large, easy-to-acquire land parcels that were either barren or government owned




96.     Solution: a)

HDR measures inequality in terms of two indicators. The first indicator is the income
Gini

Coefficient which measures ‘the deviation of distribution of income (or consumption)
among the individuals within a country’ from a perfectly equal distribution. For India, the income Gini coefficient was 36.8 in 2010-11. In this respect, inequality in India is lower than many other developing countries, e.g., South Africa (57.8), Brazil (53.9), Thailand (53.6), Turkey (40.8), China (41.5), Sri Lanka (40.3), Malaysia
(46.2), Vietnam (37.6), as well as countries like USA (40.8), Hong Kong (43.4),




http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    
4
    
Argentina (45.8), Israel (39.2), Bulgaria (45.3) etc., which are otherwise ranked very high in terms of human development index.






97.     Solution: d)

The poverty estimates indicate that the highest poverty headcount ratio (HCR) exists in Bihar at 53.5 per cent as against the national average of 29.8 per cent. In 2009-10 compared to 2004-5, Bihar has displaced Odisha as the poorest state, Socio- Economic and Caste Census (SECC) with Odisha’s situation improving considerably in 2009-10. Lowest poverty is in Himachal Pradesh (9.5 per cent) followed by Kerala (12 per cent).

Bihar has the highest decadal (2001-11) growth rate of population (25.07 per cent), while Kerala has the lowest rate (4.86 per cent). Some big states like Gujarat, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, and Uttar Pradesh also have high decadal growth of population.






98.     Solution: b)

RSBY has been launched by Ministry of Labour and Employment, Government of India to provide health insurance coverage for Below Poverty Line (BPL) families. The objective of RSBY is to provide protection to BPL households from financial liabilities arising out of health shocks that involve hospitalization. Beneficiaries under RSBY are entitled to hospitalization coverage up to Rs. 30,000/- for most of the diseases that require hospitalization. Government has even fixed the package rates for the hospitals for a large number of interventions. Pre-existing conditions are covered from day one and there is no age limit.

Coverage extends to five members of the family which includes the head of household, spouse and up to three dependents. Beneficiaries need to pay only Rs.
30/- as registration fee while Central and State Government pays the premium to the
insurer selected by the State Government on the basis of a competitive bidding.




99.     Solution: c)

During India’s rapid growth phase between 2002-03 and 2008-09, the ratio of exports of services to GDP increased dramatically, from 4.0 percent to nearly 9.0 percent. In contrast, manufacturing exports were less buoyant After the global
financial crisis, however, the roles seem to have been reversed; manufacturing



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    
Insights Mock Test Series – 2015: Test – 18 Solutions


exports seem to have done better than services exports. More worrisome, however, both have slowed down in the last five years which does not augur well.




100.   Solution: a)

Duties that are imposed in order to counter the negative impact of import subsidies to protect domestic producers are called countervailing duties.


Description: In cases foreign producers attempt to subsidize the goods being exported by them so that it causes domestic production to suffer because of a shift in domestic demand towards cheaper imported goods, the government makes mandatory the payment of a countervailing duty on the import of such goods to the domestic economy.


This raises the price of these goods leading to domestic goods again being equally competitive and attractive. Thus, domestic businesses are cushioned. These duties can be imposed under the specifications given by the WTO (World Trade Organization) after the investigation finds that exporters are engaged in dumping.
These are also known as anti-dumping duties.









































http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Test  -­‐    18    
