    




INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK PRELIMINARY EXAM - 2015  


INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST - 20

GENERAL STUDIES  

PAPER-I

Time Allowed: 1.5 Hours                                                                                           Maximum Marks: 150  


INSTRUCTIONS
1.   IMMEDITELY AFTER THE COMMENCEMENT  OF THE EXAMINATION, YOU SHOULD
CHECK  THAT  THIS  TEST  BOOKLET   DOES  NOT  HAVE  ANY  UNPRINTED   OR  TORN  OR MISSING PAGES OR ITEMS, ETC. IF SO, GET IT REPLACED BY A COMPLETE TEST BOOKLET.
2.  You have to enter your Roll Number on the Test I Booklet in the Box provided alongside. DO NOT write anything else on the Test Booklet.

4.  This Test Booklet contains 75 items (questions). Each item is printed only in English. Each item comprises four responses (answers). You will select the response which you want to mark on the Answer Sheet. In case you feel that there is more than one correct response, mark the response which you consider the best. In any case, choose ONLY ONE response for each item.
5.  You have to mark all your responses ONLY on the separate Answer Sheet provided.  See directions in the
Answer Sheet.
6.  All items carry equal marks.

7.  Before you proceed to mark in the Answer Sheet the response to various items in the Test Booklet, you have to fill in some particulars in the Answer Sheet as per instructions  sent to you with your Admission Certificate.

8.  After  you  have  completed  filling  in all your  responses  on the Answer  Sheet  and  the examination  has concluded, you should hand over to the Invigilator only the Answer Sheet. You are permitted to take away with you the Test Booklet.

9.  Sheets for rough work are appended in the Test Booklet at the end.
10.  Penalty for wrong answers :
THERE WILL BE PENALTY FOR WRONG ANSWERS MARKED BY A CANDIDATE IN THE OBJECTIVE TYPE QUESTION PAPERS.
(i)    There are four alternatives for the answer to every question. For each question for which a wrong answer has been given by the candidate, one-third of the marks assigned to that question will be deducted as penalty.
(ii)   If a candidate gives more than one answer, it will be treated as a wrong answer even if one of the given answers happens to be correct and there will be same penalty as above to that question.
(iii)     If a question is left blank, i.e., no answer is given by the candidate, there will be no penalty for that question.




    
http://insightsonindia.com


INSIGHTS  ON    INDIA    MOCK    TEST    SERIES    FOR    CIVIL    SERVICES    PRELIMINARY    EXAM    2015    
    



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Page  1    
    
    

1.   Consider the following statements.

Assertion (A): The Central Information
Commission is not a constitutional body.

Reason (R): It has been established under the provisions of the Right to Information Act (2005).

In the context of the statements above, which of these is true?

a)  A and R both are true, and R is the correct explanation for A.
b)  A and R both are true, and R is the
NOT the correct explanation for A. c)  A is correct, R is incorrect.
d)  A and R both are incorrect.




2.  Consider the following statements about the Central Information Commission (CIC).
1.   The CIC consists of a Chairperson and two other members.
2.  MPs and MLAs are eligible to become members of the CIC.
3.  The Chairperson should be an
eminent justice in the opinion of the President or eligible to be a Supreme Court Judge.

Choose the correct answer from the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only. c)  3 only
d)  None of the above.




3.  The Central Information Commission is a/an
a)  high-powered independent body
which inter alia looks into the complaints made to it and decide
the appeals
b)  body that comes under Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, which inter alia looks into the complaints forwarded to it by the Ministry and decide the appeals
c)  independent body that refers to
complaints only submitted to it by the Department of Public Grievances
d)  quasi-judicial body that is supervised by one of the special benches of the Supreme Court, and works independently of the Government of India




4.  The Chief Information Commissioner is appointed by a selection committee consisting of
1.   Union Home Minister
2.  Union Law Ministry
3.  Chief Justice of India
4.  Lok Sabha Speaker
5.  Leader of Opposition, Rajya Sabha

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 4 and 5 only b)  All of the above
c)  None of the above d)  2, 3 and 4 only




5.  Which of the following are NOT eligible for reappointment to the office?
1.   Comptroller and Auditor General of
India
2.  Chief Information Commissioner
3.  Chairman, UPSC
4.  Chief Election Commissioner

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Page  2    
    
    


a)  1, 3 and 4 only b)  All of the above c)  1 and 2 only
d)  2, 3 and 4 only




6.  The Chief State Information
Commissioner can be removed by
a)  the State Governor after an enquiry by the Supreme Court upholds the cause of removal
b)  the State Governor after an enquiry
by the High Court upholds the cause of removal
c)  the President after an enquiry by
the Supreme Court upholds the cause of removal
d)  the President after an enquiry by a
Parliamentary Committee upholds the cause of removal




7.   Consider the following statements about the Constituent assembly of India.
1.   Its constitution was finally subject to the approval of the British Parliament.
2.  The selection of representatives of various Indian states was flexible and decided by consultation.
3.  Members of the CA from Provinces were elected directly from the
people by a very limited franchise.


8.  Consider the following statements about the appointment of CVC.
1.   He is appointed by the President.
2.  The recommendation of the nominee of the post comes from the Council of Ministers.
3.  Appointment of CVC cannot be
challenged in court.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only d)  1 only




9.  Consider the following procedures.
1.   President referring the matter to the Lok Sabha.
2.  Inquiry by the Supreme Court.
3.  Parliament passes the motion by a simple majority in both the houses.

Which of the following procedures are followed in the removal of CVC. Choose the order that is chronological from the ones given below.

a)  123 b)  213
c)  2 only d)  13 only

Which of the above is/are true?

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only d)  2 only
10. Which of the following ministries/departments/organs of the Government of India (GoI) have a bearing on the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI)?
1.   Ministry of Law and Justice
2.  Ministry of Home Affairs
3.  CVC
4.  UPSC
5.  Department of Personnel and
Training

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Page  3    
    
    
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 3 only b)  All of the above
c)  None of the above d)  1, 3 and 5 only




11. Which of the following powers/responsibilities are exercised by CVC?
1.   Part of the Selection Committee in the appointment of the Director, CBI
2.  Instituting inquiries against
Union and State Ministers
3.  Superintendence of Police in matters of corruption

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only
c)  None of the above d)  1 only




12. Which of the following domains are handled by the CBI for investigation and reporting?
1.   cyber and high technology crime
2.  transnational organised crime
3.  Economic crimes

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only
c)  All of the above d)  3 only


13. Which of the following is/are NOT National Investment and Manufacturing Zones (NIMZs) that have been approved in principle by the Government of India (GoI)?
1.   Kolar in Karnataka
2.  Prakasam in Andhra Pradesh
3.  Nagpur in Maharashtra
4.  Chittor in Andhra Pradesh

Choose the correct matches using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  2 and 4 only c)  4 only
d)  All are NMIZs.




14. In order to boost the MSME sector, several schemes are operational. Some of the major initiatives taken for the development of this sector are
1.   Technology Centre Systems
Programme
2.  India Inclusive Innovation Fund
3.  Credit Linked Capital Subsidy
4.  Credit Guarantee Scheme
5.  MSE-Cluster Development
Programme

Choose the correct matches using the codes below.

a)  1, 3 and 5 only b)  2 and 3 only
c)  2, 4 and 5 only d)  All of the above




15. According to the Financial Sector Legislative Reforms Commission (FSLRC), what are the core functions of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI)?
1.   Controlling inflation
2.  Public debt management
3.  Banking supervision

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Page  4    
    
    
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




16. Who/Which among the following comes under the jurisdiction of the Lokpal?
1.   Prime Minister
2.  All categories of public servants.
3.  Entities receiving donation from foreign sources

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only
c)  All of the above d)  3 only




17. RESIDEX launched by the National Housing Board of India measures the a)  movement of prices in the
residential housing segment.
b)  growth rate of the construction of residences in the residential housing segment.
c)  growth rate of the real state sector
in general
d)  movement of prices in the real state sector in general.




18. The Government of India Act, 1919 popularly known as Montague Chelmsford Act was significant in which of the following ways?
1.   Established a responsible
Parliamentary system of
Government in the country


2.  The final decision on all important questions was no more in the hands of the Viceroy
3.   It relaxed previously stringent
control of centre on provinces. Which of the above is/are true?
a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only d)  3 only




19. The demand for a constituent
assembly was made officially by Indian National Congress for the first time at a)  Second Round table conference
b)  After the departure of Simon
Commission
c)  the time of Gandhi-Irwin Pact d)  None of the above





20.Consider the following about the power of inquiry of the Central Information Commission. The CIC
1.   can exercise suo-moto inquiry
powers
2.  has powers similar to a civil court during inquiry
3.  may examine any record which is under the control of the public authority

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Page  5    
    
    


21. The 97th Constitutional Amendment Act of 2011 gave a constitutional status and protection to co-operative societies. In this context, which of the following changes were made in the constitution?
1.   Right to form co-operative
societies became a fundamental right
2.  It included a new Directive Principle of State Policy on promotion of co-operative societies
3.   It established a Central constitutional authority for overseeing matters related to cooperatives.




23. Consider the following about the composition of the Lokpal at the Central Level.
1.   50 per cent of the members shall
be judicial members.
2.  Seats are reserved for minority and women in Lokpal members.
3.  One member will be an eminent jurist nominated by the President.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only
c)  All of the above
d)  3 only
Choose the correct answer using the codes
below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only
c)  All of the above d)  3 only




22. The Constitution of India contains explicit and specific provisions for which of following language related aspects?
1.   Directive for development of the
Hindi language
2.  Facilities for instruction in mother-tongue at primary stage for Children
3.  Language to be used in
representation for redress of grievances

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only
c)  All of the above
d)  1 and 2 only
24. Consider the following statements.

Assertion (A): Despite Agriculture being a State Subject, the Centre can legislate on it even in ordinary circumstances.

Reason (R): Agriculture is a means of livelihood to a majority of population in India. The Parliament legislates in national interest.

In the context of the statements above, which of these is true?

a)  A and R both are true, and R is the correct explanation for A.
b)  A and R both are true, and R is the
NOT the correct explanation for A. c)  A is incorrect, R is correct.
d)  A and R both are incorrect.

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Page  6    
    
    


25. Consider the following statements.
1.   Wind gaps in the course of a river do not allow the construction of upland roads and railways.
2.  Deltas are less preferred sites than estuaries for the siting of large ports.


d)  there was a need to increase investment in the Oil sector by squeezing extra resources



28. Consider the following statements about the recently undocked

Which of the above is/are true?

a)  1 only b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None




26. India’s economic growth rate has reduced over the last few years. Which of the following sectors have been unaffected by this reduction in growth?
1.   Construction
2.  Electricity
3.  Mining
4.  Manufacturing

Choose the correct matches using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  2 and 4 only c)  4 only
d)  All have been affected.




27. Offshore companies will now be taxable in India, if key management decisions are being taken from India. This move by the Government was necessitated because
a)  Shell companies were being used in business transactions to evade taxes.
b)  Such offshore companies extract
India’s oil resources; hence the tax. c)  Offshore companies were being
used for organized crime.
submarine Kalvari.
1.   It has been built indigenously.
2.  It has stealth capability.
3.  It cannot operate in any other environment than tropics.
4.  It can be used for intelligence gathering purposes.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  All of the above b)  1, 2 and 4 only c)  2 and 4 only
d)  1 and 3 only




29. Consider the following about the composition, powers and appointments related to the Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT).
1.   The Chairman and members are
appointed by a collegiums consisting of senior Supreme court judges headed by the Chief Justice of India.
2.  The members are drawn from both
judicial and administrative stream.
3.  CAT orders and decrees are final, and no provision of appeal lies whatsoever.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  2 only
d)  1 and 3 only



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Page  7    
    
    


30. DigiLocker can be used to securely store e-documents as well as store Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) link of e-documents issued by various
issuer departments of the Government. For a user, which of the things are indispensable to register for
Digilocker?
1.   Mobile number
2.  Aadhaar number
3.  E-mail ID
4.  Bank Account
5.  Residence proof

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1; and either 2 or 3 b)  2, 3 and 4 only
c)  2; and either 1 or 3 d)  2, 4 and 5 only





31. 4538 Vishyanand is a minor planet named after India’s first chess grandmaster Vishwanathan Anand. Consider the following statements about minor planets.
1.   A large comet can be designated as a minor planet.
2.  It also includes dwarf planets that orbit around the Sun.
3.  International Astronomical Union
(IAU) is also responsible for naming the minor planets.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only
c)  All of the above. d)  1 and 3 only
32. In recently released 2015 FM Global Resilience Index, India has been ranked 119 out of 130 countries. Which of the following factors are taken into account in the index?
1.   Quality of fire risk management
2.  Quality of natural hazard management
3.  Corruption control
4.  GDP
5.  Political risk

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 3 only b)  2, 3 and 4 only c)  1, 4 and 5 only d)  All of the above




33. Union Government recently has unveiled new Foreign Trade Policy (FTP) to make India an exporting powerhouse in the next five years. Which of the following areas have been addressed in the FTP?
1.   E-commerce
2.  Skill India programme
3.  Paperless governance

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only
c)  All of the above. d)  1 and 3 only



34. The provisions of the 97th amendment cover which of the following aspects related to cooperatives?
1.   Regulation
2.  Winding-up


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Page  8    
    
    


3.  Appointment of Board of
Directors
4.  Auditing


37. Consider the following statements about the fishery sector of India.
1.   India ranks second in world fish
production.
Choose the correct answer using the codes
below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only
c)  All of the above
d)  1 and 4 only




35. In deciding the official language of a
State, the choice of the state is a)  Limited to the languages
mentioned in the Eighth Schedule of the Constitution
b)  Limited to the languages officially
recognized by the State
Government
c)  Either an aboriginal language or a classical language or English/Hindi
d)  Not limited; any language can be
choose.




36. Which of the following is the criterion for a language to be officially recognized in a State of India?
a)  If the Governor is satisfied that a
certain language should be recognized; and declares so officially
b)  If the State Legislature passes a resolution to that effect
c)  When the President is satisfied that a substantial population of the state speaks that particular language; and declares so officially
d)  None of the above
2.  More fishing volume comes from the inland sector rather than the marine sector.
3.  Fisheries contribute more than
50% of the agricultural GDP.

Choose the correct matches using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




38. If the Model Agricultural Produce Marketing Committee (APMC) Act is implemented successfully all across India, it will result in
1.   Closure of government sponsored mandis
2.  barrier-free and tax-free national market for agri commodities
3.  freedom of trading in futures
market of agricultural commodities

Choose the correct matches using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  3 only
d)  None of the above




39. Consider the following statements about food procurement in India.
1.   Coarse grains are procured by state governments and their agencies.
2.  FCI is responsible both for open-
ended procurement and storage of foodgrains.


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Page  9    
    
    


3.  Decentralized Procurement Scheme (DCP) has been adopted by all state governments.


2.  The sea adjoining the delta should be shallow.
3.  There should be no large lakes in
the river course.
Choose the correct matches using the codes
below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  3 only
d)  All of the above




40.Leeves are formed in a flood plain when the river
a)  flows normally in a bed that rises
by the accumulation of deposits
b)  flows rapidly in a bed that has been eroded by large granular deposits
c)  falls near a river cliff and accumulates the deposit thereof
d)  is just nearing the Delta plains




41. Deltas are formed when a river nears the sea and starts depositing its sediment load in the plains. Which of the following can be the consequences of delta formation?
1.   Change of river course
2.  Formation of several distributaries of the original river
3.  Fertility of the local soil increases.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




42. Which of the following conditions are favourable for the formation of Deltas?
1.   Coast should be sheltered,
preferably tideless.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




43. To ensure last-mile connectivity, extension services need to be geared to address emerging technological and knowledge needs. Under this, the Sub Mission on Agricultural Extension (SMAE) under the National Mission on Agricultural Extension and Technology (NMAET) was revamped. Which of the following has been subsumed under it?
1.   District-level Agriculture Technology Management Agencies (ATMAs)
2.  Mass Media and Kisan Call Centre schemes
3.  Central-sector Establishment of Agri-Clinics and Agri-Business Centres (ACABC) Scheme
4.  SMS portal for farmers

Choose the correct matches using the codes below.

a)  All of the above b)  2 and 3 only
c)  2, 3 and 4 only d)  1 and 4 only




44. Horticulture sector comprising a wide array of crops. India is the largest producer of which of the following?
1.   Mango
2.  Banana

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  10    
    
    


3.  Coconut
4.  Pomegranate
5.  Papaya
6.  Cashew


Choose the correct matches using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  2 and 3 only
b)  1, 4, 5 and 6 only c)  1, 2, 3 and 5 only d)  All of the above




45. Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs) have been identified as one of the key strategies for achieving inclusive agricultural growth during the Twelfth Plan. In this regards, consider the following statements with reference to the role of The Small Farmers’ Agribusiness Consortium (SFAC).
1.   It is the central procurement agency for undertaking price support operations under MSP for pulses and oilseeds.
2.  The SFAC is the nodal agency of
FPOs and will operate only through
FPOs at the farm gate. Which of the above is correct?
a)  1 only b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2 d)  None




46. Consider the following statements.
1.   Vertical erosion is dominant in the upper courses of the river.
2.  Incised meanders are features of river rejuvenation.
3.  Mass movement of earth is mainly due to the lubricating action of
rain-water and gravitational forces.
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




47. Piedmont glaciers are formed when


1.   Glaciers slowly erode the base soil and reach the feet of the mountain
2.   steep valley glaciers spill into
relatively flat plains
3.   glaciers spread out in bulb-like lobes

Choose the correct matches using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




48. Consider the following statements about Central Services and All-India Services.
1.   Any disciplinary action (imposition
of penalties) against these officers can only be taken by the Central government.
2.  The personnel of Central services (even though are posted in states) work under the exclusive jurisdiction of the Central government.

Which of the above is/are true?

a)  1 only b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2 d)  None

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  11    
    
    




49. Article 323 A empowers the Parliament to provide for the establishment of administrative tribunals for the adjudication of disputes relating to recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to public services of the
1.   Other Public Authorities
2.  State
3.  Local Bodies
4.  Public Corporations


2.  By rift valleys due to faulting
3.  By glaciations
4.  By volcanic activity

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  All of the above
b)  None of the above c)  1 and 3 only
d)  2 and 4 only




52. Recently RBI seems to be concerned
Choose the correct answer using the codes
below.

a)  All of the above b)  2 only
c)  2, 3 and 4 only d)  3 and 4 only




50. In the globe, the possibility of finding a desert is highest in the regions
1.   which are within 15-30 degrees of North-south latitude from the equator
2.  which lie on the western sides of the continents where trade winds are offshore
3.  that near cold currents

Choose the correct matches using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




51. Lakes are among the most varied features of the earth’s surface. In which of the following ways can lakes be formed?
1.   By tectonic action
with the ‘Sacrifice ratio’ in deciding monetary policy matters. Sacrifice ratio is
a)  cumulative output losses that an economy must endure to reduce average inflation, on a permanent basis, by one percentage point
b)  the multiplier effect of the
liquidity injected by the Central bank in the economy divided for every one percentage of deposit ratio sacrificed by banks
c)  the amount of fiscal stimulus flexibility foregone by the government for each percentage point hike in the monetary policy indicators
d)  None of the above




53. The National Green Tribunal (NGT) has recently ordered banning of diesel vehicles older than 10 years in the capital city of India. Why are old cars with Diesel engines a problem for the environment?
1.   They emit more CO2 than normal
petrol cars.
2.  Diesel cars emit several times more
NO2 than petrol cars.
3.  They emit more hydrocarbons than petrol engines.

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  12    
    
    
Choose the correct matches using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only d)  2 only




54. If a river is passing through an area where rocks are composed of homogenous beds of uniform resistance to corrosion, then
1.   The tributaries will join the main
valley obliquely as insequent streams
2.  The evolving drainage pattern will
be tree-like in appearance.
3.  It will not form a catchment area.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




55. Consider the following features in a drainage system.
1.   Interlocking spurs
2.  Meanders
3.  River cliffs
4.  Rapids and waterfalls

Which of the above will be found in the middle course of the river system?

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  3 and 4 only
d)  1, 2 and 3 only




56. Consider the following matches of river with the countries that they separate.


1.   Oder – Germany & Poland
2.  Mekong – Laos & Thailand
3.  Yalu – North Korea & China

Choose the correct matches using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




57. India meets the production needs of which of the following fertilizers domestically (i.e. majority share need not be imported)?
1.   Urea
2.  Potassic fertilizer
3.  Phosphoric fertilizer

Choose the correct matches using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only d)  1 only




58. Ultra-processed junk foods are known to be a health hazard as they are high in
1.   Trans fats
2.  Salt
3.  Hydrocarbons
4.  Fats

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 4 only b)  1 only
c)  1 and 3 only d)  2 and 4 only

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  13    
    
    


59. The government has recently launched National Air Quality Index (NAQI). Which of the following air pollutants will be reported by the NAQI?
1.   Ozone
2.  Particulate matter
3.  Hydrocarbons
4.     CO2


authorised to provide for the establishment of tribunals for the adjudication of disputes relating to which of the following matters?
1.   Food stuffs
2.  Rent and tenancy rights
3.  Industrial labour
4.  Elections to State legislatures

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  2 and 3 only b)  4 only
c)  1 and 2 only d)  1 and 4 only




60.India is NOT one the world’s top producers of
1.   Rice
2.  Wheat
3.  Milk
4.  Fruits
5.  Vegetables

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  All of the above
b)  India is one of the world’s top producers of all of these.
c)  2 and 4 only
d)  1, 3 and 5 only




61. In the functioning of the Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT), it is guided by and follows the
a)  Civil Procedure Code of 1908 b)  Principles of natural justice
c)  Criminal Procedure Code d)  Indian Penal Code



62. Under Article 323 B, the Parliament and the state legislatures are
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  All of the above b)  2 only
c)  2, 3 and 4 only d)  3 and 4 only




63. Consider the following statements.

Statement (S): Under the Constitution, the civil servants are conferred personal immunity from legal liability for official contracts.

Implication (I): The government (Central or state) is liable for the contracts made by Civil servants.

In the context of the statements above, choose the correct option from the following.

a)  Both S and I are correct, and I
follows correctly from S.
b)  Both S and I are correct, but I does not follow correctly from S.
c)  S is correct, but I is incorrect. d)  Both S and I are incorrect.




64. With regards to the distribution and procurement of food, which of the following provisions have NOT been provided in the National Food Security Act, 2013?
1.   grievance redressal mechanisms at
district and state levels

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  14    
    
    


2.  In case of non-supply of entitled foodgrains or meals, the beneficiaries will receive a food security allowance
3.  doorstep delivery of foodgrains to
Targeted PDS outlets


b)  3 and 4 only
c)  None of the above d)  All of the above

67. In a glacial landscape, arrange the following in the order from which they occur from the foot of the mountain
Choose the correct matches using the codes
below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  3 only
d)  All have been provided




65. As per the Public Procurement Policy for Micro & Small Enterprises (MSEs)
1.   Every central
ministry/department/public sector-undertaking shall set a minimum annual procurement (purchase) goal from MSEs.
2.  There is provision for mandatory government purchase from MSEs owned by SC and ST entrepreneurs.

Which of the above is/are true?

a)  1 only b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None




66. In recent years, which of the following sectors have attracted some of the least Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in India?
1.   Automobile industry
2.  Metallurgical Industries
3.  Drugs and pharmaceuticals
4.  Power

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only
range?
1.   Moraines
2.  Crevasses
3.  Arete
4.  Corrie

Choose the correct order from the codes below.

a) 1234 b) 4321 c) 4213 d)  1342




68. Consider the following statements about the movement of glaciers.
1.   If more snow and ice are added
than are lost through melting, calving, or evaporation, glaciers will advance.
2.  Glaciers move by
internal deformation.
3.  The middle of a glacier moves faster than its sides.

Choose the correct matches using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




69. In India, the share of services sector in the overall GDP of the state is the lowest and highest respectively in which of the following states?
a)  Arunachal Pradesh & Chandigarh

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  15    
    
    


b)  Sikkim & Delhi
c)  Chattisgarh & Mizoram d)  Sikkim & Goa




70. Consider the following statements about the Service Sector in India & World.
1.   India’s share in world services
exports has been increasing faster than its share in world merchandise exports.
2.  Services Sector’s share in the World
GDP is more than 50%.
3.  Unlike major European and Western countries, the shares of both Service income (per capita) and service sector employment is
low in both India and China.


frame her constitution, Cripps mission was sent in 1942 to India. Which of the following were a part of the agreement offered by the mission?
1.   The constitution of India was to be framed by an elected constituent assembly of people.
2.  Any province has the rights not to accept the constitution.
3.  British government had rights to enter into agreements with specific Indian states.

Which of the above is/are true?

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above

Which of the above is/are true?

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




71. Consider the following statements about Central Vigilance Commission (CVC).
1.   Originally the CVC was neither a
constitutional body nor a statutory body.
2.  It is free of functional control from any executive authority.

Which of the above is/are correct?

a)  1 only b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None

73. Consider the following statements about the impact and occurrence of El- nino in the Indian subcontinent in the last decade?
1.   While El-Nino has occurred every
year in the last decade, agricultural productivity has not been affected negatively every year.
2.  El-Nino has affected only Kharif crops, not Rabi crops.
3.  The production of crops like Sugarcane, groundnut and soyabean also take a hit due to El- Nino.

Choose the correct matches using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only d)  3 only




72. With the recognition by the British government that India should herself
http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  16    
    
    


74. Consider the following statements about the Gross Capital Formation (GCF) in the agriculture sector of India?
1.   Public sector invests more in GCF
than private sector.
2.  Public sector GCF is largely subsidies.
3.  Private sector GCF has not created
any irrigation or water-saving infrastructure.


New Policy on Seed Development
(NPSD) that include
1.   permitting 100 per cent foreign direct investment (FDI) under the automatic route
2.  simplifying the procedure for
inclusion of new varieties in the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) Seeds Scheme
3.  creation of a seed bank

Choose the correct matches using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only d)  2 only



75. Several important policy initiatives have been taken under the amended
Choose the correct matches using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above
    




































http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  17    
    
