
INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK PRELIMINARY EXAM - 2014


INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST - 5

GENERAL STUDIES

PAPER-I

Time Allowed: Two Hours                                                                               Maximum Marks: 200


INSTRUCTIONS
1.   IMMEDITELY AFTER THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE EXAMINATION, YOU SHOULD
CHECK  THAT  THIS  TEST  BOOKLET  DOES  NOT  HAVE  ANY  UNPRINTED  OR  TORN  OR MISSING PAGES OR ITEMS, ETC. IF SO, GET IT REPLACED BY A COMPLETE TEST BOOKLET.
2.  You have to enter your Roll Number on the Test I Booklet in the Box provided alongside. DO NOT write anything else on the Test Booklet.

4.  This Test Booklet contains 100 items (questions). Each  item is  printed only in  English. Each item comprises four responses (answers). You will select the response which you want to mark on the Answer Sheet. In case you feel that there is more than one correct response, mark the response which you consider the best. In any case, choose ONLY ONE response for each item.
5.  You have to mark all your responses ONLY on the separate Answer Sheet provided. See directions in the
Answer Sheet.
6.  All items carry equal marks.

7.  Before you proceed to mark in the Answer Sheet the response to various items in the Test Booklet, you have to fill in some particulars in the Answer Sheet as per instructions sent to you with your Admission Certificate.

8.  After you have completed filling in all your responses on the Answer Sheet and the examination has concluded, you should hand over to the Invigilator only the Answer Sheet. You are permitted to take away with you the Test Booklet.

9.  Sheets for rough work are appended in the Test Booklet at the end.
10.  Penalty for wrong answers :
THERE WILL BE PENALTY FOR WRONG ANSWERS MARKED BY A CANDIDATE IN THE OBJECTIVE TYPE QUESTION PAPERS.
(i)   There are four alternatives for the answer to every question. For each question for which a wrong answer has been given by the candidate, one-third of the marks assigned to that question will be deducted as penalty.
(ii)   If a candidate gives more than one answer, it will be treated as a wrong answer even if one of the given answers happens to be correct and there will be same penalty as above to that question.
(iii)    If a question is left blank, i.e., no answer is given by the candidate, there will be no penalty for that question.


http://insightsonindia.com


INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST SERIES FOR CIVIL SERVICES PRELIMINARY EXAM 2014





http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                        Page 1
1.   Factors affecting ocean salinity are,


1.  The   salinity   of   water   in   the surface layer of  oceans depend mainly on evaporation and precipitation.
2. Surface   salinity    is    greatly influenced in  coastal regions by the fresh water flow from rivers, and in polar regions by the processes of freezing and thawing of ice.
3.  Wind,  also  influences salinity of
an area  by transferring water to other areas

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 Only
b.  1 and 2 Only c.  2 and 3 Only d.  All


2.   Consider the following statements
1. The   dominant  thinking   in economics before Keynes was that  all  the  labourers who  are ready to work will  find employment and all the factories will be working at their full capacity.
2.   Keynes’ approach was to examine
the working of the economy in its entirety and examine the interdependence  of the different sectors.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 Only
b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None


3. Consider the following statements about earthquakes


1.   The  point  where the  energy is released is called the epicenter.
2.   The  energy waves travelling in
different directions reach the surface. The point on the surface, nearest to the epicenter, is called hypocenter.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are incorrect?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None

4.  Consider the following:


1.    Most  Ashokan inscriptions  were in the Pali language while those in the northwest of  the subcontinet were in Aramaic and Greek.
2. Most Ashokan inscriptions were written in the Brahmi script; however, some, in the northwest, were written in Kharosthi.


Which of the above is/are correct?


a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None


5. Consider the following statements about the   recent   Supreme   Court   order   on


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 2
creating  a National Environment Appraisal and Monitoring Authority (NEAMA) :

1.     It  would  take away the powers of forest clearances from the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF).

2. NEAMA will be responsible for  implementing the  Forest Policy.
3. It will be independent from the MoEF,  but not from the influence of the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA).

Which  of the following is/are  true in this connection?

a.   Only 2 b.  2 and 3 c.  1 and 3
d.  All of the above


6. According to Wegener, who gave continental drift theory, the movement responsible for the drifting of the continents was caused by
1.   The polar-fleeing force
2.   The tidal force
3.  The convection currents

Which of the above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only
b.  1 and 2 Only c.  2 Only
d.  All Three
7.  Consider the following with respect to the powers of the Rajya Sabha :


1.   Considers  and approves non money bills   and suggests   amendments  to money bills.
2. Approves                   constitutional amendments.
3.  Exercises  control over executive by asking questions, introducing motions and resolutions.
4.  It can alone initiate the procedure for removal of Vice President.

Which  of  the statements  given  above is/are correct?

a.   3 Only
b.  2 and 3 Only
c.  1, 2 and 3 Only
d.  1, 2, 3 and 4 Only



8. Consider the following statements about capital goods


1. While        they       make production of other commodities feasible, they themselves don’t get transformed in  the production process.
2. They   are   the  crucial backbone of  any production process, in aiding and enabling  the production to take place.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are characteristics of a capitalist  economy?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 3
c.  Both d.  None

9.  Which   of  the  followings  is/are   true about National Ganga River Basin Authority (NGBA)?



1.  It  is  the  monitoring and coordinating authority for the Ganga river basin protection.

2.    It  plays an important role in financial planning  for    the   Ganga    river   basin.
3.   One of the objectives of NGBA  is  to
protect  overuse  of   Ganga   river  water.
4. It is supported by World Bank.

Select the correct answer using the codes below

a.   1 and 3
b.  1,2 and 4
c.  All of the above d.  Only 3


10. Which  of the following is/are  correct with  reference to  the  Public  Interest Litigation (PIL)?


1.   It has expanded the scope of Article
21
2.   It has led to overburdening of courts
3.  It may be introduced in a  ‘court of law’ by the court itself.
4.  It can be filed either in High Court
or Supreme Court
Select the correct code. a.   1 Only
b.  1, 2 and 4 Only c.  2 and 4 Only
d.  1, 2, 3 and 4
11. When  the  availability of  water in different storages and reservoirs like aquifers, lakes, reservoirs,  etc.  falls below  what  the  precipitation can replenish, then it is called as


a.   Meteorological drought b.  Hydrological drought
c.  Agricultural drought d.  Ecological drought

12. Consider  the  following  statements about Consumer Price Index (CPI)

1.   CPI is  the index of prices of a  given   basket of commodities which are bought by the representative consumer.
2.   CPI  is  generally  expressed in percentage terms.
3.  CPI  is   one  of  the  most
frequently  used   statistics for  identifying periods  of inflation or deflation.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are incorrect?

a.  1 Only
b.  2 and 3 Only
c.  3 Only
d.  None

13. Asoka was arguably the most famous ruler  of  early India.  Consider  the following statements:


1.   In none of the Asokan inscriptions, the name of the ruler, Asoka, is mentioned. What  is  mentioned instead are  titles   adopted by  the ruler   –  devanampiya and piyadassi .
2.    Asoka  was  the  first   ruler

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 4
who  inscribed  his  messages to his  subjects and officials on stone surfaces.


Which of the above is/are correct?


a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None



14. “These  clouds  are  formed at  high altitudes (8,000 -  12,000m).  They are thin and detached clouds having a   feathery     appearance. They   are always white in colour.”

The above description refers to which type of cloud?

a.   Cumulus b.  Cirrus
c.  Cumulonimbus d.  Stratus


15. The Unionist  party was a  powerful political  party  during  the  period
1923-47.   Consider    the   following
about this party:



1. The  party represented the interests  of  landholders  – Hindu,  Muslim   and also  the Sikh.
2.  The party was particularly powerful in  the Punjab region and it did not favour the creation    of    Pakistan    as    a
separate state.


Which of the above is/are correct?


a.   1 Only
b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None



16. The Census  of India  defines an urban area as having:


1.   A minimum population of 10000
2.   At least 50 per cent of male working population engaged  in non- agricultural occupations.
3.  A  density of population of at  least
400 persons per sq. Select the correct code.
a)  3 Only b) 1 Only
c)  1 and 2 Only d) 1 and 3 Only

17.    The CAG  recently unveiled a  major scam relating to the violation of the policy of  compensatory  afforestration (CA). Consider the following statements about the policy:

1.  It is compulsory to follow this policy while awarding projects which destroy forests in India.
2. Compensatory    Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority (CAMPA) implements this policy.
3.  The       non-availability       of
suitable  non-forest  land  for CA has to be certified only by the Chief  Secretary of the State/UT.

Which  of the following is/are  true in this connection?

a) All of the above

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 5
b) None of the above c) 1 and 3
d) 1 and 2

18. Consider    the    following    statements about temperature


1.  Compared to land, the sea  gets heated  slowly  and loses  heat slowly.  Land heats  up and cools down quickly.
2.   The   variation   in   temperature over the sea is more compared to land.
3.  The places situated near the sea come under the moderating influence  of  the  sea  and land breezes which  moderate the temperature.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.  1 and 2 Only c.  1 Only
d.  2 and 3 Only

19. Arya Samaj was a  North Indian Hindu reform organisation of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, particularly active in the Punjab. Consider  the  following statements about Arya Samaj:


1.    Arya  Samaj was  founded by M G Ranade in 1875.
2.     It sought  to revive Vedic learning and combine it with  modern education in the sciences.
3.   It  regards the  Vedas  as infallible.
4. Arya   Samaj  professed "Shuddhi" to bring back to the Hindu fold those who had  recently  converted to Islam.


Which of the above is/are incorrect?


a. 1 Only
b. 2 and 4 Only c. 1 and 2 Only d. 1 and 4 Only



20. GDP of a country as an index of greater well-being of the people of that country may not be correct because,
1.   Many    activities    in    an
economy are not evaluated in monetary terms.
2.   The presence of positive or negative externalities affects the actual estimation of GDP

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None
21. Which    of   the   following   statements is/are  correct with reference to the powers of the Supreme Court of India?


1.   It can transfer any Judge  of a  High
Court.
2.   It can deal with any case within the jurisdiction of the State.
3.  It can move cases from any court to itself.
4.  Its decisions  may be binding on all
courts.


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 6
5.  It can transfer cases from one High
Court to another High Court
Select the correct code. a.   4 and 5 Only
b.  1, 3 and 5 Only
c.  1, 2, 3 and 5 Only d.  1, 2, 3, 4 and 5

22. Consider the following:


1. The  Muslim  League was floated in  Dhaka   in  1906, with a separate Muslim state as their goal.
2.    The  name Pakistan  or  Pak- stan (from  Punjab,  Afghan, Kashmir, Sind and Baluchistan) was  coined  by
Muhammad Iqbal, the composer of Saare Jahan  se achcha.


Which of the above is/are correct?


a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None


23. Consider    the    following    statements
about “Plant Succession” :


1.     It  is  a   directional non- seasonal          cumulative change   in    the    types of plant species that occupy    a      given     area through time.
2.   Succession begins only when an area is made partially or completely devoid     of     vegetation
because of a disturbance.
Which  of the following is/are  true in this connection?

a.   Only 1 b.  Only 2 c.  Both
d.  None

24. Consider  the  following  statements about the Sufi saints:


1. The   Dargah   of   Shaikh Nizamuddin Auliya is located in Delhi.
2.    The famous Dargah of Ajmer
is     the    tomb    of    Shaikh
Muinuddin Sijzi.
3. Both   Shaikh  Nizamuddin Auliya and Shaikh Muinuddin Sijzi   belong  to   the   Chisti silsila.


Which of the above is/are correct?


a.   1 and 2 Only b.  1 and 3 Only c.  2 and 3 Only d.  All the above


25. Consider    the    following    statements about cyclones


1.  The   energy   to    the   tropical cyclone comes from the latent heat released  by the warm moist air.
2.   Hence,   with   the   increase   in
distance from the sea, the force of the cyclone decreases.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 7
c.  Both d.  None

26. Lord Dalhousie is  one of  the famous Governers-General in  India.  Consider the following statements about Dalhousie:


1.  Lord  Dalhousie's  policy  of "refrain from annexations" creation affection towards him among the people.
2. Dalhousie was a  progressive Governer-General, he was responsible  for  the introduction of post and telegraph system in India.
3. Dalhousie  introduced  many administrative as  well  as educational reforms  during  his
period in  office  in  India  as  the
Governer-General.


Which of the above is/are correct?


a.   1 and 2 Only b.  1 and 3 Only c.  2 and 3 Only d.  All the above


27. The  following  forms  of  relationships exist  between man and his  environment according to  the development of geographical thought –

1. Environmental determinism

2. Possibilism

3. Neo-determinism The correct sequence of the development of these forms of relationships is:

a.   2,1,3 b.  1,2,3
c.  3,1,2 d.  1,3,2




28. The Constitution of India provides for a single  Integrated  Judicial  System. In  this context, which of the following statements is/are correct?


1.   District      Court      decides     cases involving serious criminal offences.
2.   Subordinate Courts  considers  cases of both civil and criminal nature.
3.  Both   High    Court   and  Supreme
Court have appellate jurisdiction
4.  The Supreme Court is bound by its own decision and cannot review it.
5.  Both   High    Court   and  Supreme
Court have advisory jurisdiction
Select the correct code. a.   1, 2 and 3 Only
b.  1, 3 and 5 Only c.  2, 3, and 4 Only d.  None


29. Consider    the    following    statements about bank deposits


1.   Time         deposit account balances are usually considered money and
form the greater part of the
narrowly     defined money supply of a country.
2.   Fixed    deposits,   have    a
fixed period to maturity and are referred to as time deposits.

Which of the above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 8
b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None


30. Consider the following statements
1.   These volcanoes are characterised by eruptions of cooler and more viscous lavas than basalt.
2.   These  volcanoes often result  in explosive eruptions.
3.  Along with lava, large  quantities of pyroclastic material  and ashes find their way to the ground.

The above characters best describe which of the following type of volcanoes?

a.   Caldera
b.  Shield volcanoes
c.  Composite volcanoes
d.  Mid-Ocean ridge volcanoes


31. Consider the following statements


1.   Reserve deposit ratio (rdr) is the proportion of the total deposits  commercial banks keep as reserves.
2. Commercial  banks  can borrow money from RBI at the bank rate when  they run short of reserves.
3.  Maintaining      a         given
fraction of their total demand and time deposits in the form of specified liquid assets by the banks is called Cash Reserve Ratio.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?
a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  3 Only
d.  1 and 3 Only

32. Consider    the    following    statements related to the 1857 uprising:


1.  During the 1857 uprising, religious divisions between Hindus and Muslim  were hardly noticeable despite British attempts to create such divisions.
2.     The fear that the British were bent on converting Hindus and Muslims   to  Christianity  was also a reason  for the uprising.


Which of the above is/are correct?


a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None


33. Histories  of  the Gupta rulers  have been reconstructed from  literature, coins  and inscriptions.  Consider the following statements  about the Gupta rule in India:


1.   The  Prayaga Prashasti (also known as the Allahabad Pillar Inscription) composed by Banabhatta.
2. Banabhatta,   was  the court poet of Samudragupta.
3.  The  Prayaga Prashasti was composed in praise of   SamudraGupta in Prakrit language.


Which of the above is/are incorrect?


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 9
a.   1 and 2 Only b.  1 and 3 Only c.  2 and 3 Only d.  All the above
b.  Only 2 c.  Both
d.  None
36. To promote people’s participation, the
parliament  enactment  73rd    and  74th
rd
34. Consider the following statements with respect to special provisions provided to Jammu and Kashmir:


1. The concurrence of the State is required for making  any law in matters  mentioned in both the Union and Concurrent lists.
2. Emergency   due    to    internal disturbances can be declared without the concurrence of the State.
3.  The  Directive   Principles  of  State policy applies to the State.
4. Amendments    to     the    Indian Constitution, under Article 368, can only apply in concurrence with the government of Jammu and Kashmir.


Which  of the above statements  is/are incorrect?


a)  2 and 3 Only
b) 1, 2 and 4 Only c)  1, 3 and 4 Only d) 1, 2, 3 and 4

35. Consider the following statements:

1.  Quantity  of   biomass   in   a higher trophic  level  is  lesser than that  of  the  immediate lower levels.
2.   In  the  phenomena of  plant succession,  rate of  succession is  faster in  secondary succession.

Which of the following is/are true?

a.   Only 1
Amendment Act. With reference to 73
Amendment     Act,      consider      the following statements:


1. The   Gram   Panchayat    would comprise of all the adult members registered as voters in the Panchayat area.
2.   The roles and functions of the Gram Sabha  are  decided by State legislation.
3.  All the three levels of Panchayati Raj institutions  are  elected directly  by the people.
4.  It  is   mandatory   to  create   Gram
Sabha in all States.


Which  of the above statements  is/are correct?


a)  1 Only
b) 1 and 2 Only
c)  2, 3 and 4 Only d) 1, 2, 3 and 4


37. In   the   Geological  Time   Scale,  the extinction of dinosaurs took place in


a.   Cretaceous period b.  Permian Period
c.  Devonian Period d.  Triassic Period

38. Consider the following with regard  to the teachings of Buddha:


1. The   Buddha   taught orally – through discussion and debate.
2.    Only   a    part  of   the

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 10
Buddha’s speeches were written down during his lifetime.
3.  The compilations of his teachings were  known as Tipitaka. The Vinaya Pitaka included rules and regulations for those who joined the sangha  or  monastic order while Abhidhamma Pitaka dealt with philosophical matters.


Which of the above is/are correct?


a.   1 Only
b.  1 and 2 Only c.  1 and 3 Only d.  All the above




39. Which  of the following is/are  true in connection with micro plastics?

1. It affects marine environment the most.

2. It is used in the manufacturing of cosmetics.

3. It  can act as an agent  to transport Persistent Organic Pollutants(PoPs]

Select the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   Only 2 b.  1 and 3
c.  All of the above
d.  Only 3

40. Consider the following:
1. One-third       Reservations       for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes  are provided for  at  all  the three levels.
2.   The States may  or may not provide reservations for the Other Backward Castes (OBC)
3.  In   the   areas  inhabited  by   the
Adivasis,  the Gram Sabha  is  more powerful  compared to  the  other parts of the country.
4. A  minimum age  of 21 years is necessary to become a member of a
Panchayat.
5.  The power to appoint and remove the  State  Finance commissioner  is vested in the Governor.


Which  of the above statements  is/are correct?


a)  1 Only
b) 2, 3 and 4 Only
c)  1, 2, 3 and 5 Only d) 1, 2, 3 and 4 Only


41. An item is called  a final good,


1.  Because once it  has  been sold  it  passes out  of  the active economic flow
2.   It  will   not  undergo any
further  transformation at the hands of any producer.
3.  A  final  good  may never
undergo transformation  by the action of the ultimate purchaser.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  3 Only


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 11
c.  2 and 3 Only d.  All Three


42. Consider the following statements,


1.  The government has  legal authority to issue currency by printing in case of a budget deficit
2.   The  government   borrows
money by selling  treasury bills or government securities to RBI, which issues currency to the government in return.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None

43. Consider  the following about the The
Khilafat Movement, (1919-1920) :


1.  The Khilafat Movement was a movement of  Indian  Muslims, led by Sir Syed Ahmed Khan.
2.    It demanded  that the Turkish Sultan or  Khalifa  must  retain control over the Muslim  sacred places in the erstwhile Ottoman Empire.
3.  Mahatma Gandhi supported the movement but the congress didn't support it.


Which of the above is/are correct?


a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  3 Only
d.  2 and 3 Only





44. With   regard to  the  theory  of  basic structure of the Constitution,  consider the following:


1.  Parliament has powers to amend all parts of the Constitution except the basic structure.
2. Constitution  specifies  the  basic structure of the Constitution
3.  It found its  first  expression  in  the
Golaknath case.
4.  It has increased the powers of the judiciary.
5.  Federal system, fundamental  duties, social justice     form the basic structure of the Constitution


Which  of the above statements  is/are incorrect?


a)  1, 2 and 3
b) 1 and 4 Only c)  2 and 3 Only
d) 2, 3 and 5 Only


45. Which  of the following sources help in studying about the interior of the earth?


1.   Meteors  that  at  times reach the earth
2.   Gravitation
3.  Magnetic Field
4.  Seismic Activity

Select the correct answer using the codes below

a.   1,2 and 3 Only b.  2 and 3 Only
c.  3 and 4 Only d.  All

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 12
46. The term biotype means:

a.   All   individuals  having the same phenotype.
b.  All   individuals  having
the same genotype.
c. All  individuals having different phenotype comprising a whole group.
d. All  individuals having different genotype comprising a whole group.




47. The Ocean Health Index ( OCI  ) is a tool that scientifically studies the health of oceans from  multiple  dimensions.  What dimensions,  other  than biological,  is/are included in this analysis?

1.   Physical
2.   Economic
3.  Social
4.  Political

Select the correct answer using the codes below

a.   1 and 2 b.  Only 3
c.  1,2 and 3
d.  All of the above


48. Consider    the    following    statements about sterilization by RBI


1.   It’s an open market sale of government securities of an amount equal  to the amount       of        foreign
exchange inflow  in the economy, thereby keeping the stock of high powered money and total money supply unchanged.
2.   It’s a tool to fight inflation

Which   of   the  statements   given   above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None

49. Which  of the following is  true about
Profundal zone?

a.   It  is  a   deep zone  of  inland body of  free standing water, located below  the  range of effective light penetration.
b.  It is  a  deep zone of  the sea located below  the  range of effective light penetration.
c.  It  is   upper  zone  of  inland body of free standing water.
d.  None of the above.

50. Consider the following statements  and choose the appropriate option:


1.  Purusha   sukta,   describes the  sacrifice  of  Purusha, the primeval man. It says that  all  the  elements  of the universe, were supposed to have emanated from his body.
2.    Purusha sukta is a part of
Rigveda.
3.  The rule that Kshatriyas were supposed to engage in warfare, protect people and   administer   justice,

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 13
study the Vedas, get sacrifices  performed, and make gifts is given in the Dharmasutras and Dharmashastras.


Which of the above is/are correct?


a. 1 Only
b. 1 and 3 Only c. 2 and 3 Only d. All the above



51. Consider the following:


1. Governor   has  the   power   to recommend the dismissal of the State government  and suspension or dissolution of State assembly.
2.   The  Lok  Sabha   consists   of   only elected representatives.
3.  The Vice  President belongs to the
Upper House of the Parliament.
4.  The 73rd and 74th amendments have created uniformity in the structures of  Panchayati  Raj and  Nagarpalika institutions across the country.


Which  of the above statements  is/are correct?


a.   1 and 4 Only b.  1 and 3 Only
c.  2 , 3 and 4 Only
d.  1, 2, 3 and 4


52. With    reference   to   Parliamentary Standing Committees  consider  the following:


1.  Standing Committees not only supervise the work of various departments but  also their budget.
2.   Public Accounts Committee is an example of Standing Committee.
3. Members  of  the  Standing committees are selected from both Houses.
4. Standing  Committees    are permanent in nature.
5. Standing  Committees   are means  of  parliamentary control over the executive.


Which  of the above statements  is/are correct?


a)  1, 4 and 5 Only b) 1, 3 and 5 Only
c)  1, 2, 4 and 5 Only d) 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5



53. Consider  the  following  statements with reference to GDP  deflator and CPI


1. GDP   deflator  includes prices of goods consumed by the representative consumer,  hence  it includes prices of imported goods.  CPI  does  not include prices of imported goods.
2.   The  goods  purchased by consumers  do  not represent all the goods which  are produced in  a country. GDP deflator takes into account all such goods and services.

Which    of   the   above  sentences   is/are correct?



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 14
a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None

54. Which  one is supposed to be the most stable environment?

a.   Deep sea regions
b.  Temperate Grasslands c.  Tropical rainforests
d.  Hilly Regions

55. Subsidiary   Alliance    was   a     system devised by Lord Wellesley  in 1798. Consider the following terms and conditions of the system:


1.   The British would be responsible for protecting their ally from both the external as well as internal threats to their power.
2. The ally could not enter into agreements with other rulers or engage in warfare.
3.  The British would assist the ally in maintaining  an armed contingent.


Which of the above is/are incorrect?


a.   3 Only
b.  1 and 2 Only c.  2 and 3 Only d.  None



56. Consider    the    following    statements about  the evolution of the present atmosphere


1. There are three stages in the evolution of the present atmosphere. The first stage is marked by the loss of primordial atmosphere.
2.   In  the  second  stage,   the  hot interior of the earth contributed to the evolution of the atmosphere.
3. Finally, the composition of the atmosphere was modified by the living world through the process of photosynthesis.

Which of the above statement is/are correct?

a.   1 Only
b.  2 and 3 Only c.  3 Only
d.  All

57. Consider the following statements:

1. The influence of bordering communities on each other is known as  the edge effect in environmental science.
2.   The edges are different to the
interior of the fragment in climate, soil  environment and species composition.

Which of these is/are true?

a.   Only 1 b.  Only 2 c.  Both
d.  None

58. Consider       the      following      about
Virashaivism in Karnataka:


1.   Basavanna founded  Virashaivism as a separate caste within Hinduism.
2. Virashaivism     allowed    widow remarriage.
3.  Lingayats believe  in   rebirth  after death. So they practise funerary rites such as cremation.

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 15


Which of the above is/are correct?


a.   1 Only b.  2 Only
c.  2 and 3 Only d.  1 and 3 Only


59. Consider the following statements with reference to earthquake waves


1.   Body waves are generated due to the release of energy  at the focus and move in all directions travelling through the body of the earth.
2.   The body waves interact with the surface rocks  and generate  new set of waves called surface waves.
3.  The   denser  the   material,   the lower is the velocity of these waves.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  1 and 2 Only d.  All Three


60. The Indian Constitution has ensured the independence of the judiciary through  a number  of  measures. Which   of  the following are  these measures provided in the Constitution?


1.   The Executive is not involved in the process of appointment of judges.
2.   The judges have a fixed tenure.
3.  The  expenses  of  the  judiciary are charged on the Consolidated Fund of
India.
4.  The  Supreme court  and the  High Court can punish any person for its contempt
5.  A judge of Supreme court can only be removed by a special majority of the Parliament.

Select the correct code.


a)  2, 3, and 5 Only b) 1, 2, 3 and 5 Only c)  2, 3, 4 and 5 Only d) 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5

61.  With  reference to a  fresh water lake, consider the following characteristics:

1.   Richness in nutrients
2.   Rapid          turnover          of phytoplankton
3.  Depletion of dissolved oxygen and nitrogen
4.  Increase in zooplankton levels

Which    of   the   following   is/are observed in a lake after its Eutrophication?

a.   1,2 and 3
b.  All of the above c.  1 and 3 only
d.  2 and 4

62. Three  Round Table  Conferences  held between 1930-32. Consider the following in this regard:


1.   Mahatma  Gandhi attended the first
Round table conference.
2.    He attended  only one Round table conference out of the three Round table conferences held.
3.  He opposed the separate electorates for the “Untouchables” in the Round table conference he attended.

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 16
Which of the above is/are correct ?


a.   1 and 2 Only b.  1 and 3 Only c.  2 and 3 Only d.  All the above



63.   Consider   the   following   statements about Epiphytes – a plant  species:

4. They    grow    parasitically  upon another plant
5.  They   derive  their   moisture   and
nutrients from the air and rain.
6.  They may harm the forest trees.


Which  of the following is/are  true in this connection?
a.   1 and 3 b.  1 and 2 c.  Only 2
d.  All of the above

64. "Quit India" campaign/movement was launched in  1942.  Consider  the following statements on the movement


1.   The  failure of  the  Cripps  Mission was the immediate trigger  for Mahatma Gandhi to launch Quit India movement against British rule.
2.    Mahatma Gandhi led the movement through   its   course   by   travelling
extensively  through  the length  and
breadth of the country.


Which   of  the  above statement/s  is/are correct?


a.   1 only b.  2 only c.  Both d.  None
65. Consider the following intrusive forms of lava


1. Lacoliths    - A large body of magmatic  material  that  cools  in the  deeper depth of  the  crust develops in the form of large domes.
2.  Batholiths     -   These   are   large dome-shaped intrusive  bodies with a  level base and connected by a  pipe-like conduit from below

Which of the above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None


66. Consider the following statements with reference to GDP

1.  Real           GDP is      GDP evaluated  at current market prices.  Therefore, real GDP will include all of the changes in market prices  that  have occurred during the current year due to inflation or deflation.
2.   Nominal     GDP   is   GDP
evaluated      at     the market prices of some base year
3.  The factor used to convert GDP from current to constant values in this way is called the GDP deflator.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.        1 Only
b.     2 and 3 Only


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 17
c.      3 Only
d.     All Three

67. The  combined  flora   and fauna of  a region is called as
a. Ecotherm
b. Biota
c. Torpor
d. Hugosphere

68. It is  argued  by some scholars that  the separate  electorates  for  Muslims, created by the colonial government crucially shaped the nature of communal politics  in India.  In relation to the Separate electorates,  consider the following:


1.   With  the Poona pact of  1916,  the Congress  and the  Muslim   League reached an agreement  whereby the Congress  accepted separate electorates.
2.  The Indian Councils Act of 1909 provided separate electorates for the
Muslims .


Which   of  the  above statement/s   is/are correct?


a.   1 only b.  2 only c.  Both d.  None


69. The  Manusmrti  is  one  of  the  best- known legal texts of early India, written in Sanskrit and compiled between second century BCE and second century CE. Consider the following about Manusmrti:


1.   It gives equal rights  to women on the paternal property  and resources
2.    It   strongly   opposes   the   Varna system.


Which of the above is/are incorrect?


a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None


70. Consider    the    following    statements about macroeconomics


1. Macroeconomics  deals with  the aggregate  economic  variables of  an economy.
2.   It    takes   into    account   various
interlinkages which  may exist between the different sectors of an economy.
3.  Macroeconomics    emerged   as    a
separate subject in the 1930s due to
Keynes.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are incorrect?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  3 Only
c.  2 and 3 Only d.  None


71. Which  of the following is  implied by Advisory jurisdiction of the Supreme Court?


1.   The President of India can refer any matter  that is  of public importance or that which involves interpretation of  Constitution  to  Supreme Court for advice.
2.   The  advice of  Supreme  Court  is binding on the President.
3.  This  jurisdiction   of  the  Supreme
Court may prevent unnecessary litigations.


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 18
4.  The President is not bound to accept such an advice.
Select the correct code. a)  2 and 3 Only
b) 1 and 4 Only
c)  1, 3 and 4 Only d) 1, 2, 3 and 4


72. Consider    the    following    statements about sea-floor spreading concept


1.   Constant eruptions at the crest of oceanic ridges cause the rupture of the oceanic crust and the new lava  wedges into it, pushing the oceanic crust on either side. The ocean floor, thus spreads.
2.   The ocean floor that gets pushed due to volcanic eruptions at  the crest, sinks  down at  the oceanic trenches and gets consumed.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None


73. The  MoEF   has   recently  decided  to regulate developmental activities  in Western Ghats. Consider the following in this regard:
1.   The Gram Sabhas will have a role in categorising the ecologically sensitive areas where certain activities will be regulated.
2.   Only “Red Category” industries have
been banned.
3. The   Ministry   has   decided  to constitute a Western Ghats Development and Regulation authority (WGDRA) to examine developmental proposals and  grant clearance to projects in ESAs.




Which  of the following is/are  true in this connection?

a.   Only 2 b.  2 and 3
c.  All of the above
d.  1 and 2

74. Consider    the    following    statements about the Coins  issued in  the ancient India:


1.  The  earliest  coins  recovered from excavations in India had symbols punch-marked on  them  and were made of silver and copper.
2.   The first  gold  coins  were issued in
India by the Guptas.


Which of the above is/are correct?


a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None




75. Which  of  the following  is  incorrectly matched?


a.   Cocos  plate :  Between Central
America and Pacific plate
b.   Nazca   plate :  Between North
America and Pacific plate


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 19
c.  Arabian plate : Mostly  the Saudi
Arabian landmass
d.  Philippine  plate :  Between the
Asiatic and Pacific  plate

76. Consider    the    following    statements about inventories and investments

1.   In economics, the stock of unsold finished goods, or semi-finished goods,  or raw materials  which  a firm carries from one year to the next is called inventory.
2.   Inventories  are treated as capital.
Addition to the stock of capital of a firm is known as investment.
3.  The  addition to  the machinery, factory buildings, and equipments employed by the firms is called as the fixed business investment.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  3 Only
d.  All Three

77. Consider    the    following    statements about GDP

1.   It is a Sum total of gross value added of all the firms in the economy.
2.   If we calculate the GDP by looking at the demand side of the products, then it is referred to as the expenditure method.

Which   of   the  above  statement   is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None
78. Which  of the following is  true about
Deccan                                               Traps?



a.   It  is  a   large carbon deposit located in Deccan plateau.
b. It is a large volcanic deposit located in  Deccan plateau  of west central India.
c.  It is  a  large iron ore deposits located in  Deccan plateau  of west central India.
d.  It is  a  large   diamond deposit located in Deccan plateau.

79. Which  of the following was/were the important agreements signed at the recent Warsaw climate conference?

1.   REDD+
2.   “Global e-sustainability Initiative”
agreement
3.  “Loss and damage” compensation
a.   Only 1 b.  1 and 3 c.  Only 3
d.  All of the above

80. The  Sanchi stupa  is  among the best preserved ancient stupas. Consider the following about the Sanchi stupa:


1. It was Emperor Ashoka who commissioned the design of Sanchi Stupa in the third century BC.
2.    The stupa has wonderful carvings which  interpret the life  of Buddha and his  various incarnations from the Jataka tales.
3.  Sanchi stupa is a UNESCO world heritage site.


which of the above is/are correct ?


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 20
a.   1 and 2 Only b.  1 and 3 Only c.  2 and 3 Only d.  All the above



81.    Consider   the   following   statements about Plastic Parks scheme:

1. Plastic Parks is  a  scheme which envisages a cluster of plastic industry where plastic reprocessing, recycling plant and waste management system is set up.
2.   It will be set up through PPP model.


Which of the following is/are true?


a) Only 2 b) Only 1 c) Both
d) None of the above


82. Consider the following statements

1.   Net National Product at  factor cost is nothing but National Income.
2.   To get NNP at factor cost we have to deduct subsidies to the NNP evaluated at market prices.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None

83. The Government has recently approved the launching of a  new Integrated Processing Development Scheme (IPCS). Which  of the following is/are correct in this connection?
1.  The scheme envisages the development of  brown field and green  field projects in the food processing sector in India.
2.   The     scheme     addresses
environmental issues also.
3.  It  would  encourage  R&D in the textile processing sector.

Select the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   Only 1 b.  2 and 3 c.  1 and 2
d.  None of the above


84. Consider the following statements,

1.  If we deduct depreciation from GNP the measure of aggregate  income that  we obtain is  called Net National Product (NNP).
2.   s  Gross   National Product
(GNP) is nothing but GDP
+ Net factor income from abroad

Which  of the following statements  is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None

85. Consider the following statements with respect to the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court:


1.   The government  wanted to know if it  can pass a  law about the citizenship   status   of   residents  of

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 21
Pakistan  occupied areas of  Jammu and Kashmir,  comes under original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court
2.   In order to resolve the dispute about river Cauvery the government  of Tamil Nadu wants to approach the court, comes under appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court
3.  Court rejected the appeal by people against  the eviction  from  the dam site, comes under writ jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.


Which  of the above statements  is/are correct?


a.   2 Only
b.  1 and 2 Only
c.  1, 2 and 3 Only d.  None


86. Consider  the  following  statements regarding measuring national income,


1. The               expenditure approach measures
national income as total spending on final goods and services produced within nation during an year.
2.    The      expenditure     on
second  hand goods should not be included as they do not contribute to the current  year’s  production of goods.
3.  Expenditure    on purchase of      old      shares      and bonds is included            in computing national income

Which   of  the  statements   above is/are correct?
a.   1 Only
b.  2 and 3 Only c.  1 and 2 Only d.  All Three


87. Consider  the  following  statements with respect to the youth stage of a river


1.   Streams are few during this stage with  poor  integration  and flow over original slopes showing shallow V-shaped valleys with no floodplains or with  very narrow floodplains along trunk streams.
2.  Streams divides are broad and flat
with marshes, swamp and lakes.
3.  Waterfalls and rapids disappear.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  A Only
d.  All Three


88. Consider  the features  of  limestone caves


1. Stalactites hang as icicles  of different diameters.
2.  Stalagmites rise up from the floor
of the caves.

Which of the above is/are incorrect?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 22
89. Western  Himachal Pradesh (around Dharamshala) and Kashmir Valley in the  Himalayan region  and the Kuchchh (Gujarat) fall under which earthquake zone of India?
a.    Very high damage risk zone
b.   High damage risk zone
c.   Moderate  damage risk zone d.   Low damage risk zone


90. Article  368 provides for the procedure for  amendment of  the  Constitution. With   regard to  amendment, consider the following:
1. All     amendments   to    the Constitution are initiated  only in the Parliament.
2.   The Constitution Commission  is required to amend the Constitution.
3. After   the   passage   of   the amendment bill in the Parliament and in some cases, in State legislatures, referendum is required for  ratification of  the amendment.
4. Sovereignty        of         elected representatives is the basis of the amendment procedure.

Which  of the above statements  is/are correct?


a.   1 and 4 Only b.  1 and 2 Only c.  2 and 3 Only
d.  1, 2 and 4 Only



91. Indian   Constitution   has   adopted  a system   of   Checks   and  Balance for smooth functioning of the three organs of   the   government.   Which    of   the
following are the instruments of parliamentary control   over  the executive?


1.   No Confidence Motion
2.   Both  Zero   Hour  and   Half-an- hour discussion
3.  Comptroller and Auditor General
4.  Amendment Provisions
5.  Public Accounts Committee
6.  Emergency provisions
Select the correct code. a.   1, 3, 4 and 5 Only
b.  1, 2, 3 and 5 Only
c.  1, 2, 4, 5 and 6 Only d.  1, 2, 3,4, 5 and 6



92. Consider  the  following  statements about tsunamis


1.   The speed of wave in the ocean depends upon the depth of water. It  is  more in the shallow water than in the ocean deep.
2.   As a result of this, the impact of
tsunami is less over the ocean and more near the coast where they cause large-scale devastations
3.  Over deep water the tsunami has
very short wave-length and large wave-height.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 Only
b.  2 and 3 Only c.  1 and 2 Only d.  All Three

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 23
93. Consider the following statements:


1.  The  Rajya   Sabha   cannot  initiate, reject or amend money bills.
2.   The President cannot send back an
amendment  bill  for  reconsideration of the Parliament.
3.  Fundamental  Duties  are known as instrument of instructions  in Indian administration.
4. The  President  does  not  enjoy constitutional discretion.


Which  of  the statements  given  above is/are correct?


a.   2 and 3 Only b.  1 and 2 Only
c.  1, 2 and 4 Only
d.  1, 2, 3 and 4 Only


94. Consider the following statements,


1.   The monetary  value of an asset decreases over  time due to use, wear and tear or obsolescence. This decrease is  measured as depreciation.
2.   Depreciation is the cost of the good divided by number of years of its useful life.

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None
95. In which of the following cases are the powers  of  the Lok  Sabha  and Rajya Sabha co-equal?


1.   Election  and impeachment of  the
President
2.   Approval of ordinances issued by the
President
3.  Removal  of   Judges    of   Supreme
Court and High Court
4.  Approval   of   proclamation   of   all three types of emergencies
Select the correct code. a)  2 and 4 Only
b) 1 and 3 Only
c)  1, 2 and 3 Only
d) 1, 2, 3 and 4 Only


96. Steel    sheets    used    for    making automobiles and copper  used  for making utensils is an example of


a.   Intermediate goods b.  Consumer durable c.  Capital goods
d.  Consumer goods
97. Consider  the  following  statements about  a capitalist economy


1.   Production takes place for selling the output in the market
2.   There  is  sale  and purchase  of labour services at a price which is called the wage rate

Which   of  the  above statements   is/are characteristics of a capitalist  economy?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 24
c.  Both d.  None


98. Consider  the  following  statements about tropical cyclone


1. The  centre of  the cyclone is mostly a warm and high- pressure    cloudless core known as eye of the storm.
2.   Tropical  cyclones  are
characterized  by large pressure gradients
3.  In case of the Bay  of
Bengal, cyclones mostly develop during the  months  of October and November.



Which   of  the  above statements   is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  1 and 3 Only
d.  All Three
2.   Those species that spread widely and create  significant  problems are known as invasive species.
3.   Most of the exotic species are
harmless and beneficial  to the ecosystem as they introduce diversity in the region

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.    1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.   1 Only
d.  All Three

100.             Consider the following statements with reference to genetic diversity



1.   Humans differ in height, color and physical appearance because of genetic diversity

2.   Genetic diversity refers to the variation of genes within species
3.  Genetic diversity is essential for a healthy breeding of population of species.

Which of the above statements is/are correct?


99. Consider  the  following  statements related to biodiversity


1.   Species which are not the natural inhabitants of  the  local  habitat but   are    introduced   into   the
system, are called exotic species.

a.    1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.   3 Only
d.  All Three








http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 25






































































http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      Page 26
