
INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK PRELIMINARY EXAM - 2014


INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST - 9

GENERAL STUDIES

PAPER-I

Time Allowed: Two Hours                                                                                  Maximum Marks: 200


INSTRUCTIONS
1.   IMMEDITELY AFTER THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE EXAMINATION, YOU SHOULD
CHECK  THAT  THIS  TEST  BOOKLET  DOES  NOT  HAVE  ANY  UNPRINTED  OR  TORN  OR MISSING PAGES OR ITEMS, ETC. IF SO, GET IT REPLACED BY A COMPLETE TEST BOOKLET.
2.  You have to enter your Roll Number on the Test I
Booklet in the Box provided alongside. DO NOT
write anything else on the Test Booklet.

4.  This Test Booklet contains 100 items (questions). Each item is  printed only in  English. Each item comprises four responses (answers). You will select the response which you want to mark on the Answer Sheet. In case you feel that there is more than one correct response, mark the response which you consider the best. In any case, choose ONLY ONE response for each item.
5.  You have to mark all your responses ONLY on the separate Answer Sheet provided. See directions in the
Answer Sheet.
6.  All items carry equal marks.

7.  Before you proceed to mark in the Answer Sheet the response to various items in the Test Booklet, you have to fill in some particulars in the Answer Sheet as per instructions sent to you with your Admission Certificate.
8.  After you have completed filling in all your responses on the Answer Sheet and the examination has concluded, you should hand over to the Invigilator only the Answer Sheet. You are permitted to take away with you the Test Booklet.

9.  Sheets for rough work are appended in the Test Booklet at the end.
10.  Penalty for wrong answers :
THERE WILL BE PENALTY FOR WRONG ANSWERS MARKED BY A CANDIDATE IN THE OBJECTIVE TYPE QUESTION PAPERS.
(i)   There are four alternatives for the answer to every question. For each question for which a wrong answer has been given by the candidate, one-third of the marks assigned to that question will be deducted as penalty.
(ii)   If a candidate gives more than one answer, it will be treated as a wrong answer even if one of the given answers happens to be correct and there will be same penalty as above to that question.
(iii)    If a question is left blank, i.e., no answer is given by the candidate, there will be no penalty for that question.


http://insightsonindia.com


INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST SERIES FOR CIVIL SERVICES PRELIMINARY EXAM 2014





http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                        Page 1
1. With reference to the 1857 revolt, consider the following statements
1.   The   territorial   aristocrats       and feudal chiefs who had suffered at the hands of the British were made leaders of the revolution
2.   The Madras army remained totally
loyal  to  the  British  and  did  not participate in the revolt

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.   Both
d.  None

2.   With reference to gelatine, consider the following statements

1. It is an animal protein substance having  gel-forming  properties, used    primarily    in food products and home cookery

2.   It      is      used      to      hold silver halide crystals    in    an emulsion in virtually                  all photographic films and photographic papers

3.   It can be used in fuel cells to make them more efficient

Which of the above statements is incorrect?

a.   1 and 2 b.   3 Only c.   None
d.   2 Only



3.   Consider   the   following   statements with reference to the British policy towards sepoys
1.   The British from the beginning did not respect the religious sentiments
of the Indian sepoys
2.   The  British  tried  to  recruit  only
Brahmins to homogenise the army
3. The   British   felt   that   caste distinctions and segregation within a regiment were not conducive to the cohesiveness of a fighting unit.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.  3 Only
c.   1 and 2 Only d.  2 and 3 Only


4.     Consider the following statements:
1. The provisions of the constitution do not allow the Union government to discriminate between states.
2.   The Indian constitution permits the Indian government to acquire any foreign territory by even conquest or subjugation.

Which of these is/are correct?

a.   Only 1 b.  Only 2 c.   Both
d.  None of the above


5.   Consider the following statements,
1.   The  sepoys  in  the  British  army were predominantly from the peasantry
2.   The   sepoys   were   insulated   by hearing  any  news  from  their peasant  relatives  and  thus  were

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 2
completely      unaware      of      the problems faced by their families
3. The Revolt of the sepoys was accompanied by a rebellion of the civil population in every part of India

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1  Only
b.  2 and 3 Only c.   1 and 3 Only d.  All


6. After the great depression, Keynes advocated his theory of state intervention  and  questioned  the  idea of   a   free   market.   Which   of   the following statements is/are true in this regard?
1.   Flexibility  in  the  prices  of  goods and   wages   of   labour   in   a   free market may not allow full employment in the economy.
2. State intervention can increase or decrease  the  demand  in  an economy so as to ensure employment to all.

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a.   Only 1 b.  Only 2 c.   Both
d.  None


7.   With  reference  to  the  nature  of  civil and tribal uprisings of 18th century, consider the following statements
1. Leaders of these rebellions were backward  looking  and  traditional
in outlook.
2.   The historical significance of these civil uprisings lies in that they established strong and valuable local traditions of resistance to British rule
3. Their resistance represented no societal alternative
4. Its basic objective was to restore earlier forms of rule and social relations

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only
b.  1,2 and 4 Only c.   2,3 and 4 Only d.  All


8.   Consider   the   following   statements about the Preamble:
1. It is a part of the constitution.
2.   It  grants power  to  the legislature  to  enact laws that are in conformity with its values.
3. It can be selectively amended by the legislature.

Select  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a.   1 and 2 b.  Only 1 c.   1 and 3 d.  Only 3


9.   Which of the following rebellion was not a tribal uprising?
a.   The Rampa rebellion
b.  The Kols rebellion


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 3
c.   The Munda rebellion d.  None of the above




10. With  reference  to  aerosols,  consider the following statements

1.   Aerosols influence climate change

2.   ‗Aerosol  optical  depth‘ (AOD),  an index of aerosol levels is used to measure levels of aerosol in atmosphere

3.   An aerosol is defined as a colloidal system of solid or liquid particles in a gas.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.   1 and 3 Only d.  All


11. With  reference  to  the  British  policy with respect to peasants after the 1857 revolt, consider the following statements
1. The  Government  rose  to  the defence of the zamindars wherever violence took place
2. Though  imperfect,  the  Bengal Tenancy Act was passed to protect t the tenants from the worst aspects of zamindari oppression
3.   Many peasant movements just after
1857    revolt    were    not    anti    –
Zamindari system or anti- British

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.  2 and 3 Only
c.   1 and 2 Only d.  All

12. With reference to napalm, consider the following statements

1.   Napalm has not been outlawed as a weapon of war

2.   It is            a            mixture            of a thickening/gelling agent
and petroleum or a similar fuel for use in an incendiary device

3.   It   was   extensively   used   in   the
Vietnam war by the USA

Which of the statements above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.  1 and 2 Only c.   2 and 3 Only d.  All


13. With reference to the Bengal Tenancy Bill enacted by the British, consider the following statements
1.   The Bill was strongly opposed by the landed interests in the legislature, but was supported by pro-peasant parties including the Muslim members
2.   The bill conferred occupancy rights
even on non-cultivators

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.   Both
d.  None


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 4
14. With     reference     to     the     Deccan Agriculturists‘ Relief Act of 1879, consider the following statements
1.    This Act  was  intended  to  reduce
the  aggregate  indebtedness of the farmers and restrict the transfer of land from cultivators to money- lenders
2.   It was enacted in response to 1875
Pabna peasant uprisings

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.   Both
d.  None

15. With reference to liquid apogee motor (LAM) consider the following statements

1.   It refers to a rocket motor that is regularly    employed    on artificial satellites destined                          for a geostationary orbit.

2. They often employ  bipropellant engine

3.  India‘s  GSAT-5P  will use LAM in its mission

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.  1 and 2 Only c.   1 Only
d.  All



16. With reference to the objectives of the National  Telecom  Policy  2012, consider the following statements
1.   Increase rural teledensity from the
current level of around 39 to 70 by
the year 2017 and 100 by the year
2020
2.   The thrust is on Cloud Computing, Next  Generation  Network including IPV6
3.   Its aim is to create  One Nation - Full   Mobile   Number   Portability and work towards One Nation - Free Roaming
4.   It is silent on spectrum allocation procedure

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.   1,2 and 3 Only b.  2 and 3 Only
c.   2,3 and 4 Only d.  All


17. The  book  ‗India Today‘,  which  made the myth of the safety-valve a staple of left-wing opinion and claimed that the Congress was brought into existence through  direct  Governmental initiative, was written by
a.   Rajani P Dutt b.   Barun De
c.   Girija Mukherji d.  A.R. Desai



18. Consider   the   following   statements about the Rett Syndrome

1.   It occurs primarily in males

2. Its symptoms include   impaired memory and learning, and social interaction, a peculiar wringing of the  hands,  loss  of  balance, abnormal activity etc

3.  It‘s a genetic  disorder

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 5
b.  2 and 3 Only c.   1 and 3 Only d.  All


19. Which   of   the   following   are   NOT secured by the preamble of the Indian constitution to its citizens?
1.   Social and economic equality
2.   Political equality
3.   Equality of opportunity

Select  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a.   Only 2 b.  1 and 2 c.   Only 1
d.  None of the above

20. With reference to the Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF), consider the following statements

1.  It   was   formed   by   an   act   of
Parliament

2. was     established     with     the fundamental objective of providing access  to  ‗basic‘ telegraph services to people in the rural and remote areas at affordable and reasonable prices

Which of the statements given above is/are incorrect?

a.  1 Only b.  2 Only c.  Both
d.  None



21.  Consider the following statements:
1.   The kind of socialistic practice that    is    enshrined     in    the
Preamble    is    that    of    state socialism.
2.   Indian socialism is a  blend of
Marxism and Leninism.



Which of these is/are true?

a.   Only 1 b.  Only 2 c.   Both
d.  None of the above

22. With  reference  to  New  Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP), consider the following statements

1. It was introduced to boost the production  of oil and natural  gas and  providing  level  playing  field for both public and private players.

2.   Licences for exploration are being awarded only through first come first serve basis with any bias against Indian and foreign companies

3. In January 2014, India offered 46 hydrocarbon blocks to investors under the 10th round of the New Exploration  Licensing  Policy (NELP) through a revenue sharing regime that was recommended by a panel headed by C. Rangarajan

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.  1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.  1 and 3 Only d.  All


23. Which of the following provisions of the constitution ensure civic equality?



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 6
1. Equality of opportunity in matters of public employment
2.   Abolition of titles
3. Freedom  of  speech  and expression

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below
c.   The  demand  by  coastal  countries that all countries, including developing countries should create a fund to manage any loss and damage to their biodiversity and livelihood in future because of global warming

d.  None of the above

a.   2 and 3 b.  1 and 2 c.   Only 1
d.  All of the above


24. The dignity of women is protected or secured by which of the following in the Indian constitution?
1.   Fundamental Rights
2.   Fundamental Duties
3.   Directive Principles of State
Policy

Select  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a.   Only 2 b.  1 and 2 c.   1 and 3
d.  All of the above

25. The   ‗loss   and    damage‘   subject    in
climate change negotiations refers to

a.   The demand from the poorest and most vulnerable countries that they must be paid for the damage that will occur to life and property from the level of emissions already up in the atmosphere and which cannot be prevented even by adaptation.

b.  The demand from India and China that  they  must  be  first compensated  for  taking  any positive steps towards greenhouse gases reductions
26. With reference to Stuxnet, consider the following statements

1.   Stuxnet   was   a   worm,   sent   by Iranian   hackers   aimed   at interfering with  USA‘s efforts to sabotage Iran‘s nuclear facilities

2.   It     was     designed     to     attack industrial Programmable        Logic Controllers or PLCs.

3. Stuxnet functions by targeting machines using the Microsoft Windows operating system and networks

4.   Stuxnet  is  typically  introduced  to the target environment by infected USB flash drive

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.   1,2 and 3 Only b.  2,3 and 4 Only c.   3 and 4 Only
d.  All



27. Consider   the   following   statements about   the  Indian Parliament‘s power to reorganize states:
1.   Any           bill           for
reorganization   of   the states    can    only    be introduced  with  prior Presidential recommendation.

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 7
2. The          bill          for reorganization of state(s)  must  be referred to the concerned   state(s) every time it is amended.
3. The   Parliament   can destroy  any  Indian state by diminishing its territorial area to zero.

Which of these is/are true?

a.   1 and 2
b.  1, 2 and 3 c.   Only 1
d.  None of the above.



28. With      reference      to      Mahanagar Telephone   Nigam   Limited (MTNL), consider the following statements

1.   The Government of India currently holds 100% stake in the company

2. It  was  established  to  provide telecommunications services in metro cities

3.   It  is  listed  on  New  York  Stock
Exchange

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  1 and 3 Only c.   2 and 3 Only d.  All


29.  Which of the following fundamental rights are denied to foreigners staying in    India,    but    granted    to    Indian
citizens?
1.   Freedom of speech and expression.
2.   Right     against     racial discrimination.
3.   Equality before law.
4.   Right    to    elementary education

Select  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a.   3 and 4 b.  1 and 2 c.   2 and 4
d.  All of the above


30. With reference to failure of the rebels to   defeat   the   British   during   1857
Revolt,      consider      the      following statements
1.   Almost half the Indian soldiers not only did not Revolt but fought against their own countrymen.
2. Although the rebels received the sympathy  of  the  people,  the country as a whole was not behind them.
3. The merchants, intelligentsia and Indian   rulers   actively   supported the British
4. The   rebels   had   no   political perspective or a definite vision of the future
5. Leaders like Maulvi Ahmadullah betrayed the sepoys by siding with the British

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.   1,2,3 and 5 b.  1,2, 3
c.   1,2,3 and 4 d.  All



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 8
31.  Which of the following rights would be suspended if a National Emergency is proclaimed by the Government of India?
1. Right to freedom of speech and expression
2.   Right   to   equality   of
opportunity in matters of public employment.
3. Right to protection in respect   of   conviction for offences.

Select  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a.   Only 1 b.  1 and 2 c.   2 and 3
d.  None of the above


32. Which of the following hypothetical cases would NOT fall under the category  of  an  offence  of untouchability under the Protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955?
1.   A researcher publishes
a research paper which justifies untouchability on  scientific  and rational grounds.
2. A  foreigner  justifies untouchability   based on philosophical arguments.
3. A non-Hindu is not allowed under a public Hindu temple.
4. A      private      hotel hoarding       displaying
―Only             non-dalits
allowed‖.
Select  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a.   Only 3
b.  1, 2 and 3 c.   1 and 2
d.  3 and 4


33. Article 19(a) guarantees the Right to freedom of speech and expression. As per the interpretations of the Supreme Court,  which  of  the  following  rights are covered in its ambit?
1.   Right to protests and strike.
2.   Right to be offended.
3.   Freedom        of        commercial advertisements.

Select  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a.   1 and 3 b.  1 and 2 c.   2 and 3 d.  Only 3

34. With    reference    to    the    National Electricity  Fund,  consider  the following statements

1.   It was launched to provide interest subsidy on loans raised by public Distribution Companies (DISCOMS). Private DISCOMS are not covered under the scheme.

2.   Its main objective is to improve the infrastructure in distribution sector.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.   2 Only c.   Both
d.  None



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 9
35. Which  of  the  following  hypothetical cases would qualify for a restriction on the right to freedom of speech and expression of Mr. A?
1.   Mr.   A   is   defaming   Mr.   B publicly and Mr. B moves the court of law.
2.   Mr.   A‘s   views    on   religious matters have the potential of instigating a local riot.
3. Country X has very cordial relations with India.  Mr. A‘s publicly  stated  views  on country X have the potential to affect the relations between these two countries negatively.

Select  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a.   2 and 3 b.  1 and 2
c.   All of the above
d.  None of the above


36. With  reference  to  The  Kuka  Revolt, consider the following statements
1.   It was led by Baba Ram Singh in
Punjab
2.   It   had   elements   of   a   messianic movement.
3.   It was not against the British rule

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.   1 and 3 Only d.  All

37. Consider   the   following   statements about the rights enshrined under Article  20  –  Protection  in  respect  of
Conviction   for   offences   –   in   the
Constitution of India:
1.   Criminal     laws     cannot     be applied retrospectively.
2.   Preventive       detention       lies
outside the ambit of this article. Which of these is/are true?
a.   Only 1
b.  Only 2 c.   Both
d.  None of the above


38. Which  of  the  following  rights  come under the Right to Life and Liberty under Article 21 of the Indian Constitution as per the interpretations of the Supreme Court?
1.   Right to livelihood
2.   Right to shelter
3.   Right to free legal aid
4.   Right to speedy trial
5.   Right to travel abroad
6.   Right of women to be treated with decency and dignity

Select  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a.   4 and 6
b.  All of the above c.   1, 2, 3 and 4
d.  1,2, 3 and 6


39. Consider the following statements in connection with the practice of Secularism in India:
1.   The state cannot spend public money on religious affairs.
2.   The state cannot impose a fee on any religious institution as it would breach their right to
freedom of religion.


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 10
Which of these is/are correct?

a.   Only 1 b.  Only 2 c.   Both
d.  None of the above


40. Consider   the   following   statements regarding the Right to Constitutional remedies under Article 32 of the Constitution:
1.   Unconstitutional         executive
actions    can    be    questioned under Article 32.
2.   Even  statutory  rights  can  be
enforced under Article 32. Which of these is/are correct?
a.   Only 1 b.  Only 2 c.   Both
d.  None of the above


41. Consider   the   following   statements about writ jurisdictions of Supreme Court and High Courts:
1.   High court can issue writs even for enforcing a statutory right.
2.   A High court cannot issue writs outside the borders of the particular state.
3.   For   the   High   courts  issuing writs is a discretionary power unlike the Supreme Court.

Which of these is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 b.  2 and 3 c.   1 and 3
d.  All of the above
42.  Consider the following statements:
1.   ‗Habeas           Corpus‘           and
‗Mandamus‘ both cannot be issued against private individuals.
2.   ‗Prohibition‘ can be issued only against  judicial  or  quasi- judicial authorities.

Which of these is/are correct?

a.   Only 1 b.  Only 2 c.   Both
d.  None of the above


43. Consider   the   following   statements about Martial law:
1. Martial   law   has   explicit constitutional backing.
2.   Martial   law   does   not   affect
Centre-state relations.
3. While  it  is  in  operation, ordinary law courts are suspended.

Which of these is/are correct?

a.   All of the above b.  2 and 3
c.   1 and 3 d.  Only 2


44. Right to vote in Lok Sabha and State assembly elections is a:
a.   Constitutional right
b.  Statutory right
c.   Fundamental right d.  None of the above


45. Consider   the   following   statements under Article 31– saving of laws providing for several measures:




http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 11
1.   State  laws  made  under  article
31A are exempt from judicial review if they have received presidential assent.
2.   Laws made under Article 31C are  exempt  from  judicial review if they distribute resources of the nation to promote public good.

Which of these is/are correct?

a.   Only 1 b.  Only 2 c.   Both
d.  None of the above


46. According to the Proclamation issued at Delhi by the rebels during 1857 revolt, which of the following were immediate causes of the revolt?
1. The British efforts to destroy the religion of the whole Hindustani Army
2.   The extreme poverty of the families of sepoys
3.   The   British  efforts  to   make   the
people by compulsion Christians

Which of the statements given above is/are incorrect?

a.   2 Only b.  1 Only c.   3 Only d.  None

47.  Socialist  and  communist  economies are  forms  of  state  controlled economies. Which of the following correctly  highlight  the  basic differences between the socialistic and communistic form of economies?
1.   Communism   is   a   transitional stage to socialism.
2.   The state owns all the properties in  a  socialistic  economy including even labour.
3. Communist    economies    are highly centrally planned economies, while the control is a little relaxed in socialistic economies.

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a.   1 and 3 b.  1 and 2 c.   Only 3 d.  2 and 3


48. With reference to Madame Blavatsky, consider the following statements
1.   She  established  the  Theosophical
Society
2. A.O Hume was a member of Theosophical Society and was influenced by Blavatsky

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.   Both
d.  None







49. In capitalism, there is uni-dimensional movement of money and wealth and almost no redistribution. Why is this so?
1.   Economic planning is not centralized.




http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 12
2.   Redistribution mechanisms   like   taxes are generally absent.
3. The                        private entrepreneurs supply all the goods and services.

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a.   1 and 2 b.  2 and 3 c.   Only 1
d.  All of the above


50. Which  of  the  following  can  be  the benefits of providing cheap public goods, which were once privately provided?
1.   It helps generate extra demand in the market.
2.   It acts a social security net.

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a.   Only 1 b.  Only 2 c.   Both
d.  None


51. Which of the following statements is/are true?
1.   China     was    the     first nation  to  experiment with market socialism.
2. Market socialism is the shift to state controlled mechanisms  in capitalistic economies.

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a.   Only 1
b.  Only 2 c.   Both
d.  None


52. Consider   the   following   statements about  the ‗depreciation‘  in the value  of goods and services.
1.   Levels and rates of depreciation
can be altered.
2.   Altering     depreciation     levels may reduce economic growth.

Which of these is/are true?

a.   Only 1 b.  Only 2 c.   Both
d.  None


53.  Consider the following statements:
1.   India‘s   GNP   has   always  been lower than its GDP post- independence.
2.   IMF    ranks    nations    in    the
‗national      income‘       category
based on GDP (PPP). Which of these is/are true?
a.   Only 1
b.  Only 2 c.   Both
d.  None


54. Which of the following relations is/are correct?
1.   GDP  =   NNP   +   Depreciation
(+/-) Income from abroad
2. GDP at factor cost = GNP - Indirect taxes - Subsidies

Which of these is/are true?

a.   Only 1 b.  Only 2


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 13
c.   Both d.  None


55. With reference to the response of the British against the Indigo revolt, consider the following statements
1.   It was ruthlessly suppressed with
violent force
2. The    British‘s     response    was restrained because of the support extended to the revolt by the intelligentsia and missionaries
3. The  government  appointed  a commission to inquire into the problem of indigo cultivation.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 3 b.  2 and 3 c.   3 Only d.  2 Only


56. Consider  the  following  statements about Citizenship in India:
1.   The        criteria        for
Citizenship can be amended by a simple majority in the Parliament.
2. An Indian citizen can voluntary relinquish citizenship.

Which of these is/are true?

a.   Only 1 b.  Only 2 c.   Both
d.  None of the above
57. The Human Development Index (HDI) includes    which    of    the    following parameters/indicators/sub-indicators of development:
1.   Real Per capita income adjusted for Purchasing power parity (PPP)
2.   Asset ownership by population
3. Participation of women in the workforce

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a.   2 and 3 b.  1 and 3 c.   Only 1 d.  1 and 2


58. The Gross National Happiness (GNH) index differs or is similar to HDI in which of the following respects:
1.   HDI focuses mainly on the non- material side of development similar to the GNH.
2. GNH includes a responsive, transparent and accountable government as an important indicator  of  development, unlike the HDI.
3.   HDI values are affected by the levels of ecological degradation and imbalances.

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a.   Only 2 b.  1 and 2 c.   Only 1
d.  All of the above







http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 14
59.  Consider the following statements:
1. Indian       economy       nearly stagnated under colonial rule.
2. Foreign      investment      was discouraged  in  the  early decades post-independence.
3.   Central  economic  planning  in
India      started      only      after independence.

Which of these is/are true?

a.   All of the above b.  1 and 2
c.   Only 3 d.  2 and 3


60. With  reference  to  Santhal  rebellion, consider the following statements
1.   They  made  a  determined  attempt to expel the outsiders — the dikus
2. The Santhals believed that their actions had the blessings of God.
3. The  Santhal  insurrection  was helped by a large number of non- tribal and poor dikus.
4.   The Santhals did not revolt against
the  British  but  only  against  the moneylenders and outsiders

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1,2 and 3 b.  2,3 and 4 c.   3 and 4
d.  All


61. Which of the following factors could have been the motivators for India to choose  Industries as  prime  mover  of the economy?
1.   Lack  of  indigenous  industrial
support to agriculture.
2. Assistance   by   international bodies in industrialization.
3.   Need for strengthening defense capabilities.
4.   Easy      availability      of      raw
materials

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a.   1 and 3
b.  1, 2 and 3 c.   2 and 3
d.  1, 2 and 4


62. Which  of  the  following  policies  or schemes or laws directly affect Agriculture in India?
1.   Exim Policy
2.   Bharat Nirmaan
3.   MGNREGA
4.   Provision of Urban amenities in rural areas (PURA)
5.   Food Security Act

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a.   2 and 3 only b.  1, 2, 3 and 5
c.   All of the above d.  1,2 and 5


63. The ‗East Asian  Miracle‘  (World  Bank Reports) refers to which of the following:
a.   High growth rates sustained in the East Asian economies due to appropriate state intervention.
b.  High growth rates sustained in the East Asian economies due to success of market led growth.
c.   High growth rates sustained in
the East Asian economies due to


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 15
a        completely        centralized planning process.
d.  High growth rates sustained in the East Asian economies due to heavy focus on industries instead of agriculture.


64. Consider the following statements:
1.   Crude Oil and Cement related industries are a part  of ‗core industries‘ in India.
2.   Steel has the highest weightage in the Index of Industrial production   (IIP)  amongst   the
‗core industries‘.

Which of these is/are true?
d.  None
66. After           independence,           Indian government set up a number of PSUs to lift the economy. Which of the following could have been the motivating factors behind the same?
1.   Low    purchasing    power    of
masses.
2.   Low    defense    capabilities    of
India.
3.   Low  volume  of  exports  from India to be lifted up to correct the trade balance.

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a.   Only 1 b.  Only 2 c.   Both
d.  None


65. With   reference  to   the   ‗safety  valve theory‘,  consider the following statements
1.   According to it, the Indian National
Congress   was   started   by   A.O. Hume and others under the official direction,  guidance  and  advice  of no  less  a  person  than  Lord Dufferin, the Viceroy.
2. It was done to provide safe and constitutional outlet for the rising discontent among the masses, to avert a popular and violent revolution

Which    of    the    above    statements    is/are incorrect?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.   Both
a.   2 and 3 only
b.  1 and 2 only c.   Only 1
d.  1, 2 and 3


67. Consider   the   following   statements about the Public Sector Units (PSUs) in India in the first few decades post- independence:
1.   The  PSUs  were  also  meant  to
generate revenue for the social sector programmes in India.
2.   The   PSUs   were   not   able   to deliver public goods adequately because of internal gross mismanagement and heavy competition with private sector.

Which of these is/are true?

a.   Only 1 b.  Only 2 c.   Both
d.  None


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 16
68.  Which of the following steps did the Indian government  took  in line  with the need for immediate social change in India post-independence?
1.   Land reforms
2.   Opening of PSUs
3.   Limiting  foreign investment  in
India

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a.   Only 1 b.  1 and 2
c.   All of the above d.  2 and 3


69. The Indian government has moved from industries to agriculture as the prime moving force of the economy in
2002 on the advice of the Planning Commission. It marks one of the biggest policy shifts in India. What major challenges were to be solved by this policy shift?
1.   Generating         more         rural employment.
2.   Ending  the  monopoly  of  the
PSUs in the industrial sector.
3.   Ensuring  adequate  agricultural marketing infrastructure.
4.   To    boost    demand    in    the economy.

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a.   1 and 3
b.  1, 2 and 3 c.   1, 3 and 4
d.  2 and 4 only
70. During  the  British  rule  in  India,  the tribals had cause to be upset for a variety of reasons. Which of the following are those reasons?


1. The   Begar   system   was   not introduced in the tribal regions
2. It recognized the tribal chiefs as zamindars and introduced a new system  of  land  revenue  and taxation of tribal products
3. It   encouraged   the   influx   of Christian  missionaries  into  the tribal areas.
4.   It  introduced  a  large  number  of
moneylenders, traders arid revenue farmers as middlemen among the tribals.

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a.   2,3 and 4
b.  3 and 4 Only
c.   1,3 and 4 Only d.  All


71. Which  of  the  following  can  be  the examples of ‗equality before  law  and equal  protection of laws‘ under Article
14?
1. A   disabled   person   is sentenced to less rigorous punishment than a physically fit person under the charges of impersonation and forgery.
2.   Women are not allowed to
be taken under police custody   after   7   PM,   but men are.
3.   Indian president is immune
to    criminal    proceedings


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 17
while  being  in  the  office term.

Select  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a.   Only 1 b.  2 and 3 c.   1 and 2 d.  Only 2


72. Consider  the  following  statements regarding preventive detention:
1. Even     a     person     under preventive detention does have the right to consult and be defended by a legal practitioner or a lawyer under Article 22.
2. Being a subject related to the security of the nation, only the Parliament can make laws on preventive detention, the state legislatures cannot.
3.   India is the only nation to have a preventive detention law in the world as of now.

Which of these is/are true?

a.   2 and 3 b.  1 and 3 c.   1 and 2 d.  Only 3


73. With  reference  to  Internet  Protocol version      6 (IPv6),      consider      the following statements
1.   It     is     the     latest     version     of the Internet                   Protocol (IP), the communications    protocol that provides an identification and location system for computers on networks and routes traffic across
the Internet
2.    IPv6        was        developed        by the Internet      Engineering      Task Force (IETF) to deal with the long- anticipated        problem       of IPv4 address exhaustion.
3.   India   is   yet   to   issue   addresses under IPV6

Which    of    the    above    statements    is/are incorrect?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.   3 Only d.  None


74. Which of the following is included in the calculation of Gross National Product (GNP) but not Gross Domestic Product (GDP)?
1.   Outstanding  loans  abroad  and
Interest on external loans.
2.   Trade balance.
3.   Investment balance in sovereign bonds.

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a.   2 and 3 b.  1 and 3 c.   Only 2 d.  Only 1

75. The     government     of     India     has undertaken  creation  of  National Optical Fibre Network (NOFN) to

a.  Provide internet access to all the urban households by 2015

b.   Provide  broadband  access  to  2.5 lakh panchayats in the country

c.   Create extensive network to enable industries to access cheap internet all over the country


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 18
d.   None of the above



76. With        reference        to        spectrum management, consider the following statements

1. The     purpose     of     spectrum management is to mitigate radio spectrum  pollution and  maximize the  benefit  of  usable  radio spectrum.

2. Spectrum and satellite orbits are scarce natural resources which are prone  to  harmful  interference, hence exclusively managed by the governments

3.   Spectrum      management is      the process    of    regulating    the    use of radio    frequencies to    promote efficient use and gain a net social benefit

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.   1 and 3 Only d.  All


77. How do high rates of depreciation in the economy affect the per capita income (PCI) of a nation?
a.   Increase PCI
b.  Decrease PCI
c.   No effect as national income is decided by the volume of production in the economy.
d.  No effect as per capita income depends  on  the  total expenditure that is incurred by the public sector, private sector and individual consumers.
78. MeghRaj project of the Government of
India aims at

a.   Creation of network of air fleet to  carry  on  cloud  seeding during drought seasons

b. Creation    of    network    of computers to study the mechanism and predict the arrival of monsoons accurately

c.   To create Government of India cloud network of internet   to evolve  a  Strategy  and implement various components including governance mechanism to ensure proliferation of Cloud in government

d.  None of the above



79. Which   of   the   following   is/are      a defence  undertaking  of  the Government of India?

1.   Goa Shipyard Limited

2.   Garden   reach   Shipbuilders   and
Engineers Limited

3.   Mazgon Dock limited

4.   Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a.   4 Only

b.  2 and 4 Only

c.   2,3 and 4 Only d.  All






80. Consider the following statements:
1.   The stark contrast between the monetary     dependency     and

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 19
labour dependency on agriculture was first seen in India.
2.   In  India,  economic  growth  in the last decade has been lead largely by the secondary sector.

Which of these is/are true?

a.   Only 1 b.  Only 2 c.   Both
d.  None



81. With   reference   to   Sainik   Schools, consider the following statements

1.   These schools are open only for the children of serving and retired defence personnel

2.   These  were  established to  rectify the regional and class imbalance amongst    the    Officer    cadre    of the Indian Military

3.   Their aim is to to prepare students for entry into the National Defence Academy (NDA)

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.   2 and 3 Only b.  1 and 2 Only c.   3 Only
d.  All



82. With  reference  to   Mahila  Samakhya programme, consider the following statements

1.   It was launched in 1988 to pursue the   objectives   of   the   National Policy  on  Education,  1986  to convert its them into a concrete programme for the education and
empowerment  of  women  in  rural areas

2. This programme was given an Honourable Mention of the Noma Literacy Prize by UNESCO

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.   Both
d.  None



83. With       reference       to       Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan (RMSA), consider the following statements

1.   It was launched by the central government  to  enhance  access to secondary education and to improve its quality

2.    It seeks to ensure availability of secondary schools within reasonable distance of every habitation

3. It seeks to reduce disparities related to gender, socio- economic status, geographical location and disability.

4.   It‘s  a  wholly  centrally  funded
scheme

Which of the above statements given is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2

b.   All

c.   2 and 3

d.   1,2 and 3



84. With  reference  to  Ultra  Mega  Power Projects(UMPP),  consider  the following statements

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 20
1. Its objective was to facilitate the development of power plants with
4000mw  or  more  capacity  at  coal pitheads and coastal areas

2.   Tata  power at Mundra is country‘s first  UMPP  and  is  already connected to the northern grid

3. These  projects  are  based  on supercritical technology

4.   supercritical  technology  uses  less fuel and contributes less green house gases to the atmosphere

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.   1,3 and 4 Only b.  1 and 3 Only
c.   3 and 4 Only

d.  All



85. Which  of  the  following  organization advises the government on matters relating to the National Electricity Policy and formulates short-term and perspective plans for the development of electricity systems?

a.   Central              Electricity
Regulatory Commission

b.  Bureau        of        Energy
Efficiency

c.   Central              Electricity
Authority

d.  None of the above



86.  Consider the following statements:
1.   As   India   implements   Goods and Services Tax (GST), it may be appropriate to calculate national income at current prices.
2.   Developed    nations    generally
calculate  their  national  income
at market cost at current prices as they have a uniform taxation regime.

Which of these is/are true?

a.   Only 1 b.  Only 2 c.   Both
d.  None

87. With    reference   to   NASA‘s   Origins Spectral Interpretation Resource Identification Security Regolith Explorer (OSIRIS-REx), consider the following statements

1.    It  is  a  planetary  science  mission, the third selected in the New Frontiers                              Program, after Juno and New Horizons.

2.  OSIRIS-REx is   a   planned   Mars study and sample return mission

3. Material returned is expected to enable   scientists   to   learn   more about the time before the formation and evolution of the Solar System and initial stages of planet formation

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.  1 and 2 Only c.   2 and 3 Only d.  Only 3


88. With  reference to native  sepoy‘s  life in the  British  army,  consider  the following statements
1. The sepoys‘ discontent was not limited to religion alone. They were equally unhappy with their emoluments.

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 21
2.   He was made to feel a subordinate at  every  step  and  was discriminated  against  racially  and in matters of promotion and privileges.
3.   For him, religion and caste proved to be more powerful than the prestige of serving in the British army

Which of the statements given above is/are incorrect?

a.   3 Only b.  2 Only c.   All
d.  None

89. Recently  India has decided to propose renaming of Internet as ‗Equinet‘. The objective is

a.   To make internet governance more inclusive  so  that  all  nations  can have equal say in it

b.  To  make  available  internet  access to every corner of the world

c.  To make internet accessible to all genders and races of the planet

d.  None of the above



90. Recent study has revealed that Indian deltas are sinking or subsiding fast. This is because of

a. Melting   or   glaciers   in   the Himalayas and carrying of large scale sediments by the rivers into oceans

b.  Large number of floods near delta regions

c. Construction of large number of dams on major delta forming rivers

d.  None of the above
91. Gorumara   and   Jaldapara   National
Parks are primarily famous for a.   Bengal tigers
b.  Indian one horned rhinoceros

c.   Olive Ridley turtles d.  None of the above


92. The capitalistic form of economy has its origin in the famous work of Adam Smith. Consider the following statements about a capitalistic economy:
1. Prices  are  determined  not entirely by the market forces.
2. Competitiveness in such an economy  is  vital  to  its successful functioning and ensuring public well-being.
3. The quantity of good to be produced is decided entirely by the market forces.

Which of the statements is/are correct?

a.   1, 2 and 3 b.  Only 3
c.   1 and 2 d.  2 and 3



93. Which  of  the  following  diseases  are caused by smoking or more prominent in smokers?

1.   Lung, mouth and throat cancer

2.   Cardiovascular                       disease
(atherosclerosis)

3.   Type II Diabetes

4.   Chronic    Obstructive    Pulmonary
Disease

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 22
a.    1,2 and 4 Only

b.    1 and 4 Only

c.    1 Only

d.    All



94. Consider   the   following   statements with reference to solar power generation

1. The    Ivanpah    Solar    Electric Generating  System  in  Nevada, USA, is the world‘s largest  solar energy generating power station

2.   It uses the solar thermal technology

3. In  Solar  thermals,  superheated water steam is produced, which drives a turbine and generates electricity

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.   1 and 3 Only d.  All


95.  ‗Heartbleed‘  virus  is a

a.   Variant of SARS virus which was recently discovered in few South East Asian countries

b. Computer  virus  which  was detected ten years ago at CERN

c.  Cancer virus known to accelerate cancer of the white blood cells

d.  None of the above



96. Consider the following statement with reference to conditions which aggravated the misery of farmers in Deccan regions in 1860s
1.   The end of the American Civil War in 1864 brought about an acute increase   in cotton exports and an improvement  in prices
2.   In  1867,  the  Government  raised land revenue by nearly 50 per cent pushing farmers towards moneylenders
3. In Maharashtra, as part of the Ryotwari system, land revenue was settled directly with the peasant who was also recognized as the owner of his land.

Which    of    the    above    statements    is/are incorrect?

a.   2 Only b.  1 Only c.   3 Only d.  None

97. With  reference  to  the  environmental photobioreactor (ePBR system), consider the following statements

1.   It  is     the   world‘s  first   standard algae growing platform, one that simulates dynamic natural environments

2. It  recreates  the  environmental conditions such as temperature, light intensity and CO2, enabling scientists to study algae under the same conditions found outdoors in the ponds, but in the more efficient confines of the laboratory

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.    1 Only b.    2 Only c.    Both
d.    None



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 23
98. With reference to the Indigo Revolt of
1859-60,     consider     the     following statements
1. The  planters,   most  of  them Europeans,  compelled   cultivators to grow indigo through fraudulent methods
2. Missionaries were another group which extended active support to the   British   to   suppress   Indigo revolt.
3.   The cultivator was not allowed to pay back advance money taken
4. Hem    Chandra    Kar,    Deputy Magistrate of Kalaroa supported and  aided  the  indigo  rebellion  in his   official   capacity   and   as   an Indian

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1,2 and 3 Only b.  1 and 3 Only
c.   1, 2 and 4 Only d.  All
99. Which    of    the    following    are    the manifestations of or the proof of the democratic character of the Indian polity?
1.   The executive is responsible to the Indian Parliament.
2.   Ban         on         unreasonable
discrimination.
3.   Governors  are  nominated  by the Centre.
4.   India       has       a       written constitution.

Select  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a.   1, 2 and 4 b.  2 and 4
c.   Only 2
d.  1, 3 and 4


100.           As of now, India calculates its national income at:
a.   Factor cost at constant prices b.  Factor cost at current prices
c.   Market cost at constant prices
d.  Market cost at current prices






























http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 24
