    




INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK PRELIMINARY EXAM - 2015  


INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST - 18

GENERAL STUDIES  

PAPER-I

Time Allowed: 2 Hours                                                                                              Maximum Marks: 200  


INSTRUCTIONS
1.   IMMEDITELY AFTER THE COMMENCEMENT  OF THE EXAMINATION, YOU SHOULD
CHECK  THAT  THIS  TEST  BOOKLET   DOES  NOT  HAVE  ANY  UNPRINTED   OR  TORN  OR MISSING PAGES OR ITEMS, ETC. IF SO, GET IT REPLACED BY A COMPLETE TEST BOOKLET.
2.  You have to enter your Roll Number on the Test I Booklet in the Box provided alongside. DO NOT write anything else on the Test Booklet.

4.  This  Test  Booklet  contains  200  items  (questions).  Each  item  is  printed  only  in  English.  Each  item comprises four responses (answers). You will select the response which you want to mark on the Answer Sheet. In case you feel that there is more than one correct response, mark the response which you consider the best. In any case, choose ONLY ONE response for each item.
5.  You have to mark all your responses ONLY on the separate Answer Sheet provided.  See directions in the
Answer Sheet.
6.  All items carry equal marks.

7.  Before you proceed to mark in the Answer Sheet the response to various items in the Test Booklet, you have to fill in some particulars in the Answer Sheet as per instructions  sent to you with your Admission Certificate.

8.  After  you  have  completed  filling  in all your  responses  on the Answer  Sheet  and  the examination  has concluded, you should hand over to the Invigilator only the Answer Sheet. You are permitted to take away with you the Test Booklet.

9.  Sheets for rough work are appended in the Test Booklet at the end.
10.  Penalty for wrong answers :
THERE WILL BE PENALTY FOR WRONG ANSWERS MARKED BY A CANDIDATE IN THE OBJECTIVE TYPE QUESTION PAPERS.
(i)    There are four alternatives for the answer to every question. For each question for which a wrong answer has been given by the candidate, one-third of the marks assigned to that question will be deducted as penalty.
(ii)   If a candidate gives more than one answer, it will be treated as a wrong answer even if one of the given answers happens to be correct and there will be same penalty as above to that question.
(iii)     If a question is left blank, i.e., no answer is given by the candidate, there will be no penalty for that question.




    
http://insightsonindia.com


INSIGHTS  ON    INDIA    MOCK    TEST    SERIES    FOR    CIVIL    SERVICES    PRELIMINARY    EXAM    2015    
    



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Page  1    
    
    

1.   Consider the following statements about
District Planning Committees.
1.   It is constitutionally mandated for each state to constitute a District Planning Committee (DPC).
2.  The DPC does not plan for the urban
based Municipalities.
3.  All members of the DPC are elected indirectly.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 only
b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




2.  Consider the following statements about the composition and functioning of Municipal Corporations (MCs).
1.   The composition of the MCs is governed solely by State laws.
2.  The Municipal Commissioner heads the council in the MCs.
3.  All decisions in the MCs are subject to
the approval of the Municipal
Commissioner.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 only
b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  None of the above




3.  Consider the following statements.
1.   The constitution provides for a uniform administrative system in all Union Territories (UTs).
2.  An administrator of a union territory
is an agent of the President and not head of state like a Governor.
3.  The governor is to act independently of his council of ministers if he is administering a UT too.



Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above






4.  Which of the following statements is correct about the legislative control of Parliament over the Union Territories (UTs)?
a)  The Parliament cannot make laws in
State List for those UTs that have a legislative assembly.
b)  The Parliament can make laws in
State List for even those UTs that have a legislative assembly but only after prior recommendation of the President.
c)  The Parliament can make laws on any
subject of the three lists (including the
State List) for the union territories. d)  None of the above.




5.  Consider the following statements with reference to the National Tiger Conservation Authority:
1.   It is a statutory body under the
Ministry of Environment, Forests and
Climate Change.
2.  It approves the tiger conservation plan prepared by the State Government.
3.  It is set up under the Chairmanship of the Minister for Environment and Forests.

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Page  2    
    
    
Which of the above statements are true?

a)  Only 1.
b)  Only 1 & 3. c)  Only 2 & 3. d)  All.




6.  Consider the following statements regarding the Karchi Session of Indian National Congress, 1931:
1.   Resolutions on Fundamental Rights
and the National Economic Programme were passed and adopted during this session
2.  The session, which was under public pressure after the execution of Bhagat Singh, rejected a resolution on the Gandhi-Irwin

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 Only b)  2 Only c)  Both
d)  None



7.   The Government has proposed a Comprehensive Bankruptcy Code of global standards to be brought in fiscal 2015-16. This will help in improving
a) Ease of doing business in India
b) Banking standards in India
c) The situation of Micro-finance
Institutions in India
d) The situation of debt-ridden poor families




8.  The Government has announced Tax free infrastructure bonds in the recent Budget for which of the following sectors?
1.  Rail
2. Road
3. Irrigation


4. Energy

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a) 1, 2 and 3 only b) 2 and 3 only
c) All of the above d) 1 and 4 only




9.  SETU - Self-Employment and Talent Utilization has been established in the recent budget to support entrepreneurs in which of the following domains?
1.  Technology related issues
2. Financial issues
3. Facilitation to start-up the business

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a) 1 and 2 only b) 2 and 3 only c) 1 and 3 only
d) All of the above




10. In the latest Annual Budget 2015-16, highest tax revenue has been generated from
a) Corporation tax
b) Excise duty c) Service Tax d) Income Tax




11. Arrange the following items in order of increasing quantum of spending in the recent Annual budget 2015-16.
1.  Subsidies
2. Defense Services
3. Grants to State and UTs
4. Interest Payments

Choose the correct order from the codes below.

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Page  3    
    
    


a) 1243 b) 4123 c) 4321
d) 3412


c) 1 and 3 only
d) All of the above






12. The Government proposes to set up 5 new Ultra Mega Power Projects (UMPPs), each of 4000 mw capacity in the ‘plug-and-play mode’. What is meant by ‘plug-and-play mode’ in this context?
a) The UMPPs will be a high end
technology venture supported by the government from the very initial phases
b) All clearances and linkages will be in
place before the project is awarded by the Government
c) The basic infrastructure of the UMPPs will be setup by the government, and then ownership will be transferred to the private sector for further upgradation
d) None of the above






13. The Finance Minister has proposed to set up a Public Debt Management Agency (PDMA) in the latest Budget. Consider the following statements about it.
1.  PDMA will take care of both India’s
external borrowing and domestic debt.
2. It will purchase and re-issue various bonds.
3. The agency will also regulate the
security markets in the country.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a) 1 and 2 only b) 2 and 3 only
14. In the recent Budget, the Government has mooted to bring an India Financial Code. Which of the following domains will be included in the code?
1.  Public Debt management
2. Financial Consumer protection
3. Monetary Policy
4. Reducing systemic risks in the Indian financial system

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a) 1 and 2 only
b) 2, 3 and 4 only c) 1 and 3 only
d) All of the above






15. The Ministry of Finance is composed of:
1.   Department of Economic Affairs.
2.  Department of Expenditure.
3.  Department of Revenue.
4.  Department of Disinvestment.
5.  Department of Financial Services. Choose the answer using the codes below:
a)  Only 1, 2, 3 & 5. b)  Only 2, 3, 4 & 5. c)  Only 1, 2, 3 & 4. d)  All.




16. India’s foreign exchange reserves comprise:
1.   Foreign Currency Assets.
2.  Gold.
3.  Special Drawing Rights (SDRs).

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Page  4    
    
    


4.  Reserve Tranche Position in the IMF.

19. Which of the following fiscal indicators mentioned in the Annual budget has/have
Choose the answer using the codes below:

a)  Only 1, 2 & 3. b)  Only 2, 3 & 4. c)  Only 1 & 3.
d)  All.


17. Which of the following functions are performed by the Central Statistical Office?
1.   Compilation of National Accounts.
2.  Conduct of Annual Survey of
Industries and Economic Censuses.
3.  Compilation of Index of Industrial
Production.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below:

a)  Only 1.
b)  Only 2 & 3. c)  Only 1 & 3. d)  All.




18. Consider the following statements about the Election Commission of India (ECI).
1.   Being an all-India body it serves both the Central and State Governments.
2.  It is not at all concerned with elections
to any level of Panchayats and
Municipalities.
3.  The State election Commissions work under the overall supervision of the ECI.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above
increased as a percentage of GDP from last year?
1.  Revenue Expenditure
2. Gross Tax revenue
3. Tax devolution to states
4. Total outstanding liabilities of the
Government

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a) 2 and 3 only
b) 1, 2 and 3 only c) 2, 3 and 4 only d) 1 and 4 only




20.As per the latest World Bank data, arrange the following countries in decreasing
order of per capital GHG emissions.
1.  USA
2. Australia
3. India
4. Indonesia

Choose the correct arrangement from the codes below.

a) 1243 b) 1234 c) 2134 d) 2143




21. The PAT (perform - achieve - trade), as a part of the National Action Plan for Climate Change Mission, is a scheme for
a) trading energy-efficiency certificates in large energy-intensive industries
b) trading carbon credits between developing economies
c) trading GHG credits between energy
intensive industries within a country d) None of the above



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Page  5    
    
    



22. A ordinance can only be issued by the Lieutenant Governor (LG) in Delhi UT when
a)  The Chief Minister of Delhi has
endorsed it.
b)  The CM along with the Council of
Ministers has endorsed it.
c)  The President has given prior recommendation to issue it.
d)  The LG is satisfied that the situation demands it and no approval is required at the time of issuing the ordinance.




23. Coral Reefs in India are found in:
1.   Gulf of Mannar.
2.  Gulf of Kachchh.
3.  Lakshadweep.
4.  Andaman and Nicobar Islands.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below:

a)  Only 1.
b)  Only 1 & 2.
c)  Only 1, 3 & 4.
d)  All of the above.




24. Consider the following statements:
1.   Nine of the eighteen biosphere reserves in India are a part of the World Network of Biosphere Reserves, based on the UNESCO Man and the Biosphere (MAB) Programme list.
2.  The Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve was
the first biosphere reserve in India established in the year 1986.
3.  In Biosphere Reserves protection is granted not only to the flora and fauna of the protected region, but also to the human communities who


inhabit these regions, and their ways of life.

Which of the above statements are true?

a)  Only 1.
b)  Only 2 & 3. c)  Only 1 & 2. d)  All.




25. Consider the following statements with reference to the National Biodiversity Authority:
1.   It is a statutory autonomous body under the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
2.  The recommendations made by it are advisory in nature.
3.  It is headed by the Prime Minister of India.

Which of the above statements are true?

a)  Only 1 & 2. b)  Only 3.
c)  Only 1 & 2. d)  All.




26. The Convention on Biological Diversity
(CBD):
1.   Is a legally binding multilateral environmental agreement.
2.  Has 193 contracting Parties
(Countries) as its members.
3.  Provides for equitable sharing of benefits arising from the utilization of traditional knowledge, and practices, with holders of such knowledge.

Which of the above statements are true?

a)  Only 1.
b)  Only 2 & 3. c)  Only 1 & 3.
d)  All.

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Page  6    
    
    



27. Which of the following activities have been recently brought under MGNREGA as part of Green India Mission?
1.   Water Harvesting
2.  Afforestation
3.  Farm Forestry

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




28. Researchers have recently found Endophytic alga thriving in the Indian Ocean. Its discovery is significant because a)  It can be used to make bio-fuels
b)  It can be used to clean up oil spill disasters in oceans
c)  It contains anticancer compounds such as Taxol
d)  It can act as an effective phyto-
remediator




29. With reference to the Communal Award announced by the British government in August 1932, consider the following statements:
1.   According to it, Muslims would be elected only by Muslims to the legislatures
2.  This Award declared that the Depressed Classes as minorities and would be treated on par with Muslims or any other religious minorities

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 Only b)  2 Only c)  Both


d)  None




30. NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope has recently spotted massive saltwater ocean under the icy crust of Jupiter’s moon
‘Ganymede’. Consider the following
statements about Ganymede.
1.   It is the largest moon in our Solar system.
2.  It is the only moon with its own magnetic field.
3.  The moon also creates ribbons of hot electrified gas called as auroras.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




31. Recently Pakistan has successfully tested some of its first indigenously built defence missiles and equipments. In this context, what are Burraq and Barq?
a)  All-weather armed drone and laser
guided missile
b)  Laser guided missile and all-weather armed drone
c)  Inter-Continental Ballistic Missile (ICBM) and Unarmed surveillance drones
d)  Unarmed surveillance drones and Inter-Continental Ballistic Missile (ICBM)


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Page  7    
    
    
32. Japan and France have recently signed an arms transfer agreement for military equipment, services and technology. This will help Japan in developing
1.   Drones
2.  Unmanned technologies for underwater search missions
3.  Amphibian Flight technologies

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above





33. Consider the following statements with reference to the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009:
1.   According to the Act, every child
in the age group of 6 to 14 years has Right to elementary education.
2.  The Act makes provisions for a
non-admitted child to be admitted to an age appropriate class.
3.  Education in the Indian constitution is a concurrent issue and both centre and states can legislate on the issue.

Which of the above statements are true?

a)  Only 1.
b)  Only 2 & 3. c)  Only 1 & 3. d)  All.




34. Consider the following statements with reference to Mahila Samakhya Programme:
1.   The programme was launched in
1989 to pursue the objectives of


the National Policy on Education,
1986.
2.  The Mahila Samakhya Scheme is currently being implemented in all states across the country except
the North Eastern States and
Sikkim.



Which of the above statements are true?

a)  Only 1. b)  Only 2. c)  Both.
d)  None




35. The Economic Survey points out that the Indian banking system is afflicted by what might be called “double financial repression”. It means
1.  Returns to savers and bankers are
reduced
2. Misallocation of capital to investors
3. Not enough capital for government to borrow from the market

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a) 1 and 2 only b) 2 and 3 only c) 1 and 3 only
d) All of the above




36. Consider the following statements about the role of UPSC.

Assertion (A): It has to be consulted in all promotion and disciplinary matters concerned with higher Public Services.

Reason (R): It is the Central personnel agency in India.

In the context of the statements above, which of these is true?

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Page  8    
    
    


a)  A and R both are true, and R is the correct explanation for A.
b)  A and R both are true, and R is the
NOT the correct explanation for A. c)  A is correct, R is incorrect.
d)  A and R both are incorrect.


In the context of the statements above, which of these is true?

a)  A and R both are true, and R is the correct explanation for A.
b)  A and R both are true, and R is the
NOT the correct explanation for A. c)  A is incorrect, R is correct.
d)  A and R both are incorrect.
37. Article 280 of the Constitution of India
provides for a Finance Commission. Which kind of a body is Finance Commission?
a)  Quasi-judicial
b)  Executive
c)  Administrative d)  Quasi-legislative




38. As per the qualifications prescribed by law, who among the following is/are fit to become the Chairman of the Finance Commission?
1.   A high court Judge
2.  A person who has special knowledge in economics but has not worked for the Government anytime before
3.  A person who has served for two or
more years as Secretary to the
Government of India

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 only
b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only d)  3 only


39. Consider the following statements. Assertion (A): The recommendations made by
the Finance Commission binding on the government.

Reason (R): Finance Commission is a constitutional body.




40.Which of these is/are Constitutional bodies?
1.   National Commission for SCs
2.  National Commission for Minorities
3.  National Commission for Protection of Child Rights
4.  National Human Rights Commission

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 only
b)  1 and 4 only
c)  All of the above d)  2, 3 and 4 only




41. Consider the following statements about the National Commission for SCs.
1.   The Chairman of the Commission is appointed by a Selection panel which includes he PM, Lok Sabha Speaker and Leader of Opposition, Lok Sabha.
2.  The commission presents an annual report to the president which is presented to Parliament.
3. The orders of the commission are binding on the Government.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a) 1 only b) 2 only
c) 2 and 3 only
d) 1 and 3 only

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Page  9    
    
    
42. As per the official view expressed in the recent Economic Survey, which of the following factors may have been responsible for hindering private investment in India in last few years?
1.  Deficiencies of the public private
partnership (PPP) model in infrastructure
2. Weak corporate balance sheets
3. High NPAs of banks

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a) 1 and 2 only b) 2 and 3 only c) 1 and 3 only
d) All of the above




43. Consider the followings statements with reference to Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana:
1.   The scheme is being implemented through the Rural Electrification Corporation (REC) which has been designated as Nodal Agency by Ministry of Power.
2.  The scheme provides for free of cost
connection to all rural households living below poverty line.
3.  It is a 100% centrally sponsored scheme.



Which of the above statements are true?

a)  Only 1.
b)  Only 1 & 2. c)  Only 1 & 3. d)  All.


44. Consider the following statements about the Climate Investment Fund (CIF).
1.  It is for developing and middle-income
countries only.


2. It also funds investment in clean technologies.
3. It provides funding support for
development planning, including public and private sector projects.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a) 1 and 2 only b) 2 and 3 only c) 1 and 3 only
d) All of the above




45. Consider the following statements.
1.  As per the IMF, every fast-growing Asian economy in recent years has accelerated as it underwent a demographic transition.
2. In India, the higher growth states have witnessed a greater demographic dividend than the lower growth states in the last two decades.

Which of the above is/are true?

a) 1 only b) 2 only
c) Both 1 and 2 d) None




46. Which of the following virtuous cycles of economic growth is related with the demographic dividend (DD)?
a) DD-> Lower dependency ratio (LDR) -
> High Growth-> Low fertility -> LDR
b) DD-> High employment -> High growth -> LDR-> High employment
c) DD-> High Growth -> High
Employment -> DD
d) None of the above



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  10    
    
    
47. With reference to Gandhiji’s views on untouchability, consider the following statements:
1.   According to him the very existence of
Hinduism was at risk if untouchability continued to exist
2.  He asked his followers to ignore shastras if they preached untouchability even in subtle form
3.  Gandhiji not being hostile to Dr
Ambedkar’s or other Harijan’s criticisms was a way of undergoing penance for the mistakes committed by caste Hindus against lower castes
4.  It can be said that acceptance of
reservations for scheduled castes by
the caste Hindus during the early years after gaining independence was a reaction to Gandhiji’s please for penance and reparation

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a) 1, 2 and 3 Only b) 2 and 3 Only
c) 1, 2, and 4 Only d) All




48. Which of the following accurately defines employment rate?
a) growth in those looking for work who actually find it
b) growth in the fraction of those who can
work and that actually look for work c) the total percentage of people
employed in the country divided by
the total working age population d) None of the above




49. Total Factor Productivity (TFP) is the portion of output not explained by the a) amount of input used in production b) investment put in production
c) wages of labour needed for production


d) market supply and demand forces




50. Which of the following provisions have been announced by the Government in the recent Budget concerning agricultural marketing?
1.  Need to create a National Agriculture
Market
2. A new Central Warehousing agency will be set up
3. Private sector will be allowed to
purchase grains directly from farmers from their     doorsteps.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a) 1 and 2 only b) 2 and 3 only c) 1 and 3 only d) 1 only




51. Which of the following freedom fighter is
NOT considered as New Swarajist?
a) Bhulabhai Desai b) Asaf Ali
c) M.A.Ansari
d) None of the above



52. Consider the following statements with reference to the Accelerated Rural Electrification Programme:
1.   Assistance under the Scheme will be available for electrification by conventional and non- conventional sources of energy.
2.  The interest subsidy under the
Scheme is 4%.
3.  Funds would be provided under the scheme on the basis of Net Present Value of the interest subsidies applicable on

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  11    
    
    


disbursement under Accelerated
Rural Electrification Programme.


55. Satluj Jal Vidyut Nigam was incorporated as a joint venture of:
a)  The government of India and the
Which of the above statements are true?

a)  Only 1.
b)  Only 1 & 2. c)  Only 1 & 3. d)  All.




53. Consider the following statements:
1.   No sanction is required under the provisions of the Electricity Act,
2003 for setting up captive power plants.
2.  The Electricity Act provides that any person may construct, maintain or operate a captive generating plant and dedicated transmission lines.

Which of the above statements are true?

a)  Only 1. b)  Only 2. c)  Both.
d)  None.




54. The Central Electricity Authority (CEA):
1.   Is a Statutory Body.
2.  The generating stations need not compulsorily follow the CEA technical standards specified for construction of electrical plants and electric lines.
3.  Is headed by the Union Home
Minister.

Which of the above statements are true?

a)  Only 1.
b)  Only 1 & 2. c)  Only 1 & 3. d)  All.
government of Himachal Pradesh. b)  The government of India and the
government of Jammu &
Kashmir.
c)  The government of India and
NTPC Ltd.
d)  The government of India and
NHPC Ltd.


56. Consider the following statements with reference to the Jawaharlal Nehru National Solar Mission:
1.   The Mission has set the ambitious
target of deploying 20,000 MW of grid connected solar power by
2022.
2.  The Mission is under the aegis of Ministry of New and Renewable Energy.

Which of the above statements are true?

a)  Only 1. b)  Only 2. c)  Both.
d)  None.




57. India is a party to which of the following international convention/conventions:
1.   Convention on International Trade
in Endangered Species of Wild
Fauna and Flora (CITES).
2.  International Whaling Commission
(IWC).
3.  United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organizations World Heritage Convention (UNESCO WHC).
4.  Convention on the Conservation of
Migratory Species of Wild Animals
(CMS).



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  12    
    
    
Choose the correct answer using the codes below:

a)  Only 1.
b)  Only 2, 3 & 4. c)  Only 1, 2 & 4. d)  All.




58. A per a recent study ‘Preliminary Modeling Studies on Carbon Taxes and GDP Loss’ conducted by the Ministry of Environment and Forest, GoI, carbon taxes are revenue positive when
a) it involves no adjustment to other tax
rates in the economy.
b) other tax rates are adjusted so that the revenue inflow from carbon tax is exactly balanced by an equal reduction in yields from reduced taxes.
c) it is in line with the carbon credits in
the economy
d) None of the above




59. Both the central and state governments subsidise a wide range of products with the expressed intention of making these affordable for the poor. These include
1.  Iron ore
2. Fertilizer
3. Sugar
4. Pulses

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a) All of the above b) 1, 2 and 3 only c) 2, 3 and 4 only d) 1 and 4 only




60.One of the important points mentioned in the recent Economic Survey is the inequitable distribution of subsidies that


is benefitting rich more than the poor. In which of these sectors is the distortion observed?
1.  Electricity subsidies
2. Water Utilities subsidies
3. Railways fare

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a) 1 and 2 only b) 2 and 3 only c) 1 and 3 only
d) All of the above




61. Consider the following macroeconomic indicators.
1.  Current Account Deficit
2. Economic Growth
3. Savings

Which of the above has reduced in the last couple of years as per the Economic Survey
2014-15?

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a) 1 and 2 only b) 2 and 3 only c) 1 and 3 only
d) All of the above




62. Consider the following statements.
1.  Amongst the BRICS countries, India is the most attractive foreign investment destination.
2. Amongst the BRICS countries, China is
the biggest tourist attraction destination   and tourist economy.

Which of the above is/are true?

a) 1 only b) 2 only
c) Both 1 and 2

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  13    
    
    


d) None


3.  The Left was Convinced that the
masses were ever ready for struggles in any form if only the leaders were

63. The Delhi Legislative assembly can make laws on all the matters of the State List and the Concurrent List except the three matters of the State List, that is
1.   Public Order
2.  Police
3.  Land

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




64. The Lieutenant Governor is the Administrator of the Delhi UT. In the case of difference of opinion between the lt. governor and his ministers, what option can he chose?
a)  Refer the matter to the president for
decision and act accordingly.
b)  Refer the matter to the Legislative Assembly for decision and act accordingly.
c)  The decision of the Council of
Ministers endorsed by the CM
prevails.
d)  The decision of the Lieutenant Governor, even though opposed by CM, prevails.




65. With reference to the ideology of the Left during the freedom struggle, consider the following statements:
1.   It considered the Indian National Congress as an organisation led by bourgeois
2.  The Left advocated armed struggle
against the British to liberate India
willing to initiate them.

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 and 3 Only b)  2 and 3 Only c)  1 and 2 Only d)  All




66. Indian banking system has been going through several challenges. One of the paradoxes of recent banking history is that a) The share of the private sector in
overall banking aggregates barely increased at a time when the country witnessed its most rapid growth which was fuelled by the private sector.
b) The share of the private sector in
overall banking aggregates heavily increased at a time when the country witnessed its slowest growth in a decade due to lack of private investment.
c) Banking NPAs increased at a time
when the private sector stopped borrowing from banks and investing
d) None of the above




67. Under the scheme “Mechanism for Marketing of Minor Forest Produce through Minimum Support Price and development of Value chain for
MFP" Minimum Support Price (MSP) for
Minor Forest Produce (MFP) has been fixed for some MFP which includes
1.   Tamarind
2.  Honey
3.  Mahua Seed
4.  Lac
5.  Kusumi

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  14    
    
    
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  All of the above b)  2, 4 and 5 only c)  1, 3 and 4 only
d)  1, 2, 3 and 5 only




68. Consider the following statements about the Union Public Service Commission (UPSC).
1.   The Chairman and other members are appointed by the President.
2.  The constitution does not mention the qualification for the post of UPSC Chairman.
3.  One-half of the members of the
Commission should have worked under either the Government of India or any state government.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




69. If the UPSC tenders an advice to the Government of India, which of these can follow?
a)  Only the Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT) can reject the advice of UPSC on reasonable grounds.
b)  Only the Appointments Committee of the Cabinet can reject UPSC’s advice.
c)  Any concerned Ministry can reject
UPSC’s advice.
d)  For UPSC’s advice to be rejected, approval from the Departmental Standing Committees of the Parliament is needed.


70. In the coming years, which of the following factors would help increase India’s economic growth rate?
1.  Lowering of Oil Prices
2. Monetary easing
3. Lower Inflation
4. Increase in Savings

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a) All of the above b) 1, 2 and 3 only c) 2, 3 and 4 only d) 1 and 4 only




71. Consider the following statements with reference to the Zoological Survey of India:
1.   It works under the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEFCC).
2.  The ZSI participates in the Indian
Antarctic Program.
3.  Similar to the Red Data Book produced by IUCN, ZSI also releases a Red Data Book on Indian Animals.

Which of the above statements are true?

a)  Only 1.
b)  Only 1 & 2. c)  Only 1 & 3. d)  All.




72. Consider the following statements:
1.   The forest survey report, 2013, notes down that the overall Mangrove cover in the county in
2013 has decreased compared to
2011.
2.  Mangroves in India account for about 3% of the world’s mangrove
vegetation.



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  15    
    
    


3.  Sundarbans in West Bengal accounts for almost half of the total area under mangroves in the country.


Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only
Which of the above statements are true?

a)  Only 1.
b)  Only 1 & 2. c)  Only 1 & 3. d)  All.




73. Law Commission of India in its 255th report on electoral reforms recently submitted to the Government of Indian has pitched for stronger Election Commission of India (ECI). Its recommendations include
1.   Equal Constitutional protection to all
members of ECI in removability from
Office
2.  Appointment of the Election Commissioners by a three member Selection panel        instead of the present system of appointment by President
3.  The elevation of an EC should be on
the basis of seniority.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




74. Union Government has launched Pharma Jan Samadhan scheme, for redressal of grievances of consumers related to
1.   Over-pricing of Drugs
2.  Non-availability of Medicines
3.  Non-availability of Doctors in Public
Hospitals
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




75. Which of the following statements is correct with reference to the use of
‘Drones’ in India as of now?
a)  The Aircraft Rules do not cover use of drones as well as its sale and purchase.
b)  A license is required from Ministry of Defense for sale and purchase of drones; and a special permission is required from the Indian Air Force (IAF) to use drones in India
c)  No special permission is needed to
manufacture drones. Only a special permission is needed from the IAF to use drones.
d)  Drones are not treated as a special defence equipment and are treated at par with other defence instruments




76. In the recent years, Economic Survey points towards a trend of declining
‘Employment Elasticity of Growth’. This
means that
a) High growth has not been able to create jobs.
b) Disproportionate growth across various sectors has hindered job creation.
c) Hiring and firing has become more
flexible and inevitable with higher economic growth.
d) Share of unorganized sector employment has been increasing with high growth rates.



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  16    
    
    



77. Which of the following steps taken by the Government in recent times are growth- friendly?
1.  Passing an ordinance to make land
acquisition less onerous
2. Raising gas prices
3. Deregulating diesel prices
4. Passing the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) (MMDR) Amendment Ordinance

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a) All of the above b) 1, 2 and 3 only c) 2, 3 and 4 only d) 1 and 4 only




78. In the pursuit of economic growth, ease of doing business is a very important factor. To achieve the same, in which of the following areas, both the Centre and the State can endeavour jointly?
1.  Land Law reforms
2. Labour reforms
3. Reducing the cost of capital

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a) 1 and 2 only b) 2 and 3 only c) 1 and 3 only
d) All of the above




79. The ‘JAM number trinity Solution’ has been hailed as an important driver of growth and inclusion in India in the coming years. It is essentially
a) Technology-enabled Direct Benefit
Transfers b) M-banking


c) Universalizing the Banking Correspondent model supplemented with Micro-ATMs
d) USSD based mobile transfers




80.Which of the following factors have been held responsible for the present decline in global crude oil prices?
1.  Weak Global demand
2. Increase in crude-oil and shale gas production in US
3. Iraq crisis

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a) 1 and 2 only b) 2 and 3 only c) 1 and 3 only
d) All of the above




81. As per the recent Economic Survey, India’s external sector economy is vulnerable to which of the following factors?
1.  Risks from shift in US monetary policy
2. Eurozone slowdown
3. Rising non-oil, non-gold imports

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a) 1 and 2 only b) 2 and 3 only c) 1 and 3 only
d) All of the above




82. In case of difference of opinion amongst the Chief Election Commissioner and/or two other election commissioners, how is the matter decided?
a)  It is decided by majority in the
Commission.


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  17    
    
    


b)  The Chief Election Commissioner’s decision prevails over other commissioners.
c)  The matter is referred to the
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Subordinate Legislation – the decision of which is final and binding on ECI.
d)  If two or more Election
Commissioners disagree on a matter, then their disagreement will prevail.


85. Which of the following functions are NOT performed by the Election Commission of India?
1.   Determining the territorial areas of
the electoral constituencies
2.  Advising the president on matters relating to the disqualifications of the members of Parliament.
3.  To cancel polls in the event of
Violence at election booths




83. The chief election commissioner is provided with the security of tenure. He cannot be removed from his office except in same manner and on the same grounds as that of
a)  A Supreme Court Judge
b)  UPSC Chairman
c)  Comptroller and Auditor General
(CAG) of India d)  Either (a) or (c)




84. Though the constitution has sought to safeguard and ensure the independence and impartiality of the Election Commission of India (ECI), which of the following has not been specified explicitly by the Constitution?
1.   Qualification of the Election
Commissioners
2.  Term of the members of the ECI
3.  Manner of Appointment

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 only
d)  All are performed by the ECI.




86. Elections are being conducted almost every year in India. Elaborate machinery
is required for election management. Who acts as the District returning Officer in the Districts in these elections?
a)  District Collector
b)  Divisional Commissioner as the Chief electoral Officer is incharge of the Districts under him.
c)  An Officer appointed by the District
Magistrate
d)  An Officer other than the District
Magistrate appointed by the ECI.




87. As per the recent report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), adverse impacts of Climate Change are likely to be felt more acutely in
a) Tropical Zone countries
b) Sub-tropical zone countries c) Temperate Zone countries
d) Polar zone countries





http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  18    
    
    
88.With reference to the Congress Socialist Party (CSP) which was formed at Bombay in October 1934, consider the following statements:
1.   One of it’s main objectives was to give the Indian National Congress a ‘social’ direction
2.  CSP was formed by Jayaprakash
Narayan and others
3.  CSP’s long-term goal was to root out Indian National Congress once the British were driven out and establish a government based on scialist principles

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a) 1 and 2 Only b) 3 and 2 Only c) 1 and 3 Only d) All


89. The Census 2011 reported that the sex ration in India declined from 927 in 2001, to 918 in 2011. Alongwith India, which of these countries witnessed a decline in Sex ratio in this decade?
1.  China
2. Bangladesh
3. Sri Lanka

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a) 1 and 2 only b) 2 and 3 only c) 1 and 3 only
d) All of the above




90.For India to have a good fiscal performance and a high growth rate, the Economic Survey recommends expenditure switching from consumption to investment. It means
a) Directing more investment on gross
capital formation


b) Manufacturing more durable goods c) Producing more intermediate goods d) Encouraging more savings habit in
India




91. Consider the following statements about
Scheduled Areas.
1.   Scheduled areas are declared under laws passed by the Parliament.
2.  The concerned state can not exercise executive power within the Scheduled area.
3.  The administration of these areas is entirely under the control of the President.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  None of the above




92. Consider the following statements about tribal areas in Sixth Schedule.
1.   They are completely autonomous of the State Government.
2.  The autonomous districts are
governed by an elected District
Council.
3.  The district and regional councils are empowered to assess and collect land revenue and to impose certain specified taxes.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  19    
    
    
93. The district and regional councils under Sixth Schedule administer the areas under their jurisdiction. Consider the following statements about it.
1.   They can constitute village councils or courts for trial of suits and cases between the tribes.
2.  Laws made by them do not require the assent of either the Legislature or the Governor.

Which of the above is/are true?

a)  1 only b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None




94. A simple way to compare the relative economic situation of countries is to supplement the macro-economic vulnerability index with a “Rational Investor Ratings Index (RIRI).” Which of the following components are accounted in RIRI?
1.  Inflation
2. Current Account Deficit
3. Fiscal Deficit
4. Currency Exchange Rate

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a) All of the above b) 1, 2 and 3 only c) 2, 3 and 4 only d) 1 and 4 only




95. Land acquisition appears to be a major challenge. Different state governments are adopting diverse approaches for dealing with the issue. Gujarat has a ‘land-pooling’ model. Under the model
a) 50 per cent of the land is acquired
while the remaining 50 per cent is left


with the original owners giving them a stake in the upsides generated by land monetisation.
b) Land is not acquired but pooled from
its owners, who get benefits out of land monetisation
c) Government does not acquire land, but leaves it to the industries themselves who acquire land after a fair
settlement with a pool of owners
d) None of the above




96. HDR measures inequality in terms the
Gini Coefficient which measures
a) inequality in income or consumption among individuals within a country
b) inequality in income or consumption
among individuals across countries c) inequality in health and labour force
indicators among individuals within a
country
d) inequality in health and labour force indicators among individuals across countries




97. Consider the following statements with reference to socio-economic development comparison between Indian states.
1.  Bihar had the highest decadal (2001-
11) growth rate of population.
2. The poverty estimates indicate that the highest poverty headcount ratio
(HCR) exists in Bihar.
3. Lowest poverty is in Himachal Pradesh followed by Kerala.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a) 1 and 2 only b) 2 and 3 only c) 1 and 3 only
d) All of the above

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  20    
    
    



98. Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY) scheme provides smart card-based cashless health insurance to
1.  Landless labourers
2. BPL families
3. Unorganized sector workers

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a) 1 in 2 b) 3 in 2 c) 2 only d) 3 only




99. Which of the following statements regarding India’s trade with the World is correct?
1.  Before the 2008 Financial crisis,
services exports growth rate outpaced manufacturing exports growth rate.
2. After the 2008 Financial crisis, manufacturing exports growth rate outpaced services exports growth rate.


Which of the above is/are true?

a) 1 only b) 2 only
c) Both 1 and 2
d) None




100.    The Economic Survey recommends offsetting the ‘Countervailing Duty’ for the success of ‘Make in India’ initiative. Countervailing duty is
a) imposed in order to counter the negative impact of import subsidies to protect domestic producers
b) imposed on defense equipments for strategic reasons
c) imposed on goods and services produced from all SEZs in India
d) imposed on goods and services
produced from all NMIZs (Industrial
Corridors) in India






    




















    

    







http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  21    
    
