INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 9 SOLUTIONS







1.   Solution: c)

The rebel activity was marked by intense anti-British feelings and the administration was invariably toppled. In the absence of any leaders from their own ranks, the insurgents turned to the  traditional leaders of Indian society — the territorial aristocrats and feudal chiefs who had suffered at the hands of the British.

The Revolt was not confined to major centres such as Delhi, Meerut etc. It had embraced almost every cantonment in the Bengal and a few in  Bombay. Only the
Madras army remained totally loyal.




2.   Solution: c)

Gelatin,  animal protein substance having gel-forming properties, used primarily in food products and home cookery, also having various industrial uses. Derived from collagen, a protein found in animal skin and bone, it is extracted by boiling animal hides, skins, bones, and tissue after alkali or acid pretreatment. An easily digested, pure protein food, it is nutritionally an incomplete protein, deficient in certain amino acids. Unflavoured, granulated gelatin, almost tasteless and odourless, ranges from faint yellow to amber in colour. Gelatin is also available as a finely ground mix with added sugar, flavouring, acids, and colouring. When stored in dry form, at room temperature, and in an airtight container, it remains stable for long periods.

Its application in fuel cells:

http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/jellymaking-protein-could-help-make-cheap- fuel-cells/article5243735.ece



3.   Solution: b)

Initially,  the administration sought to accommodate the sepoys‘ demands:  facilities were provided to them to live according to the dictates of  their caste and religion. But, with the extension of the Army‘s operation not only to various parts  of India, but also to countries outside, it was not possible to do so any more. Moreover, caste distinctions and segregation within a regiment were not conducive to the cohesiveness of a fighting unit. To begin with, the administration thought of an easy
way out: discourage the recruitment of Brahmins; this apparently did not succeed




http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 1
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 9 SOLUTIONS


and, by the middle of the nineteenth century, the upper castes predominated in the
Bengal Army, for instance.




4.     Solution: b)

Jammu and Kashmir is an exception to this rule. It has its own constitution and several laws and constitutional provisions are applicable to J&K only by the assent of the state.

India is a sovereign state. So it can acquire a foreign territory using any method, even tyrannical ones. Had it been a dominion, it could do so only by the permission of the ruling nation.




5.   Solution: a)

Almost every agricultural family in Oudh had a  representative in the army; there were 75,000 men from Oudh.  Whatever happened there was of immediate concern to the sepoy.  The new land revenue system introduced after the annexation  and the confiscation of lands attached to charitable institutions affected his well-being. That accounted for the 14,000 petitions received from the sepoys about the hardships of the revenue system. A proclamation issued by the Delhi rebels clearly  reflected the sepoy‘s awareness of the misery  brought about  by  British rule. The mutiny in itself, therefore, was a revolt against the British and, thus, a political act. What imparted this character to the mutiny was the sepoy‘s identity of interests with the general population.

The Revolt of the sepoys was accompanied by a rebellion of the civil population, particularly in the North Western Provinces and Oudh, the two areas from which the sepoys of the Bengal army were recruited. Except in Muzzafarnagar and
Saharanpur, civil rebellion followed the Revolt of the sepoys. The action of the sepoys released the rural population from fear of the state and the control exercised by the administration.




6.   Solution: b)

To provide employment, it is important to boost demand in any economy. The prices and wages in a free market are not flexible, but rigid as they are determined by
forces of demand and supply; neither of which changes suddenly. It is thus difficult
to happen in a free market. If, however, the state intervenes, the demand and supply


http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 2
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 9 SOLUTIONS


can be adjusted as per the requirement affecting the prices and employment in the economy.




7.   Solution: d)

Socially, economically and politically, the semi-feudal leaders of these rebellions were backward looking and traditional in outlook. They still lived in the old world, blissfully unaware and oblivious of the modern world which had knocked down the defences of their society. Their resistance represented no societal alternative. It was centuries-old in form and ideological and cultural content. Its basic objective was to restore earlier forms of rule and social relations. Such backward looking and scattered, sporadic and disunited uprisings were incapable of fending off or overthrowing foreign rule. The British succeeded in pacifying the rebel areas one by one. They also gave concessions to the less fiery rebel chiefs and zamindars in the form of reinstatement, the restoration of their estates and reduction in revenue assessments so long as they agreed to live peacefully under alien authority. The
more recalcitrant ones were physically wiped out. Velu Thampi was, for example, publicly hanged even after he was dead.




8.     Solution: c)

In the famous Keshavananda Bharti case, the Supreme Court held that the Preamble is a prt of the constitution reverting from its earlier judgments. It also said that it can be amended given that the basic structure of the constitution is maintained. The preamble is a not a source of any power to any organ of the government. It is simply a restatement of the essence of the constitution.




9.   Solution: d)

All were tribal rebellions.

The Kols of Chhotanagpur rebelled from 1820 to 1837. Thousands of them were massacred before British authority could be re-imposed. The hill tribesmen of Rampa in coastal Andhra revolted in March 1879 against the depredations of the government-supported mansabdar and the new restrictive forest regulations. The authorities had to mobilize regiments of infantry, a squadron of cavalry and two companies of sappers and miners before the rebels, numbering several thousands,
could be defeated by the end of 1880.



http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 3
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 9 SOLUTIONS


The rebellion (ulgulan) of the Munda tribesmen, led by Birsa Munda, occurred during 1899-19. For over thirty years the Munda sardars had been struggling against the destruction of their system of common land holdings by the intrusion of jagirdar,
thikadar (revenue farmers) and merchant moneylenders.

10. Solution: d)

http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/energy-and-environment/aerosol-levels-over- india-rise-alarmingly/article5372294.ece

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aerosol



11. Solution: d)

Though peasant discontent smouldered till 1885, many of the disputes were settled partially under official pressure and persuasion and partially out of the zamindar‗s fear that the united peasantry would drag them into prolonged and costly litigation. Many peasants were able to acquire occupancy rights and resist enhanced rents.

The Government rose to the defence of the zamindars wherever violence took place. Peasants were then arrested on a large sale. But it assumed a position of neutrality as far as legal battles or peaceful agitations were concerned. The Government also promised to undertake legislation to protect the tenants from the worst aspects of zamindari oppression, a promise it fulfilled however imperfectly in 1885 when the Bengal Tenancy Act was passed.

What persuaded the zamindars and the colonial regime to reconcile themselves to the movement was the fact that its aims were limited to the redressal of the immediate grievances of the peasants and the enforcement of the existing legal rights and norms. It was not aimed at the zamindari system. It also did not have at any stage an anti-colonial political edge. The agrarian leagues kept within the bounds of law, used the legal machinery to fight the zamindars, and raised no anti-British
demands.




12. Solution: d)

http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/explainer-what-is-napalm/article5097554.ece



13. Solution: c)

http://www.banglapedia.org/HT/B_0477.htm



http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 4
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 9 SOLUTIONS


The Indian Association and many of the nationalist newspapers asked for permanent fixation  of the tenant‘s rent. They warned that since the Bill would confer occupancy rights even on non-cultivators, it would lead to the growth of middlemen — the jotedars — who would be as oppressive as the zamindars so far as the actual cultivators were concerned. They, therefore, demanded that the right of occupancy should go with actual cultivation of the soil, that is, in most cases to the under ryots and the tenants-at-will.



14. Solution: a)

http://kolhapur.nic.in/kolhapurgazetteer/finan_debtors.html

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pabna_Peasant_Uprisings




15. Solution: d)

http://isro.org/news/pdf/gslvf06-gsat5p.pdf

http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/science/scientists-raise-mars-spacecrafts- orbit/article5325246.ece

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apogee_kick_motor



16. Solution: a)

The policy envisions providing secure, reliable, affordable and high quality converged telecommunication services anytime, anywhere for an accelerated inclusive socio-economic development. The main thrust of the Policy is on the multiplier effect and transformational impact of such services on the overall economy. The thrust areas of NTP - 2012 are;


• Increase  rural  teledensity from the current level of around 39 to 70 by the year 2017
and 100 by the year 2020


• Repositioning of Mobile phone- as an instrument of empowerment


• Broadband –―'Broadband For All‖  at a minimum download speed of 2 Mbps


• Domestic Manufacturing- Making India a global hub


• Convergence of Network, Services and Devices


http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 5
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 9 SOLUTIONS




• Liberalisation of Spectrum- any Service in any Technology


• Simplification of Licensing regime-  Unified Licensing, delinking of Spectrum from
License, Online real time submission and processing


• Consumer Focus - Achieve One Nation - Full Mobile Number Portability and work towards One Nation - Free Roaming


• Resale of Services


• Voice over Internet Protocol


• Cloud Computing, Next Generation  Network including IPV6




http://governancenow.com/news/regular-story/good-and-bad-national-telecom- policy-2012




17. Solution: a)

Rajani Palme Dutt

R. Palme Dutt‘s authoritative work  India  Today  made  the myth  of the safety-valve a staple of left-wing opinion. Emphasizing the myth, Dutt wrote that the Congress
was brought into existence through direct Governmental initiative and guidance and through ‗a plan secretly  pre-arranged with the Viceroy‘ so that it (the Government) could  use it ‗as an intended weapon for safeguarding British rule against the rising forces of popular unrest and anti-British feeling.‘ It was ‗an attempt to defeat,  or rather forestall,  an impending revolution.‘

http://www.mainstreamweekly.net/article1607.html




18. Solution: b)

It was in news in January 2014

http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/health/decoding-proteins-and-firing- neurons/article5631764.ece




http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 6
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 9 SOLUTIONS





19. Solution: b)

The preamble does not state that all Indian citizens will be socially, economically and politically equal. It merely states that there will be justice. And justice does not mean equality. It simply means what is fair and reasonable.

Equality of opportunity is mentioned in the preamble.




20. Solution: d)

The Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF) was established with the fundamental objective of providing access to ‗basic‘ telegraph services  to people in the rural and remote areas at affordable and reasonable prices. It provides subsidy support for enabling access to all types of telegraph services including mobile services, broadband connectivity and creation of infrastructure like OFC in rural and remote areas.It also provides subsidy support to eligible operators for operational sustainability of Rural Wireline Household Direct Exchange Lines (DELs) installed prior to 01.04.2002, and financial support for creation of National
Optical Fibre Network (NOFN) for extending the broadband connectivity up to all
gram panchayats or villages by bridging the gaps in the aggregation layer through laying of fibre and installation of end equipment‘s or terminals.

Page no. 177, India – 2014



21.  Solution: d)

The kind of socialistic practice that is enshrined in the Preamble is that of democratic socialism not state socialism. State socialism is basically communism, while Indian setup is more of a balance. Indian socialism is a blend of Marxism and Gandhism
leaning heavily towards Gandhism.




22. Solution: c)

Licences are awarded based on competitive bidding only.

New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP)[1] was conceptualised by the Government of India, during 1997-98 to provide an equal platform to both Public and Private sector companies in exploration and production of hydrocarbons with Directorate General of Hydrocarbons (DGH) as a nodal agency for its implementation. India has an estimated sedimentary area of 3.14 million km2. consisting of 26 sedimentary basins, of which, 57% (1.79 million km2.) area is in deepwater and remaining 43%


http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 7
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 9 SOLUTIONS


(1.35 million km2.) area is in onland and shallow offshore. At present 1.06 million km2 area is held under Petroleum Exploration Licenses in 18 basins by national oil companies viz. Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Limited (ONGC), OIL India Limited (OIL) and Private/Joint Venture companies. Before implementation of the New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP) in 1999, a mere 11% of Indian sedimentary basins were under exploration, which has now increased extensively over the years.

Recently, bidding process was completed in NELP-IX. Till 2010, 8 rounds of NELP
have been completed.



http://www.livemint.com/Industry/HOkh0nb4T4tDHLPgf4juwL/46-oil-and-gas- blocks-including-those-taken-from-RIL-on-a.html






23. Solution: b)

Freedom of speech and expression is not a measure of civic equality but that of individual liberty. The other two ensure that citizens are treated without any special privileges.




24. Solution: d)

Article 51A says that it is the fundamental duty of every individual to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women.

Also, the Fundamental rights and DPSP contain a number of provisions which promote a society where dignity of every individual is respected, including women. The word fraternity means the dignity of the individual (including women) and the unity and integrity of the nation as a whole.

The fundamental rights already ensure the dignity of the individual by not granting special privileges to any section of society by ensuring civic equality.




25. Solution: a)

http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/energy-and-environment/g77china-for- concrete-decision-on-loss-and-damage/article5348172.ece





http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 8
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 9 SOLUTIONS





26. Solution: b)

Stuxnet is a computer worm[1] that was discovered in June 2010. It was designed to attack industrial Programmable Logic Controllers or PLCs. PLCs allow the automation of electromechanical processes such as those used to control machinery on factory assembly lines, amusement rides, or (most infamously) centrifuges for separating nuclear material. Exploiting four zero-day flaws[2], Stuxnet functions by targeting machines using the Microsoft Windows operating system and networks, then seeking out Siemens Step7 software. Stuxnet reportedly compromised Iranian PLCs, collecting information on industrial systems and causing the fast-spinning centrifuges to tear themselves apart.[3]

Stuxnet reportedly ruined almost one-fifth of Iran's nuclear centrifuges [4]

Stuxnet has three modules: a worm that executes all routines related to the main payload of the attack; a link file that automatically executes the propagated copies of the worm; and a rootkit component responsible for hiding all malicious files and processes, preventing detection of the presence of Stuxnet.[5]

Stuxnet is typically introduced to the target environment by infected USB flash drive. The virus then propagates across the network, scanning for Siemens Step7 software on computers controlling a PLC. In the absence of both criteria, Stuxnet becomes dormant inside the computer. If the both conditions are fulfilled, Stuxnet introduces the infected rootkit onto the PLC and Step7 software, modifying the codes and giving unexpected commands to the PLC while returning a loop of normal operations system values feedback to the users

http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/new-cyberattack-model-helps-hackers-time- the-next-stuxnet/article5583043.ece



27.  Solution: c)

The Indian parliament can destroy any state except the J&K. Even to alter its name or area it would need the consent of the J&K state legislature.

Referring the bill to the state legislature more than once is a discretionary power of the President. He may or may not do it every time the bill is amended.




28. Solution: c)
Indian government holds 56 % in MTNL. http://mtnl.net.in/financials/index.htm




http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 9
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 9 SOLUTIONS





29.  Solution: b)

In the eyes of the law, the foreigner and the Indian is alike. However, the offence for which both can be convicted and tried can be different. For e.g. a foreigner is not entitled to free speech or protection against racial discrimination.




30. Solution: c)

Apart from some honourable exceptions like the Rani of Thansi, Kunwar Singh and Maulvi Ahmadullah, the rebels were poorly served by their leaders. Most of them failed to realize the significance of the Revolt and simply did not do enough. Bahadur Shah and Zeenat Mahal had no faith in the sepoys and negotiated with the British to secure their safety. Most of the taluqdars tried only to protect their own interests.




31.  Solution: b)

Rights under Article 20 and 21 remain unaffected by the imposition of national emergency. Other rights may or may not be suspended depending on the decision of the government.




32.  Solution: a)

Justifying untouchability on any ground even if philosophical, scientific or religious is an offence. While private places are generally out of ambit, but explicit discrimination is still an offence. Supreme Court has also held that protection against untouchability is also available against private bodies.

Not allowing a non-Hindu a different matter altogether. Even in public Hindu temples non- Hindus can be banned. It is not untouchability but a matter of religious faith.




33.  Solution: d)

We have a right to protest, not to strike. Right to be offended is an opinion of leading intellectuals in the country to be included in the freedom of speech – in the recent
case of the book by Wendy Donigner – Penguin Publications.

http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 10
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 9 SOLUTIONS





34. Solution: b)

Government of India launched the National Electricity Fund (Interest Subsidy Scheme) in July 2012 to provide interest subsidy on loans raised by both public and private Distribution Companies (DISCOMS), for capital works sanctioned by financial institutions to improve the infrastructure in distribution sector during the financial year 2012-13  and 2013-14.

Projects worth Rs.10,953.80 Crores have been sanctioned by the Union Government to various Utilities/States for consideration of Interest subsidy benefit under National Electricity Fund.

Government of India has approved setting up of National Electricity Fund (Interest Subsidy Scheme) to provide interest subsidy on loans disbursed to the State Power Utilities, Distribution Companies (DISCOMS) – both in public and private sector for the loans taken from Private & Public Financial Institutions, to improve the infrastructure in distribution sector.

Rural Electrification Corporation (REC), would be the Nodal Agency to operationalise the scheme.

Under NEF scheme, interest subsidy would be provided on loans taken by private and public power utilities in distribution sector for
non Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY) and non Restructured
Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme (R-APDRP) projects.

The preconditions for eligibility are linked to reform measures taken by the States and the amount of interest subsidy is linked to the progress achieved in reforms linked parameters. The preconditions of eligibility are operationalisation of State Electricity Regulatory Commission (SERC), formulation of business plan for turn around of utilities, re-organization of State Electricity Boards (SEB), release of subsidy by State Government toDISCOMs, submission of audited annual accounts and timely filing of tariff petition.




35. Solution: c)

The criteria of restricting freedom of speech are: defamation; relations with foreign states; public order etc. All thus qualify under it. M.S. Dhoni move the court recently for restricting the false reports against him that were defaming him.




36. Solution: d)

http://www.gktoday.in/kuka-movement-1872/



http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 11
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 9 SOLUTIONS


http://books.google.co.in/books?id=zZDvBP0ZbnYC&pg=PR7&lpg=PR7&dq=The
+Kuka+Revolt&source=bl&ots=mJuJp- yo31&sig=8pd7QF37mngfhwQXslKhTXCHQmo&hl=en&sa=X&ei=z1dOU- WpEcXc8AWIvoKYDg&ved=0CFsQ6AEwBzgU#v=onepage&q=The%20Kuka%20R
evolt&f=false




37. Solution: c)

Only civil laws can be applied retrospectively. For e.g. in the recent Vodafone tax dispute, the government is trying to tax Vodafone retrospectively. Refer to page 7.13
Laxminkanth 3rd edition for more details.




38.  Solution: b)

Refer to the full list in page 7.13-7.14 in Laxmikanth Indian Polity 3rd edition.




39.  Solution: d)

The state can spend public money on religious affairs but not on any one particular religion. It can spend for the promotion of all. It can also impose a fee for regulation and promotion, but not taxes.




40. Solution: d)

Unconstitutional executive actions can be questioned under Article 32 only if they violate fundamental rights. Statutory rights can not be enforced under Article 32. Ordinary legal route needs to be adopted if that is the case.




41. Solution: c)

The writ jurisdiction of high courts is wider than that of the Supreme Court as it can enforce legal rights too. Refer to page 7.20-7.21 in Laxmikanth Indian Polity 3rd edition for more details.




42.  Solution: b)



http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 12
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 9 SOLUTIONS


Habeas Corpus can be issued against private individuals too as it is concerned with protection of human rights. Refer to page 7.21 Laxmikanth for more details.




43.  Solution: b)

Martial law is implicit in the constitution. It is imposed in an extraordinary situation and all the law courts are suspended while it is in operation. It however does not affect centre-state relations even while it suspends the civilian government in the specific areas where it is imposed.




44. Solution: a)

Fundamental rights are meant to protect human rights against executive tyranny and establish political democracy. However, Article 326 in Part XV of the constitution mentions adult suffrage. It is not mentioned under the fundamental rights section neither under any law enacted by the parliament of India. Therefore it is only a constitutional right.




45. Solution: c)

To enforce articles 39(a) and 39 (b) which promote the socialistic ideals of the Indian constitution, certain laws and rules can be exempted from judicial review. Refer to pages 7.25-7.26 for details therein in Laxmikanth Indian polity 3rd edition.




46. Solution: a)

Why did the sepoys revolt?

It was considered prestigious to be in the service of the Company; it provided economic stability. Why,  then, did the sepoys choose to forego these advantages for the  sake of an uncertain future? A proclamation issued at Delhi indicates the immediate cause: ‗it is well known that in these  days  all the English  have entertained these evil designs — first, to  destroy the religion of the whole Hindustani Army, and then to  make the people by compulsion Christians. Therefore, we, solely on account of our religion, have combined with the people,
and have not spared alive one infidel, and have re-established the  Delhi dynasty on
these terms.



http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 13
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 9 SOLUTIONS







47.  Solution: c)

Communism is the direct opposite of capitalism. Socialism is a balance between the two. Communist economies are centrally planned and each and every activity of the economy. But, private property does exist in a socialistic economy.




48. Solution: c)

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Helena_Blavatsky#Indian_Independence_Movement




49.  Solution: d)

By the very nature of a capitalistic economy, the goods are bought by the consumers and money flows to the entrepreneurs. As there is no state intervention or taxes; there is no redistribution.




50. Solution: c)

Sanitation, education, drinking water, health etc. come under the category of public goods and services. When provided privately, they often become unaffordable for the poor masses. When they are provided at a lower price, people can afford them and the money that is spare can be spent in the market.




51.  Solution: a)

In 1985, China  announced its ‗Open Door‘ Policy moving towards market socialism. Market socialism, also called liberal socialism,  economic system representing a compromise between socialist planning and free enterprise, in which enterprises are publicly owned but production and consumption are guided by market forces rather than by government planning. Rest can be read at page 1.8 in Indian economy 5th Edition – Ramesh Singh.




52.  Solution: c)



http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 14
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 9 SOLUTIONS


Depreciation levels can never be brought to zero, but they can definitely be altered to zero by human efforts, e.g. polishing and maintaining a car keeps it in good condition, and thus its value would not go down fast.  But, Governments all over the world tweak the depreciation rates to change the demand of that particular good.
For e.g. sale of car would increase if its value depreciates very fast.




53.  Solution: a)

IMF ranks nations based on GNP (PPP) not GDP (PPP). India has always had a negative ―income from abroad‖ and as GNP= GDP+/- income from abroad: It has always been negative for India.




54. Solution: a)

GDP or National Income at factor cost = NNP – Indirect taxes + Subsidies.

This is because the subsidies form part of the excess government expenditure in the economy which has to be reduced while calculating actual production or income of the economy.




55. Solution: b)

The Government‘s response to the Revolt was rather restrained and not as harsh as in the case of civil rebellions and tribal uprisings. It had just undergone the harrowing experience of the Santhal uprising and the Revolt of 1857. It was also able to see, in time, the changed temper of the peasantry and was influenced by the support extended to the Revolt by the intelligentsia and the missionaries. It appointed a commission to inquire into the problem of indigo cultivation. Evidence brought before the Indigo Commission and its final report exposed the coercion and corruptio underlying the entire system of indigo cultivation. The result was the mitigation of the worst abuses of the system. The Government issued a notification
in November 1860 that ryots could not be compelled to sow indigo and that it would
ensure that all disputes were settled by legal means. But the planters were already closing down the factories they felt that they could not make their enterprises pay without the use of force and fraud.




56.  Solution: b)


http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 15
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 9 SOLUTIONS


The criteria for citizenship are mentioned both in the constitution and in the laws enacted by the parliament.

57. Solution: c)

Refer to page 2.5 Indian economy Ramesh Singh for details.




58. Solution: a)

HDI does not take into account the ecological imbalances. It mainly focuses on the material side of development. Good Governance is a major factor in GNH which includes – transparency, accountability, responsiveness, rule of law, efficiency etc. Refer to page 2.8 Indian economy by Ramesh Singh for a detailed explanation.




59.  Solution: b)

Central economic planning started with the setting up of the National Planning Committee (1938). Foreign investment was discouraged because of the colonial experience of Drain of wealth and the stagnant performance of the economy under the colonial rule. It grew by zero % between 1600 and 1870, and a meagre 0.2 % between 1870 to 1947.




60. Solution: a)

Among the numerous tribal revolts, the Santhal hool or uprising was the most massive. The Santhals, who live in the area between Bhagalpur and Rajmahal, known as Daman-i-koh, rose in revolt; made a determined attempt to expel the outsiders — the dikus — and proclaimed the complete ‗annihilation‘ of the alien regime. The social conditions which drove them to insurrection were described by a
contemporary in the Calcutta Review  as follows: ‗Zamindars, the police, the revenue
and court alas have exercised a combined system of extortions, oppressive exactions, forcible dispossession of property, abuse and personal violence and a variety of
petty tyrannies upon the timid and yielding Santhals. Usurious interest on loans of money ranging from 50 to 500 per cent; false measures at the haul and the market; wilful and uncharitable trespass by the rich by means of their untethered cattle, tattoos, ponies and even elephants, on the growing crops of the poorer race; and,
such like illegalities have been prevalent.‘





http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 16
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 9 SOLUTIONS







61. Solution: b)

Raw materials were not available easily in India due to lack of reserves and the lack of technology for exploration and extraction. Refer to page 3.4-3.6 for a detailed explanation in Indian economy by Ramesh Singh 5th Edition.




62. Solution: c)

Exim policy promotes agricultural exports.

Bharat Nirmaan builds necessary infrastructure such as roads, electricity, communication etc. These directly affect agricultural productivity and marketing of produce.

Under MGNREGA several agricultural related works can be taken up such as recharging groundwells, rejuvenating fallow lands, flood protection works etc.

PURA deals with other kinds of infrastructure which stops distress migration. It affects agriculture directly. It also creates the much-needed infrastructure.

Food Security Act would increase government procurement of agricultural produce from farmers apart from strengthening the marketing network and delivery system. This would result in better returns for farmers.




63. Solution: a)

The East Asian miracle was all about the right mixture of state and market forces. The WB had drawn many conclusions based on this right set of mixture. Such a model could be replicated in the whole world and served as an important lesson for the world. With the right set of interventions by the state, the economy was able to sustain high growth rates by reviving demand as and when required. Not only this, but the opening of industries and regulating competition in the markets ensured fairplay.




64. Solution: a)





http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 17
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 9 SOLUTIONS


Eight core industries are – Iron and Steel, Cement, Crude Oil, Natural Gas, Fertilizers, Oil refining, Electricity and Coal. They together have a weight of 37.90% in the IIP.

Out of these electricity has the highest weightage amongst them of nearly 10.32%. Steel has the second highest weightage of nearly 6.68 %.




65. Solution: d)

A powerful and long-lasting  myth,  the myth  of ‗the safety valve,‘ has arisen  around this question. Generations of students and political activists have been fed on this myth. But despite widespread popular belief, this myth has little basis in historical fact. The myth is that the Indian National Congress was started by A.O. Hume and others under the official direction, guidance and advice of no less a person than Lord Dufferin, the Viceroy, to provide a safe, mild, peaceful, and constitutional outlet or safety valve for the rising discontent among the masses, which was inevitably
leading towards a popular and violent revolution. Consequently, the revolutionary potential was nipped in the bud. The core of the myth, that a violent revolution was on the cards at the time and was avoided only by the foundations of the Congress, is accepted by most writers; the liberaIs welcome it, the radicals use it to prove that the Congress has always been compromising if not loyalist vis-a-vis imperialism, the extreme right use it to show that the Congress has been anti-national from the beginning. All of them agree that the manner of its birth affected the basic character and future work of the Congress in a crucial manner.



66. Solution: c)

Options 2 and 3 were not motivators, they became the positive consequences of the setting up of the PSUs. To revive demand in the economy it was important to provide jobs. Only then can the private sector could have been given a push. Hence low purchasing power was a factor, the others were not.




67. Solution: a)

The PSUs were not able to deliver public goods adequately not because of internal gross mismanagement and heavy competition with private sector, but because they were not able to generate profits. Their goal was social service, not profit maximization. The private sector was not in a shape to give tough competition to the




http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 18
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 9 SOLUTIONS


PSUs. It was in a nascent stage. Internal gross mis-management is a very subjective word and no sweeping statement can be made just like that. It is wrong.






68.  Solution: b)

Limiting foreign investment was an attempt towards economic change, not social change.

Opening PSUs and reservations in them ensured that the most marginalized sections get jobs.

Land reforms are directly related to social change as they promote equitable ownership of land and ensure tenancy rights.




69.  Solution: c)

The major challenges that were to be solved were: a) Food Security- which in a sense means ensuring adequate infrastructure in rural areas in agriculture. It is because food security is not just about productivity; it is also about accessibility of food.

The monopoly of PSUs was never a factor as the private sector flourished very well by 2002.

It also had to solve the case of India being a market failure. It means that goods and services are available in the economy, but there is little demand. This is because majority of population lives on agriculture which does not provide them with good purchasing power. With this policy shift their incomes were supposed to be improved and market demand be boosted. This would also involve generating more rural employment.




70. Solution: a)

The tribal people, spread over a large part of India, organized hundreds of militant outbreaks and insurrections during the 19th century. These uprisings were marked by immense courage and sacrifice on their part and brutal suppression and veritable butchery on the part of the rulers. The tribals had cause to be upset for a variety of reasons. The colonial administration ended their relative isolation and brought them
fully within the ambit of colonialism. It recognized the tribal chiefs as zamindars and


http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 19
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 9 SOLUTIONS


introduced a new system of land revenue and taxation of tribal products. It encouraged the influx of Christian missionaries into the tribal areas. Above all, it introduced a large number of moneylenders, traders arid revenue farmers as middlemen among the tribals. These middlemen were the chief instruments for bringing the tribal people within the vortex of the colonial economy and exploitation. The middlemen were outsiders who increasingly took possession of tribal lands and ensnared the tribals in a web of debt. hi time, the tribal people increasingly lost their lands and were reduced to the position of agricultural labourers, share-croppers and rack-rented tenants on the land they had earlier brought under cultivation and held on a communal basis.

Colonialism also transformed their relationship with the forest. They had depended on the forest for food, fuel and cattle-feed. They practiced shifting cultivation (jhum, podu, etc.), taking recourse to fresh forest lands when their existing lands showed signs of exhaustion. The colonial government changed all this. It usurped the forest lands and placed restrictions on access to forest products, forest lands and village common lands. It refused to let cultivation shift to new areas.

Oppression and extortion by policemen and other petty officials further aggravated distress among the tribals. The revenue farmers and government agents also intensified and expanded the system of begar — making the tribals perform unpaid labour.




71.  Solution: c)

Equal protection of law means that the same class of persons (disabled, women etc.) would be treated alike. But, they will all be subjected to the law of the land. No one is exempt from it except the President and the Governor in states. This is an exception to equality before law.




72.  Solution: d)

A person under preventive detention does not have any such rights which a person in custody normally has. The state legislatures can make laws as preventive detention is not only concerned with matters of national security, but also state security.




73. Solution: c)



http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 20
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 9 SOLUTIONS


http://www.zdnet.com/in/india-starts-issuing-of-ipv6-addresses-7000007932/

https://www.apnic.net/    data/assets/pdf_file/0004/58981/2013-India-DOT- IPv6.pdf

Internet Protocol version 6 (IPv6) is the latest version of the Internet Protocol (IP), the communications protocol that provides an identification and location system for computers on networks and routes traffic across the Internet. IPv6 was developed by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) to deal with the long-anticipated problem of IPv4 address exhaustion.

IPv6 is intended to replace IPv4, which still carries the vast majority of Internet traffic as of 2013. As of February 2014, the percentage of users reaching Google services over IPv6 surpassed 3% for the first time



74. Solution: c)

Refer to the calculation of GNP in Indian economy 5th edition by Ramesh Singh page
1.16. Sovereign bonds and loans from abroad form part of the capital account and do not count in the category of Income from abroad as they are not related to any
production process. They are just borrowings.




75. Solution: b)

he objective of the scheme is to extend initially the existing optical fiber network which extends upto districts HQ‘s/Block HQ‘s level upto  the Gram Panchayat level by utilizing Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF) .The cost of the initial phase of the NOFN scheme is likely to be in the region of RS 20,000 crore. Similar amount of investment is likely to be made by  private sector complementing the NOFN infrastructure while providing services to individual users





76. Solution: d)

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spectrum_management





77. Solution: b)

Per capita Income = NNP = GDP – Depreciation + Net Income from abroad.





http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 21
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 9 SOLUTIONS


Depreciation can be logical or artificial ( state dictated). Though economies fix their rates of depreciation, international bodies fix their own rates of depreciation while
ranking nations on the basis of national income.








78. Solution: c)

In order to utilise and harness the benefits of Cloud Computing, Government of India has embarked upon a very ambitious and important initiative – ―GI Cloud‖ which has been coined as ‗Meghraj‘. The focus of this initiative is to evolve  a Strategy and implement various components including governance mechanism to ensure proliferation of Cloud in government. Formulation of the Cloud Policy is one of the primary steps that will facilitate large scale adoption of cloud by government.

http://techcircle.vccircle.com/2014/02/05/indian-govt-launches-cloud-computing- project-meghraj-to-accelerate-delivery-of-e-services/





79. Solution: d)

Page no. 220-222, India – 2014





80. Solution: a)

In India, economic growth in the last decade has been lead largely by the services sector and it contributes to almost 65% of GDP as of now. India was the first example in the world where population dependency on agriculture remained more or less the
same, even while the share in GDP went down.




81. Solution: a)

The Sainik Schools are a system of schools in India established and managed by the Sainik Schools Society. They were conceived in 1961 by V. K. Krishna Menon, the then Defence Minister of India, to rectify the regional and class imbalance amongst the Officer cadre of the Indian Military, and to prepare students for entry into
the National Defence Academy (NDA), Khadakwasla, Pune and Indian Naval
Academy. Today there are over 24 such schools covering all the states of the country





http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 22
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 9 SOLUTIONS


The inspiration for Sainik Schools came from the Rashtriya Indian Military
College (RIMC) which have given India many service chiefs and the public school system of England. Sainik schools can be regarded as the ordinary citizen's public school where deserving students can get high quality education irrespective of their income or class background. Seats are reserved for children of serving Defence personnel and concessions are given to children of Government officials.





82. Solution: c)

Important document:

http://mhrd.gov.in/sites/upload_files/mhrd/files/Mobilisation.pdf (for women empowerment related information)

The National Policy on Education, 1986 recognised that the empowerment of women is possibly the most critical pre-condition for the participation of girls and women in the educational process. The Mahila Samakhya programme was launched in 1988 to pursue the objectives of the National Policy on Education, 1986. It recognised that education can  be  an  effective  tool  for  women‘s empowerment,  the  parameters of which are:


     enhancing self-esteem and self-confidence of women;



     building a positive image of women by recognizing their contribution to the society, polity and the economy;


      developing ability to think critically;



     fostering decision making and action through collective processes;



     enabling women to make informed choices in areas like education, employment and health (especially reproductive health);


     ensuring equal participation in developmental processes;



     providing information, knowledge and skill for economic independence;




http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 23
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 9 SOLUTIONS


     enhancing access to legal literacy and information relating to their rights and entitlements in society with a view to enhance their participation on an equal
footing in all areas.











83. Solution: d)

The Centrally sponsored scheme  ―Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha  Abhiyan (RMSA)‖ was launched in March, 2009 to enhance access to secondary education and to improve its quality. It seeks to ensure availability of secondary schools within reasonable distance of every habitation, improve quality to education imparted at secondary stage and reduce disparities related to gender, socio-economic status, geographical location and disability. The sharing pattern between the Centre and the States during the 11th Five Year Plan is 75:25, while for the north-eastern States, the
ratio is 90:10.



84. Solution: d)
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ultra_Mega_Power_Projects http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Supercritical_steam_generator





85. Solution: c)

In all technical and economic matters, Ministry of Power is assisted by the Central Electricity Authority (CEA). While the Authority (CEA) is a Statutory Body constituted under the erstwhile Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948, hereinafter replaced by the Electricity Act, 2003, where similar provisions exists, the office of the CEA is an  ―Attached Office‖ of  the  Ministry of  Power.   The  CEA  is  responsible for  the technical coordination and supervision of programmes and is also entrusted with a number of statutory functions. It is headed by a Chairman, who is also ex-officio Secretary to the Government of India, and comprises six full time Members of the CEA of the rank of ex-officio Additional Secretary to the Government of India, they are designated as Member (Thermal), Member (Hydro), Member (Economic and Commercial), Member(Power Systems), Member(Planning) and Member(Grid Operation and Distribution).

The Central Electricity Authority shall prepare a National Electricity Plan in accordance with the National Electricity Policy and notify such plan once in five


http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 24
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 9 SOLUTIONS


years. Any generating company intending to set-up a hydro-generating station also requires the concurrence of the Central Electricity Authority.



86.  Solution: b)

As India implements Goods and Services Tax (GST), it may be appropriate to calculate national income at market prices. This is because the taxation regime will become more uniform throughout the nation and the taxation regime will be unified.

Developed nations generally calculate their national income at market cost at current prices as they have a uniform taxation regime and low inflation rates. The difference
between constant and current prices is lesser as compared to developing nations.






87. Solution: a)

OSIRIS-REx is a planned asteroid study and sample return mission. It is a planetary science mission, the third selected in theNew Frontiers Program, after Juno and New Horizons. The mission is planned for a 2016 launch and will study and return a sample of asteroid 101955 Bennu (formerly designated 1999 RQ36), a carbonaceous asteroid, to Earth for detailed analyses in 2023. Material returned is expected to enable scientists to learn more about the time before the formation and evolution of the Solar System, initial stages of planet formation, and the source of organic compounds which led to the formation of life.

http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/science/nasa-approves-spacecraft-for-asteroid- trip/article5901138.ece





88. Solution: d)

All are correct.

The sepoys‘ discontent was not limited to religion alone. They were equally unhappy with their emoluments. A sepoy in the infantry got seven rupees a month. A sawar in the cavalry was paid Rs. 27, out of which he had to pay for his own uniform, food and the upkeep of his mount, and he was ultimately left with only a rupee or two. What was more galling was the sense of deprivation compared to his British counterparts. He was made to feel a subordinate at every step and was
discriminated against  racially and in matters of promotion and privileges. ‗




http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 25
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 9 SOLUTIONS


89. Solution: a)

India  has decided to propose renaming of Internet as ‗Equinet‘ so that all nations can have equal  say in its operations, besides calling for ―internationalisation‖ of core Internet resources.
http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/technology/internet/india-to-suggest- renaming-of-internet-as-equinet/article5916877.ece



90. Solution: c)

A proliferation of large dams that starve deltas of sediment, groundwater mining that causes land compaction, and artificial levees that affect river courses, have been responsible for the subsiding of major Indian deltas including Ganga-Brahmaputra, Krishna-Godavari, Brahmani and Mahanadi.

http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/energy-and-environment/indian-deltas-are- sinking/article5892566.ece



91. Solution: b)

http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/other-states/rhinos-proliferate-in- gorumara-park/article5843864.ece
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gorumara_National_Park http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jaldapara_National_Park





92.  Solution: d)

In a pure capitalistic economy prices are determined entirely by the market forces, including the quantity of good to be produced. Such an economy may collapse if large corporations monopolize the economy. It affects the pricing and supply of
goods thus hurting public interest.






93. Solution: a)

http://www.healthiersouthderbyshire.org/stop-smoking/major-diseases-caused- by-smoking

It causes diabetes too. It was in news recently.





http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 26
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 9 SOLUTIONS


http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/smoking-causes-type-ii- diabetes/article5657267.ece





94. Solution: d)

http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/energy-and-environment/worlds-largest- solar-power-plant-opens-in-nevada/article5685463.ece

http://www.volker-quaschning.de/articles/fundamentals2/index_e.php

95. Solution: d)

Heartbleed is a security bug in the open-source OpenSSL cryptography library, widely used to implement the Internet's Transport Layer Security (TLS) protocol. This vulnerability is due to a missing bounds check in the handling of the Transport Layer Security (TLS) heartbeat extension. A fixed version of OpenSSL was released on April 7, 2014, at the same time as Heartbleed was publicly disclosed. At that time, some 17 percent (around half a million) of the Internet's secure web servers certified by trusted authorities were believed to be vulnerable to the attack, allowing theft of the servers' private keys and users' session cookies and passwords

http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/technology/new-technique-to-fight- heartbleed-virus/article5915602.ece





96. Solution: b)

A major agrarian outbreak occurred in the Poona and Ahmednagar districts of Maharashtra in 1875. Here, as part of the Ryotwari system, land revenue was settled directly with the peasant who was also recognized as the owner of his land. Like the peasants in other Ryotwari areas, the Deccan peasant also found it difficult to pay land revenue without getting into the clutches of the moneylender and increasingly losing his land. This led to growing tension between the peasants and the moneylenders most of whom were outsiders — Marwaris or Gujaratis.

Three other developments occurred at this time. During the early I 860s, the American Civil War had led to a rise in cotton exports which had pushed up prices. The end of the Civil War in 1864 brought about an acute depression in cotton exports and a crash in prices. The ground slipped from under the peasants‘ feet. Simultaneously, in 1867, ‗the Government raised land revenue by nearly 50 per cent. The situation was worsened by a succession of bad harvests.





http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 27
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 9 SOLUTIONS


97. Solution: c)

http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/science/algae-proposed-as-a-viable-source-to- produce-cheaper-biofuel/article5733023.ece

http://www.algaeindustrymagazine.com/phenometrics-environmental-photo- bioreactor/







98. Solution: b)

The most militant and widespread of the peasant movements was the Indigo Revolt of 1859-60. The indigo planters, nearly all Europeans, compelled the tenants to grow indigo which they processed in factories set up in rural (mofussil) areas. From the beginning, indigo was grown under an extremely oppressive system which involved great loss to the cultivators. The planters forced the peasants to take a meager
amount as advance and enter into fraudulent contracts. The price paid for the indigo plants was far below the market price.

The discontent of indigo growers in Bengal boiled over in the autumn of 1859 when their case seemed to get Government support. Misreading an official letter and exceeding his authority, Hem Chandra Kar, Deputy Magistrate of Kalaroa, published on 17 August a proclamation to policemen that ‗in case of disputes relating to Indigo Ryots, they (ryots) shall retain possession of their own lands, and shall sow on them what crops they please, and the Police will be careful that no Indigo Planter nor anyone else be able to interface in the matter.

Missionaries were another group which extended active support to the indigo ryots in their struggle




99. Solution: c)

The executive is responsible only to the Lok Sabha, not the whole Parliament, which includes Rajya Sabha too.

Governors hold the highest post in a state government. They being nominated characterizes undemocratic tendencies.

The fact that India has a written constitution nowhere proves that it is a democratic nation. Several autocratic nations like Syria have written constitutions, whereas
democratic nations like the U.K. do not have a written constitution.


http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 28
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 9 SOLUTIONS







100.           Solution: a)

Refer page no. 1.15 and 1.16,  Ramesh Singh, 4th Edition





























































http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 29
