INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 18 SOLUTIONS




1.   Solution: d)

Mutation causes changes in the genes and hence weakens the self-non-self discrimination thereby making the immune system weak.
Infection impairs the immune system.
Malnutrition does not allow the immune system to access the compounds from the body it needs to fight a disease.



2.   Solution: d)

The first statement is false as the PM can only recommend the dissolution of the LokSabha and not the whole of Parliament which also includes the Rajya Sabha. He can do so by the virtue of being in the majority in the Loksabha.



3.   Solution: d)

The accentuation of structural constraints has been one of the factors contributing to sub-5 percent growth without a commensurate large decline in investment rate.

What are these structural factors? Salient among them as indicated by some studies are the following:

    Difficulties in taking quick decisions on project proposals have affected the ease of doing business. This has resulted in considerable project delays and insufficient complementary investments.
    Ill-targeted subsidies cramp the fiscal space for public investment and distort allocation of resources.
    Low manufacturing base, especially of capital goods, and low value addition in
manufacturing. Manufacturing growth and exports could be facilitated with simplified procedures, easy credit, and reduced transaction cost.
    Presence of a large informal sector and inadequate labour absorption in the formal sector. Absence of required skills is considered an important reason.
    Sustaining high economic growth is difficult without robust agricultural growth.
Low agricultural productivity is hampering this.
    Structural factors engendering continued high food inflation need to be tackled.
Issues related to significant presence of intermediaries in the different tiers of marketing, shortage of storage and processing infrastructure, inter-state movement of agricultural produce, etc. need to be addressed.

Source: Economic Survey – 2014

4.   Solution: c)

In the USA, the SC can only review constitutional cases and laws that are ultra vires the constitution, whereas in India, the SC can pick up not just the ulta vires laws but also

http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 1
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 18 SOLUTIONS


virtually any case from any jurisdiction, whether civil, criminal or constitutional. It is also the highest court of appeal.
However, the Indian SC exercises this power officially under the principle of “procedure established by law”,  whereas the US SC exercises it under the principle of “due process of law”  or “reasonableness”. The line is getting blurred day by day. But, the principle remains officially intact. The Indian SC would never question the reasonableness of a law unless it violates the fundamental rights.


5.   Solution: d)

Sectoral Share in GDP (Per Cent)




























For collection of data relating to manufacturing and repairing activities, all units pursuing such activities in the country are grouped into two categories, namely, registered units and unregistered units. Hereafter „registered units‟, unless otherwise stated, shall refer to the units registered under Sections 2m (i) and 2m (ii) of the Factories Act, 1948, or under
the Bidi and Cigar Workers (Condition of Employment) Act, 1966, i.e. those employing 10 or
more workers and using power and 20 or more workers but not using power. Within the manufacturing sector, registered units dominate over the unregistered units in the share of GDP.

6.   Solution: d)

Habeas Corpus can be issued against private individuals too as it is concerned with protection of human rights. Mandamus can only be issued against public authorities. Refer to the section  on „writs‟ in Laxmikanth (Chapter- FR) for more details.






http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 2
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 18 SOLUTIONS


7.   Solution: c)

The share of services has been consistently rising; more so since 2004-05. However, the pace of expansion was not balanced. The biggest drivers of the service sector expansion since
2004-05 were communications and banking and insurance. Robust growth in these sectors
primarily drove the expansion of the services sector even after 2010-11. Real estate and business services also gained share.

The services that witnessed stagnation/decline in share after 2010-11 include domestic trade, hotels, and storage. The inability of some of these employment-intensive sectors to attain sustained momentum is one of the reasons for the less-than commensurate growth in employment in services.

In the absence of sufficiently high growth in agriculture and industry, services would be seriously constrained to sustain growth acceleration on auto-pilot mode since many of the services are dependent on buoyancy in the commodity-producing sectors, especially industry.

8.   Solution: a)

Vitamins are classified into two groups depending upon their solubility in water or fat.
(i) Fat soluble vitamins: Vitamins which are soluble in fat and oils but insoluble in water are
kept in this group. These are vitamins A, D, E and K. They are stored in liver and adipose
(fat storing) tissues.

(ii) Water soluble vitamins: B group vitamins and vitamin C are soluble in water so they are grouped together. Water soluble vitamins must be supplied regularly in diet because they are readily excreted in urine and cannot be stored (except vitamin B12) in our body.



9.   Solution: b)

Investment comprises fixed capital formation, acquisition of valuables, and changes in stock and inventories, adjusted for errors and omissions. The investment rate (investment to GDP ratio) averaged 24.5 per cent over the period 1990-91 to 2003-04. The year 2004-05 marked a break, with the rate of investment exceeding 30 per cent for the first time. Between 2004 - 05 and 2012-13, the rate of investment averaged 35.4 per cent, reaching the peak of 38.1 per cent in 2007-08. It averaged 35.3 per cent during the higher growth phase of 2004-05 to 2007-08 and 35.5 per cent between 2008-09 and 2012-13. The investment rate of 34.8 per cent in 2012-
13 is lower than these two sub-period averages.














http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 3
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 18 SOLUTIONS























10. Solution: a)

One of the major factors  that has resulted in an increase in the Centre‟s fiscal deficit after
2008-09 has been the build-up in subsidies. As per the provisional actual figures of the
Controller General of Accounts (CGA), major subsidies amounted to ` 2,47,596 crore in 2013 -
14. There has been a sharp increase in total subsidies from 1.42 per cent of GDP in 2007-08 to
2.56 per cent of GDP in 2012-13, and 2.26 per cent of GDP in 2013-14 (RE). Food subsidy has been increasing due to the widening gap between the economic cost of procurement by the Food Corporation of India and the central issue prices fixed for cereals under the public distribution system (PDS). While there has been partial decontrol of fertilizer subsidy, prices of urea are still sticky; similarly petrol prices have been decontrolled and diesel prices are subjected to monthly increases of ` 0.50 per litre. The cap set on the number of subsidized LPG cylinders per annum per family was increased from 9 to 12 from April 2014. In
addition, leakages contribute substantially to the overall increase in subsidy burden.




11. Solution: c)

Food inflation partly owes to large wastage of food articles in the supply chain owing to inefficiencies in distribution channels. The provisions of the State Agricultural Produce Marketing Committee (APMC) Acts have prevented creation of competitive conditions in the distribution of commodities and creation of a national market for agricultural commodities. Multiple layers of intermediation in the distribution of food articles have also pushed up prices for consumers. It is therefore necessary to focus on distribution channels and on reducing food wastage in the supply chain. Significant investment in marketing infrastructure, including modern warehouses, cold storages, reefer vans, scientific packaging, and handling would help strengthen distribution channels. State governments will have to play a vital role in removing restrictive provisions in the APMC Act and
proactively promoting alternative trading options for farmers.





http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 4
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 18 SOLUTIONS



12. Solution: c)

Expenditure reform

Expenditure reform is required for government to achieve desired outcomes with minimum cost. This requires a change in the budgeting process and accounting practices, subsidy
reform, a focus on public goods, and mechanisms for feedback and accountability.

Budgeting process

At present in India, a government department gets resources through two mechanisms: the budget process run by the Ministry of Finance and the budget process run by the Planning Commission. This leads to sub-optimal resource allocation as well as diffused accountability.

A more effective budget process would be conducted in the language of outcomes, targets, and the cost of achieving alternative targets. The focus of a sound budget process would be upon outcomes as seen by citizens and measured by independent bodies, and not the internal activities of departments of government.

Budgetary allocations should be associated with concrete targets for outcomes and departments held accountable for achieving these targets.

The creation of feedback loops towards enhanced performance requires four elements. The first is the unification of budget making at the Ministry of Finance. The second is the design of a report card about the work of every ministry, and the preparation of the report card by independent organizations, based on technical knowledge. The third is a formal budget process that works with budget constraints, outcomes, and targets. The fourth is a set of consequences that arises when a department fails to achieve its targets. This would provide feedback loops of pulling back resources and modified allocation for expenditure that fails to deliver results.

There has been much criticism of the Indian cash-based accounting process. Greater clarity, and better decisions, would be achieved by moving towards an appropriately modified accrual based system, where the income and expenditure for the year is measured as that which is attributed to the activities of the year. As an example, if a fertiliser subsidy were operating in a year, the cost of that subsidy would be counted in that year – regardless ofwhen the actual payment of the subsidy took place. (Economic Survey – 2014)

13. Solution: a)

Urea is highly subsidised. Farmers pay approximately ` 5360 per tonne, and the government pays ` 11,760 per tonne. Subsidy for other fertilizers has been capped since 2010 under the Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) regime.

The correct proportions in which Nitrogen (N), Phosporus (P), and Pottasium (K) should be used are 4:2:1. These are the proportions in which these nutrients are used by plants. The


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 5
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 18 SOLUTIONS


skewed subsidy scheme has given farmers a distorted notion that urea, the main provider of N, is cheap while the other two elements are expensive. As a consequence, fertilizer use in India is taking place in the ratio 8.2:3.2:1.




14. Solution: c)

The FSLRC proposed a new draft law: the Indian Financial Code. This law puts consumer protection at the heart of all financial regulation. In order to protect the consumer without putting a burden on the taxpayer, regulators do micro-prudential regulation and reduce the risk of failure of financial firms. They protect policy holders and prevent unsuitable products from being sold through regulations about consumer protection and through redressal forums. When financial firms fail, shareholders should bear the full brunt of the failure, but consequences for consumers and the economy should be blocked using a
resolution corporation. Through systemic risk regulation, the regulators and the government prevent a large-scale disruption of financial services. This adds up to a rational approach to interventions by financial agencies in the financial system, as opposed to the existing approach of command and control.




15. Solution: a)

Analgesics reduce or abolish pain without causing impairment of consciousness, mental confusion, incoordination or paralysis or some other disturbances of nervous system. These are classified as follows:
(i) Non-narcotic (non-addictive) analgesics
(ii) Narcotic drugs

(i) Non-narcotic (non-addictive) analgesics: Aspirin and paracetamol belong to the class of non-narcotic analgesics. Aspirin is the most familiar example. Aspirin inhibits the synthesis of chemicals known as prostaglandins which stimulate inflammation in the tissue and cause pain. These drugs are effective in relieving skeletal pain such as that due to arthritis. These drugs have many other effects such as reducing fever (antipyretic) and preventing platelet coagulation. Because of its anti blood clotting
action, aspirin finds use in prevention of heart attacks.

(ii) Narcotic analgesics: Morphine and many of its homologues, when administered in medicinal doses, relieve pain and produce sleep. In poisonous doses, these produce stupor, coma, convulsions and ultimately death. Morphine narcotics are sometimes referred to as opiates, since they are obtained from the opium poppy.
These analgesics are chiefly used for the relief of postoperative pain, cardiac pain and pains
of terminal cancer, and in child birth.

The Narcotic drugs Act regulates the administration of narcotic analgesics. It was recently in news as the government amended the act to include flexibility for using morphine medicinally. Morphine is a narcotic drug.
Read more here


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 6
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 18 SOLUTIONS


http://www.hrw.org/news/2014/02/21/india-major-breakthrough-pain-patients





16. Solution: d)


















17. Solution: b)

Stem Cell refers to an undifferentiated cell of a multicellular organism which is capable of giving rise to indefinitely more cells of the same type, and from which certain other kinds of cell arise by differentiation.


There are three known accessible sources of autologous adult stem cells in humans:

1.  Bone marrow, which requires extraction by harvesting, that is, drilling into bone
(typically the femur or iliac crest),
2.  Adipose tissue (lipid cells), which requires extraction by liposuction, and
3.  Blood, which requires extraction through apheresis, wherein blood is drawn from the donor (similar to a blood donation), and passed through a machine that extracts the stem cells and returns other portions of the blood to the donor.



18. Solution: a)

Photochemical smog occurs in warm, dry and sunny climate. The main components
of the photochemical smog result from the action of sunlight on unsaturated hydrocarbons and nitrogen oxides produced by automobiles and factories. Photochemical smog has high concentration of oxidising agents and is, therefore, called as oxidising smog.

Classical smog occurs in cool humid climate. It is a mixture of smoke, fog and sulphur dioxide. Chemically it is a reducing mixture and so it is also called
as reducing smog.








http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 7
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 18 SOLUTIONS


19. Solution: d)


































20. Solution: c)



























21. Solution: a)

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (NMRI), or magnetic resonance tomography (MRT) is a medical imaging technique used

http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 8
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 18 SOLUTIONS


in radiology to investigate the anatomy and function of the body in both health and disease. MRI scanners use strong magnetic fields and radiowaves to form images of the body. The technique is widely used in hospitals for medical diagnosis, staging of disease and for follow-up without exposure to ionizing radiation.
MRI detects water. This allows it to distinguish between water-poor and water-rich regions.
Therefore, teeth, bones etc. do not appear in MRI. Hence, the areas surrounded by them can be examined better.
Read further here http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_resonance_imaging#How_MRI_works



22.  Solution: c)

Indian Councils Act 1892 was the beginning of the parliamentary System in India. The Indian Councils act 1892 can also be said to introduce the principle of representation. This act authorized the universities, District Boards, Municipalities, Zamindars and Chambers of Commerce to send members to Provincial councils.
However, the official majority was maintained. While questions could be asked to the executive, supplementary questions were restricted.



23. Solution: c)

Cellulosic ethanol, also known as Second generation ethanol is not produced from starch or sugar but from cellulose fibers, which are found in abundance in plant cell walls. Humans cannot digest cellulose and it is enormously available. The IAEA says that the cellulosic ethanol can allow ethanol fuels to play a much bigger role in the future than previously imagined. The feedstock for this second generation alcohol is the agricultural residues containing cellulosic biomass (e.g. stalks, leaves, bagasse, and husks of rice, wheat, wood chips, sawdust or energy crops.). The lignocellulose fibers contained in the residue can also be converted into fermentable sugars.

The cellulosic ethanol technology has already become a reality with the first commercial plant already operational in Italy by Beta Renewables. Slowly but surely, countries are shifting to renewable energy source in the Biofuels segment. While most of them are currently blending gasoline with ethanol produced from the first generation, governments are progressively supporting and promoting the need for cellulosic ethanol.




24.  Solution: d)

FR- Right to freedom of religion for example.
FD- Brotherhood towards all, religious harmony etc. DPSP – uniform civil code for example.

25. Solution: d)

There is consensus that the GST will be a major milestone for indirect tax reform in India. Replacing all existing indirect taxes by the GST will create a national market, eliminate


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 9
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 18 SOLUTIONS


cascading taxes, and align taxation of imports and exports correctly. This will improve the competitiveness of production and export from India.  The implementation of a Central GST (CenGST) could be the first step towards the GST. Once the CenGST is implemented, and
the information technology system for CenGST has worked, estimation risk will be lower and it will be easier for the centre and states to move to the GST.

http://www.moneycontrol.com/news/business/why-india-inc-wants-gst-so-badly- faq_818078.html




26.  Solution: d)

Refer to http://www.un.org/en/documents/udhr/#atop

27. Solution: b)

Aspartame is the most successful and widely used artificial sweetener. It is roughly 100 times as sweet as cane sugar. It is methyl ester of dipeptide formed from aspartic acid and phenylalanine. Use of aspartame is limited to cold foods and soft drinks because it is unstable at cooking temperature.
Alitame is high potency sweetener, although it is more stable than aspartame, the control of sweetness of food is difficult while using it.
Sucrolose is trichloro derivative of sucrose. Its appearance and taste are like sugar. It is stable at cooking temperature. It does not provide calories.



28.  Solution: d)

There are several fundamental rights enjoyed by the foreigners like Right to life, Right against exploitation etc. But, as they are not the citizens of India, they are not supposed to follow the duties.



29. Solution: c)

The total amount of goods and services demanded in the economy at a given overall price level and in a given time period. It is represented by the aggregate-demand curve, which describes the relationship between price levels and the quantity of output that firms are willing to provide. Normally there is a negative relationship between aggregate demand
and the price level. Also known as "total spending".


Aggregate demand is the demand for the gross domestic product (GDP) of a country, and is
represented by this formula:


Aggregate Demand (AD) = C + I + G + (X-M) C = Consumers' expenditures on goods and services. I = Investment spending by companies on capital goods. G = Government
expenditures on publicly provided goods and services. X = Exports of goods and services. M


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 10
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 18 SOLUTIONS


= Imports of goods and services.




To understand the relationship between Aggregate demand and Price levels, refer the link:

http://www.sparknotes.com/economics/macro/aggregatedemand/section2.rhtml

30.    Solution: c)

BOD refers to the total demand for oxygen by the micro-organisms to break the biological matter present in water. More is the biological matter, more will be the BOD. Hence, more pollution.



31.  Solution: c)

The legislature is accountable to the people in both forms of government. It is in the Parliamentary form only that the executive or the government is directly accountable to the parliament. It establishes a responsible government as the legislature can question the government on its conduct. In the presidential form, this is not possible.



32.  Solution: b)

There is no provision for the Lok Sabha secretary specifically in the constitution. It only ta lks about the secretarial staff via Article 98.
Article 98 (1): “Each House of Parliament shall have a separate secretarial staff: Provided that
nothing in this clause shall be construed as preventing the creation of posts common to both Houses of
Parliament.”



33. Solution: c)

In the aftermath of the adoption of the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management
(FRBM) Act, the fiscal deficit of the centre was brought down to 2.5 per cent of GDP in 2007-
08 that was below the threshold target of 3 per cent of GDP. Fiscal balances were deliberately expanded in the aftermath of the global financial crisis in 2008-09 to shore up aggregate demand and raise the growth rate.

The gradual fiscal consolidation process was resumed in 2010-11. The government unveiled a revised fiscal consolidation roadmap in October 2012. It targeted a fiscal deficit of 4.8 per cent of GDP for 2013-14 and through a correction of 0.6 percentage point each year thereafter, a fiscal deficit of 3.0 per cent of GDP by 2016-17.

The fiscal deficit of 4.5 per cent of GDP in 2013-14 as compared to the budgeted target of 4.8 per cent of GDP is indicative of continued focus on fiscal consolidation. With a shortfall in tax revenues and disinvestment receipts along with higher-than- budgeted subsidies and interest and pension payments, fiscal consolidation was mainly achieved through reduction
in expenditure from the budgeted levels.

http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 11
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 18 SOLUTIONS


34.  Solution: b)

The Council of Ministers is collectively responsible to Lok Sabha only. This means Rajya
Sabha cannot pass a no-confidence motion and remove the Government.

It can, however, exercise control over the Government and this function becomes quite evident, particularly when the Government does not enjoy majority in Rajya Sabha. For e.g. in passing ordinary and some financial bills like in the recent case of the TRAI bill.

In case of an ordinary legislation, to resolve a deadlock between the two Houses, the Constitution provides for the joint sitting of both Houses. Issues in joint sitting are decided by a majority of the total number of members of both Houses present and voting. The joint sitting is presided over by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. However, in the case of a Money Bill, there is no provision in the Constitution for a joint sitting of both Houses as Lok Sabha clearly enjoys pre-eminence over Rajya Sabha in financial matters. As regards a Constitution amendment Bill, it has been provided in the Constitution that such a Bill has to be passed by the specific majority, as prescribed under article 368 of the Constitution, by both Houses (not by a joint sitting). This means that if Rajya Sabha has rejected such a bill, it is over.



35.  Solution: d)

The following are the provisions related to the office of the speaker:

Two members of Lok Sabha will be chosen as Speaker and Deputy Speaker. And therefore, the Speaker shall vacate the office if he/ she cease to be a member of Lok Sabha.
The speaker can only be removed by the Lok Sabha members by majority (not by the pleasure of the President).
After the dissolution of Lok Sabha the Speaker will not vacate the office immediately but will continue till the first meeting after the next general elections.



36.  Solution: d)

A private member can move resolution only on alternate Fridays.
A statutory resolution can be moved either by a minister or a private member. It is so because it is always tabled in the pursuance of a provision in the constitution or an act of Parliament.



37.  Solution: a)

Every resolution is a special type of motion. All motions need not necessarily be substantive. Further, not all motions are put to the vote of the house, whereas all resolutions are put.



38. Solution: d)

Cyanobacteria are autotrophic microbes widely distributed in aquatic and terrestrial environments many of which can fix atmospheric nitrogen, e.g. Anabaena, Nostoc, Oscillatoria, etc. In paddy fields, cyanobacteria serve as an important biofertiliser. Blue green algae also

http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 12
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 18 SOLUTIONS


add organic matter to the soil and increase its fertility. Currently, in our country, a number of biofertilisers are available commercially in the market and farmers use these regularly in their fields to replenish soil nutrients and to reduce dependence on chemical fertilisers. Others are Rhizobium, Azospirillium, Mycorrhiza etc.



39.  Solution: d)

While Ministers vacate their offices, they do not lose their membership of the house.
A resolution for making law from the state list needs the approval of the council of states (Rajya Sabha) to be applicable to all the states. If a majority of the states pass a resolution to this effect, it will apply only to those states.



40.  Solution: c)

It starts after the Question hour, which is the first thing done in the house. Zero hour is an
Indian innovation and an informal device available to the MPs.



41. Solution: b)

Strengthening macroeconomic stability, a non-negotiable instrument for stable and faster growth, is predicated on fiscal discipline, manageable current account balance, and price stability. Policy challenges include:

    Keeping fiscal deficit in check without compromising on capital expenditure;
    Maintaining the CAD in the range of 2-2.5 per cent of GDP. This may turn out to be challenging if non-oil imports revive upon growth revival and oil prices harden. Therefore, policies that help in sustained export growth remain relevant.
    Stepping up efforts to further reduce inflation not only to counter the direct macroeconomic consequences but to provide leeway to the RBI for monetary easing and to counter external challenges more effectively.




42.  Solution: a)

It is concerned with the breach of parliamentary privileges by a minister by for e.g. withholding facts or a case or giving wrong or distorted information. Its purpose is to censure the concerned minister.




43.  Solution: c)

Impeachment of president is taken up by the house in cases of violation of the constitution. For others, grounds are either different or not mentioned explicitly as “violation of the constitution”.


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 13
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 18 SOLUTIONS



44.  Solution: d)

Other disputes of commercial nature between the centre and the states; questions of political nature; disputes arising out of a pre-constitutional agreement or treaty etc. also do not come under original jurisdiction of the SC.




45.  Solution: b)

The assembly can only recommend the abolition of the council to the President. The final call is taken by the President.
Only the assembly participates in the election of the members of the RS.




46. Solution: c)

While the combined livestock population is 70%, the contribution is only 25%. This shows a below average productivity.




47. Solution: d)

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plant_defense_against_herbivory

http://bexar-tx.tamu.edu/homehort/archives-of-weekly-articles-davids-plant-of-the- week/natural-defenses-help-make-plants-pest-resistant/




48.  Solution: d)

Bio-fortification, which is breeding crops with higher levels of vitamins and minerals, or higher protein and healthier fats – is the most practical means to improve public health. Breeding for improved nutritional quality is undertaken with the objectives of improving:

(i) Protein content and quality; (ii) Oil content and quality;
(iii) Vitamin content; and
(iv) Micronutrient and mineral content.

In 2000, maize hybrids that had twice the amount of the amino acids, lysine and tryptophan, compared to existing maize hybrids were developed. Wheat variety, Atlas 66, having a high protein content, has been used as a donor for improving cultivated wheat. It has been possible to develop an iron-fortified rice variety containing over five times as much iron as
in commonly consumed varieties.
The Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi has also released several vegetable crops that are rich in vitamins and minerals, e.g., vitamin A enriched carrots, spinach,

http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 14
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 18 SOLUTIONS


pumpkin; vitamin C enriched bitter gourd, bathua, mustard, tomato; iron and calcium enriched spinach and bathua; and protein enriched beans – broad, lablab, French and garden peas.



49. Solution: d)

Conventional agricultural production of cereals, pulses, vegetables, fruits, etc., may not be able to meet the demand of food at the rate at which human and animal population is increasing. The shift from grain to meat diets also creates more demand for cereals as it takes
3-10 Kg of grain to produce 1 Kg of meat by animal farming.
More than 25 per cent of human population is suffering from hunger and malnutrition. One of the alternate sources of proteins for animal and human nutrition is Single
Cell Protein (SCP). Microbes are being grown on an industrial scale as source of good
protein.
Microbes like Spirulina can be grown easily on materials like waste water from potato
processing plants (containing starch), straw, molasses, animal manure and even sewage, to produce large quantities and can serve as food rich in protein, minerals, fats, carbohydrate and vitamins. Incidentally such utilisation also reduces environmental pollution. It has been calculated that a 250 Kg cow produces 200 g of protein per day. In the same period, 250g of a micro-organism like Methylophilus methylotrophus, because of its high rate of biomass production and growth, can be expected to produce 25 tonnes of protein.

50.  Solution: d)

As traditional breeding techniques failed to keep pace with demand and to provide sufficiently fast and efficient systems for crop improvement, another technology called tissue culture got developed. It was learnt by scientists, during 1950s, that whole plants could be regenerated from explants, i.e., any part of a plant taken out and grown in a test tube, under sterile conditions in special nutrient media.

This method of producing thousands of plants through tissue culture is called micro- propagation. Each of these plants will be genetically identical to the original plant from which they were grown, i.e., they are somaclones. Many important food plants like tomato, banana, apple, etc., have been produced on commercial scale using this method.

Another important application of the method is the recovery of healthy plants from diseased plants. Although the plant is infected with a virus, the meristem (apical and axillary) is free of virus. Hence, one can remove the meristem and grow it in vitro to obtain virus-free plants.



51.  Solution: d)

Bacteria can be either autotroph or hetrotroph. A vast majority of bacteria are heterotroph. All protozoa are heterotrophs, i.e. they do not prepare their own food. They also act as parasites.
Fungi are cosmopolitan, i.e. they are found everywhere – water, air, soil, animals, plants etc.






http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 15
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 18 SOLUTIONS


52.  Solution: c)

Lichens are symbiotic associations i.e. mutually useful associations, between algae and fungi. Lichens are very good pollution indicators – they do not grow in polluted areas.

Viruses are non-cellular organisms containing genetic material. The material is infectious. It is difficult to classify viruses as living or non-living. They do not have a metabolism of their own.



53.  Solution: d)

Surgical methods, also called sterilisation, are generally advised for the male/female partner as a terminal method to prevent any more pregnancies. Surgical intervention blocks gamete transport and thereby prevent conception. Sterilisation procedure in the male is called „vasectomy‟ and  that in the female,  „tubectomy‟. These techniques are highly effective but their reversibility is very poor.



54.  Solution: d)

Diseases or infections which are transmitted through sexual intercourse are collectively called sexually transmitted diseases (STD) or venereal diseases (VD) or reproductive tract infections (RTI). Gonorrhoea, syphilis, genital herpes, chlamydiasis, genital warts, trichomoniasis, hepatitis-B and of course, the most discussed infection in the recent years, HIV leading to AIDS are some of the common STDs.
Some of these infections like hepatitis–B and HIV can also be transmitted by sharing of injection needles, surgical instruments, etc., with infected persons, transfusion of blood, or from an infected mother to the foetus too.



55.  Solution: a)

Assisted reproductive technology (ART) are methods used to achieve pregnancy by artificial or partially artificial means. It is reproductive technology used primarily
for infertility treatments, and is also known as fertility treatment. Examples of ART include in vitro fertilization, intracytoplasmic sperm injection(ICSI), cryopreservation and intrauterine insemination (IUI). There is yet no strict definition of the term ART; its usage mainly belongs to the field of reproductive endocrinology and infertility.



56.  Solution: c)

Mutation is a phenomenon which results in alteration of DNA sequences and consequently results in changes in the genotype and the phenotype of an organism. In addition to recombination, mutation is another phenomenon that leads to variation in DNA. There are many chemical and physical factors that induce mutations. These are referred to as mutagens. UV radiations can cause mutations in organisms – it is a mutagen.
Individuals suffering from such genetic disorders may not be physically and emotionally fit. The sexual orientation also undergoes a change.


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 16
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 18 SOLUTIONS



57.  Solution: d)

Malaria is caused by protozoa. Skin infection is caused by fungi. And, pneumonia is caused by bacteria. There are other widespread diseases too that are caused by these micro- organisms.

58.  Solution: c)

Discrimination between self and non-self is an important basis for immunity to work. But, vaccination is given to activate acquired immunity. Acquired immunity works on the basis of memory. Weak or dead pathogens are injected in the body to create a memory of them. This prepares the immunity to tackle future attacks from the identified pathogen.



59.  Solution: a)

The Moon has a lower gravitational force. Hence the escape velocity for Moon is low somewhere around 2.3 km/s. Gas molecules formed on moon having larger velocity than
2.3 km/s can easily escape it. The Earth on other hand has a higher escape velocity.



60.  Solution: a)

It is known that electromagnetic waves above a certain frequency are not reflected from ionosphere. Radio waves used for radio broadcast which are in the frequency range 2
MHz to 10 MHz, are below the critical frequency. They are therefore reflected by the ionosphere. Thus radio waves broadcast from an antenna can be received at points far away where the direct wave fail to reach on account of the curvature of the earth.



61.  Solution: a)

Electromagnetic waves of certain frequencies can only be sent as sky waves as some do not get reflected via ionosphere. Where ground disruption is low, it can be sent directly. Otherwise, receiving and sending via a satellite is common.



62. Solution: a)

When it comes to public debt, India is forcing financial firms to lend to the government such as through the statutory liquidity ratio for banks and investment guidelines for other financial firms. This method of capturing resources is known as „financial repression‟. It leads to lower returns for households who are customers of financial  firms. It generates incentives for households to avoid holding assets with Indian financial firms, thus encouraging purchases of gold, real estate, and overseas assets. The government must move away from financial repression and set up a professional Public Debt Management Agency
(PDMA) that sells government bonds to voluntary bidders.




http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 17
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 18 SOLUTIONS


63.  Solution: c)


An acronym for Long Term Evolution, LTE is a 4G wireless communications standard developed by the 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) that's designed to provide up to 10x the speeds of 3G networks for mobile devices such
as smartphones,tablets, netbooks, notebooks and wireless hotspots. 4Gtechnologies are designed to provide IP-based voice, data and multimedia streaming at speeds of at least 100
Mbit per second and up to as fast as 1 GBit per second.
4G LTE is one of several competing 4G standards along with Ultra Mobile Broadband
(UMB) and WiMax (IEEE 802.16).



64.  Solution: d)

For frequencies below 20 MHz, such as high wavelength signals, ground waves are used. For higher frequencies, Sky waves and for even higher frequencies even in the range of UHF, space waves are used. They are sent to a satellite and then received from there.



65.  Solution: d)

Higher concentrations of NO2 can damage plant leaves and retard the rate of photosynthesis. The red haze, i.e. obscurity in traffic is caused due to the oxides of nitrogen combined with some soot or dust.

66.  Solution: a)

Hydrocarbons are composed of hydrogen and carbon only and are formed by incomplete combustion of fuel used in automobiles. Hydrocarbons are carcinogenic, i.e., they cause cancer. They harm plants by causing ageing, breakdown of tissues and shedding of leaves, flowers and twigs. The Bharat Stage IV standards regulate the maximum quantity of HC that a vehicle can emit.



67. Solution: a)

Others are CFC, Carbon dioxide, Methane etc. CFCs also damage the ozone layer.



68.  Solution: a)

Normally rain water has a pH of 5.6 (acidic) due to the presence of H+ ions formed
by the reaction of rain water with carbon dioxide present in the atmosphere to form carbonic acid. When the pH of the rain water drops below 5.6, it is called acid rain.









http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 18
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 18 SOLUTIONS


69. Solution: c)

The total outstanding liabilities of the central government were placed at `50,70,601 crore, equivalent to 50.1 per cent of GDP at end March 2013 (Table 3.8). The total liabilities for the Government of India include debt and liabilities accounted for in the Consolidated Fund of India (technically defined as Public Debt) as well as liabilities accounted for in the public account (called other liabilities).


70.  Solution: a)

Li-fi is a 5G visible light communication system that uses light from light-emitting
diodes (LEDs) as a medium to deliver networked, mobile, high-speed communication in a similar manner as Wi-Fi. Li-Fi could lead to the Internet of Things, which is everything electronic being connected to the internet, with the LED lights on the electronics being used as Li-Fi internet access points.
Visible light communications (VLC) works by switching bulbs on and off
within nanoseconds, which is too quickly to be noticed by the human eye. Although Li-Fi bulbs would have to be kept on to transmit data, the bulbs could be dimmed to the point that they were not visible to humans and yet still functional.[7] The light waves cannot penetrate walls which makes a much shorter range, though more secure from hacking, relative to Wi-Fi. Direct line of sight isn't necessary for Li-Fi to transmit a signal; light reflected off the walls can achieve 70 Mbit/s.
Li-Fi has the advantage of being useful in electromagnetic sensitive areas such as in aircraft cabins, hospitals and nuclear power plants without causing electromagnetic
interference. Both Wi-Fi and Li-Fi transmit data over the electromagnetic spectrum, but whereas Wi-Fi utilises radio waves, Li-Fi uses visible light. While the US Federal Communications Commission has warned of a potential spectrum crisis because Wi-Fi is close to full capacity, Li-Fi has almost no limitations on capacity. The visible light spectrum is 10,000 times larger than the entire radio frequency spectrum. Researchers have reached data rates of over 10 GBits/s, which is more than 250 times faster than superfast broadband. Li-Fi is expected to be ten times cheaper than Wi-Fi. Short range, low reliability and high installation costs are the potential downsides.



71. Solution: b)

Rational analysis of subsidy programmes would be assisted if the accounting systems of government, and budget documents, classified all government expendtiures into public goods and subsidies. This would make it possible to obtain a full picture of subsidies and enable a more rational budget process. Shifting from the plan/ non-plan distinction to the subsidy/public-goods distinction would improve clarity of thought. This is consistent with the July 2011 report of the Planning Commission‟s High  Level Expert  Committee on Efficient Managment of Public Expenditure.


72.  Solution: a)





http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 19
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 18 SOLUTIONS


A major breakthrough in the treatment of hyperacidity came through the discovery according to which a chemical, histamine, stimulates the secretion of pepsin and hydrochloric acid in the stomach. The drug cimetidine (Tegamet), was designed to prevent the interaction of histamine with the receptors present in the stomach wall. This resulted in release of lesser amount of acid. The importance of the drug was
so much that it remained the largest selling drug in the world until another drug, ranitidine (Zantac), was discovered. Histamine is a potent vasodilator. It has various functions. It contracts the smooth muscles in the bronchi and gut and relaxes other muscles, such as those in the walls of fine blood vessels. Histamine is also responsible for the nasal congestion associated with common cold and allergic response to pollen.



73.  Solution: b)

Tranquilizers are a class of chemical compounds used for the treatment of stress, and mild or even severe mental diseases. These relieve anxiety, stress, irritability or excitement by inducing a sense of well-being. They form an essential component of sleeping pills. There are various types of tranquilizers. They function by different
mechanisms. For example, noradrenaline is one of the neurotransmitters that plays a role in mood changes. If the level of noradrenaline is low for some reason, then the signal-sending activity becomes low, and the person suffers from depression. In such situations, antidepressant drugs are required. These drugs inhibit the enzymes which catalyse the degradation of noradrenaline. If the enzyme is inhibited, this important neurotransmitter is slowly metabolized and can activate its receptor for longer periods of time, thus counteracting the effect of depression. Iproniazid and phenelzine are two such drugs.



74.  Solution: d)

Antiseptics and disinfectants are also the chemicals which either kill or prevent the growth of microorganisms. Antiseptics are applied to the living tissues such as wounds, cuts, ulcers and diseased skin surfaces. Examples are furacine, soframicine, etc. These are not ingested like antibiotics. Commonly used antiseptic, dettol is a mixture of chloroxylenol and terpineol. Bithionol (the compound is also called bithional) is added to soaps to impart antiseptic properties. Iodine is a powerful antiseptic. Its 2-3 per cent solution in alcohol
water mixture is known as tincture of iodine. It is applied on wounds. Iodoform is also
used as an antiseptic for wounds. Boric acid in dilute aqueous solution is weak antiseptic for eyes. Disinfectants are applied to inanimate objects such as floors,
drainage system, instruments, etc. Same substances can act as an antiseptic as well as disinfectant by varying the concentration. For example, 0.2 per cent solution of phenol is an antiseptic while its one percent solution is disinfectant. Chlorine in the concentration of 0.2 to 0.4 ppm in aqueous solution and sulphur dioxide in very low concentrations, are disinfectants.



75. Solution: d)

Only Delhi and Puducherry are represented. Reservation is there only in the Lok Sabha. Not the constitution, but the Representation of People‟s act fixes the term at six years for a RS MP.


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 20
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 18 SOLUTIONS


76.  Solution: d)

Food preservatives prevent spoilage of food due to microbial growth. The most commonly used preservatives include table salt, sugar, vegetable oils and sodium benzoate, C6H5COONa. Sodium benzoate is used in limited quantities and is metabolised in the body. Salts of sorbic acid and propanoic acid are also used as preservatives.



77.  Solution: a)

Basically all soaps are made by boiling fats or oils with suitable soluble hydroxide. Variations are made by using different raw materials. Toilet soaps are prepared by using better grades of fats and oils and care is taken to remove excess alkali. Colour and perfumes are added to make these more attractive.

Soaps that float in water are made by beating tiny air bubbles before their hardening. Transparent soaps are made by dissolving the soap in ethanol and then evaporating the excess solvent.

In medicated soaps, substances of medicinal value are added. In some soaps, deodorants are added. Shaving soaps contain glycerol to prevent rapid drying. A gum called, rosin is added while making them It forms sodium rosinate which lathers well. Laundry soaps contain fillers like sodium rosinate, sodium silicate, borax and sodium carbonate.



78.  Solution: a)

Hard water contains calcium and magnesium ions. These ions form insoluble calcium and magnesium soaps respectively when sodium or potassium soaps are dissolved in hard water. These insoluble soaps separate as scum in water and are useless
as cleansing agent. In fact these are hindrance to good washing, because the precipitate adheres onto the fiber of the cloth as gummy mass. Hair washed with hard water looks dull because of this sticky precipitate. Dye does not absorb evenly on cloth washed with soap using hard water, because of this gummy mass.



79. Solution: a)

From Economic Survey - 2014

“Is it the nominal or real interest rate that explains the reduction in investment rate? A study entitled „Real Interest Rate Impact on Investment and Growth- What the Empirical Evidence for India  Suggests?‟, by the RBI, indicates that it is not so much the nominal but real interest rate that explains investment decisions. It is, however, argued by some that, in recent years, investment growth has weakened despite lower real interest rates. The study highlights that a lower real interest rate can stimulate investment and growth, provided it is not achieved via higher inflation. The study further suggests that nominal interest rate is, however, more important than  real interest rate for investment planning at the firm level.”

For definitions:


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 21
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 18 SOLUTIONS


http://www.investopedia.com/terms/n/nominalinterestrate.asp

http://www.investopedia.com/terms/r/realinterestrate.asp


80.  Solution: b)

Pectinases and proteases are enzymes which speed up the breaking of cell walls of the fruit juice thus making the market made juice more clearer than the one made at home.



81.  Solution: d)

Fungi are also known to form symbiotic associations with plants (mycorrhiza). Many members of the genus Glomus form mycorrhiza. The fungal symbiont in these associations absorbs phosphorus from soil and passes it to the plant. Plants having such associations show other benefits also, such as resistance to root-borne pathogens, tolerance to salinity and drought, and an overall increase in plant growth and
development.



82.  Solution: d)

Biotechnology essentially deals with industrial scale production of biopharmaceuticals and biologicals using genetically modified microbes, fungi, plants and animals.
The applications of biotechnology include therapeutics, diagnostics, genetically modified crops for agriculture, processed food, bioremediation, waste treatment, and energy production. Three critical research areas of biotechnology are:

(i) Providing the best catalyst in the form of improved organism usually a microbe or pure enzyme.
(ii) Creating optimal conditions through engineering for a catalyst to act, and
(iii) Downstream processing technologies to purify the protein/organic compound.



83.  Solution: c)

The recombinant DNA technological processes have made immense impact in the area of healthcare by enabling mass production of safe and more effective therapeutic drugs. Further, the recombinant therapeutics do not induce unwanted immunological responses as is common in case of similar products isolated from non-human sources. At present (data of
2010), about 30 recombinant therapeutics have been approved for human-use the world over. In India, 12 (till 2010) of these are presently being marketed.



84.  Solution: c)



Some strains of Bacillus thuringiensis produce proteins that kill certain insects such as lepidopterans (tobacco budworm, armyworm), coleopterans (beetles) and dipterans (flies, mosquitoes). B. thuringiensis forms protein crystals during a particular phase of their growth.

http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 22
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 18 SOLUTIONS


These crystals contain a toxic insecticidal protein. Why does this toxin not kill the Bacillus? Actually, the Bt toxin protein exist as inactive protoxins but once an insect ingest the inactive toxin, it is converted into an active form of toxin due to the alkaline pH of the gut which solubilise the crystals killing the insect.



85.  Solution: d)

Gene therapy is a collection of methods that allows correction of a gene defect that has been diagnosed in a child/embryo. Here  genes are inserted into a person‟s cells and tissues to treat a disease. Correction of a genetic defect involves delivery of a normal gene into the individual or embryo to take over the function of and compensate
for the non-functional gene. Viruses that attack their hosts and introduce their genetic
material into the host cell as part of their replication cycle are used as vectors to transfer
healthy genes or more recently portions of genes.



86.  Solution: a)

Thermoregulation is energetically expensive for many organisms. This is particularly true for small animals like shrews and humming birds. Heat loss or heat gain is a function of surface area. Since small animals have a larger surface area relative to their volume, they tend to lose body heat very fast when it is cold outside; then they have to expend much energy to generate body heat through metabolism. This is the main reason why very small animals are rarely found in polar regions. During the course of evolution, the costs and benefits of maintaining a constant internal environment are taken into consideration. Some species have evolved the ability to regulate, but only over a limited range of environmental conditions, beyond which they simply conform.



87. Solution: a)

Tax reform in India can improve the ease of doing business and promote efficiency and productivity growth. The tax/GDP ratio of the government must be obtained through a burden-sharing mechanism where low rates apply on a broad swathe of the population, through effective  enforcement mechanisms. Taxes clarified as „bad‟ in public finance theory like cesses, surcharges, transaction taxes, and taxes imposed for ease of collection such as the dividend distribution tax, need to eventually go. Reducing tax- related distortions can increase efficiency and fuel GDP growth.

http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/2014-07-09/news/51248149_1_tax-system- tax-regime-goods-and-services-tax




88.  Solution: c)

The hotspots are richest and the most threatened reservoirs of plant and animal life on earth. About 20% of human population lives in hot spot areas. Degree of threat and endemism are the two key criteria to determine whether an area is a hot spot or not.

http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 23
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 18 SOLUTIONS


89.  Solution: b)

A reserve has three areas: core, buffer and transitional. Human settlements can be
established only in the transition zone. Research and educational activities can be carried out in the buffer zone. Core area is protected and left undisturbed.




90.  Solution: d)

Read this http://indianexpress.com/article/india/india-others/four-new-vaccines-to-be- part-of-governments-immunisation-programme-pm-modi/



91. Solution: b)

There was a decline in the workforce in the agriculture and allied sector by over 36 million between 2004-05 and 2011-12. On the other hand, the number of persons in the workforce in the non-agriculture sector increased by 51 million with industry and services contributing nearly 31 million and 20 million respectively. The table below gives the share of different sectors or the sectoral composition of the workforce (employed) by usual principal and subsidiary status (UPSS).














92.  Solution: a)

Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV-C24) put  into precise orbit the country‟s second
navigation satellite,  Indian Regional Navigation Satellite System (IRNSS-1B).
• The 1,432-kg IRNSS-1B will form part of a constellation of seven navigation satellites.
• It was the 25th success  in a row  for the PSLV.
• The IRNSS satellites will be useful for land,  sea and air navigation. They have civil and defence applications.

The IRNSS will function much like America‟s widely-used Global Positioning System (GPS), albeit on a regional scale covering much of South Asia.

93.  Solution: c)

The Heartbleed bug allows anyone on the Internet to read the memory of the systems protected by the vulnerable versions of the OpenSSL software. This compromises the secret keys used to identify the service providers and to encrypt the traffic, the names and passwords of the users and the actual content. This allows attackers to eavesdrop on

http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 24
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 18 SOLUTIONS


communications, steal data directly from the services and users and to impersonate services and users.
Since casual browsing does not contain any sensitive information, and no information is
accessible from the user‟s side (except  the IP address), it wouldn‟t be severely affected. Online banking is done on open SSL secure connection which Heartbleed can crack easily. Impersonation in social networking can become a big menace if Heartbleed can crack the ID and password of an individual.

94.  Solution: c)

Integrated Farming means to integrate crop production with livestock management which in a way complement each other with a nice symbiotic relationship which at the time is economically viable and profitable, environmentally suitable, and benefit giver of diversification of production.
An example of integrated farming could be fish and livestock cultivation along with general farming practices which support each other. The fishes can be fed with the residuary materials of farms such as leaves, stalks or other waste products. Additionally, the plankton which are major fish feed can be grown using the manures provided by the livestock which are getting raised at the side of fish farms. Near the fish farms, silk warms can also be raised (i.e. sericulture). The silkworm pupae and other wastes can then be used to feed the fish. In return the fish pond silt provides an excellent manure and fertilizer for land crops and highly solicited by farmers. This way integrated farming has multicultural approach which is environment friendly and sustainably provide the economic means to prosper.

An Indian example of Integrated farming can best be understood by the fact that once a degraded land in Jodhpur, Rajasthan having very less crop production (and income) with the use of integrated farming practices such as plantation of improved qualities of Ber along with intercropping, honey been keeping and a goat unit turned into a major revenue generator along with improving the quality of soil and decreased expenditure on fertilizer and pesticides, produced good quality fruits using organic farming which has high demand overseas.



95. Solution: d)
























http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 25
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 18 SOLUTIONS


96.  Solution: c)

Automobiles are a major cause for atmospheric pollution at least in the metro cities. As the number of vehicles increase on the streets, this problem is now shifting to the other cities too. Proper maintenance of automobiles along with use of lead-free petrol or diesel can reduce the pollutants they emit. Catalytic converters, having expensive metals namely platinum-palladium and rhodium as the catalysts, are fitted into
automobiles for reducing emission of poisonous gases. As the exhaust passes through the catalytic converter, unburnt hydrocarbons are converted into carbon dioxide and water, and carbon monoxide and nitric oxide are changed to carbon dioxide and nitrogen gas, respectively.



97.  Solution: a)

As the exhaust passes through the catalytic converter, unburnt hydrocarbons are
converted into carbon dioxide and water, and carbon monoxide and nitric oxide are changed to carbon dioxide and nitrogen gas, respectively. Motor vehicles equipped with catalytic converter should use unleaded petrol because lead in the petrol inactivates the catalyst.



98. Solution: a)

http://www.nhb.org.in/Residex/About_Residex.php



99. Solution: b)

During 2000-01 and 2002-03 Indian economic grew at below 5% rate. (http://planningcommission.nic.in/data/datatable/0306/table%2019.pdf)

Second statement is correct.

100.            Solution: c)

It is known that every individual has unique fingerprints. These occur at the tips of the fingers and have been used for identification for a long time but these can be altered by surgery. A sequence of bases on DNA is also unique for a person and information regarding this is called DNA fingerprinting. It is same for every cell and cannot be altered by any known treatment. DNA fingerprinting is now used

(i) in forensic laboratories for identification of criminals. (ii) to determine paternity of an individual.
(iii) to identify the dead bodies in any accident by comparing the DNA‟s of parents or
children.
(iv) to identify racial groups to rewrite biological evolution.









http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 26
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 18 SOLUTIONS









































































http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 27
