
INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK PRELIMINARY EXAM - 2014


INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST - 19

GENERAL STUDIES

PAPER-I

Time Allowed: 2 Hours                                                                                          Maximum Marks: 200


INSTRUCTIONS
1.   IMMEDITELY AFTER THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE EXAMINATION, YOU SHOULD
CHECK  THAT  THIS  TEST  BOOKLET  DOES  NOT  HAVE  ANY  UNPRINTED  OR  TORN  OR MISSING PAGES OR ITEMS, ETC. IF SO, GET IT REPLACED BY A COMPLETE TEST BOOKLET.
2.  You have to enter your Roll Number on the Test I Booklet in the Box provided alongside. DO NOT write anything else on the Test Booklet.
4.  This  Test  Booklet  contains  200  items  (questions).  Each  item is  printed  only in  English.  Each  item comprises four responses (answers). You will select the response which you want to mark on the Answer Sheet. In case you feel that there is more than one correct response, mark the response which you consider the best. In any case, choose ONLY ONE response for each item.
5.  You have to mark all your responses ONLY on the separate Answer Sheet provided.  See directions in the
Answer Sheet.
6.  All items carry equal marks.

7.  Before you proceed to mark in the Answer Sheet the response to various items in the Test Booklet, you have to fill in some particulars in the Answer Sheet as per instructions sent to you with your Admission Certificate.

8.  After you have completed filling in all your responses on the Answer Sheet and the examination has concluded, you should hand over to the Invigilator only the Answer Sheet. You are permitted to take away with you the Test Booklet.

9.  Sheets for rough work are appended in the Test Booklet at the end.
10.  Penalty for wrong answers :
THERE WILL BE PENALTY FOR WRONG ANSWERS MARKED BY A CANDIDATE IN THE OBJECTIVE TYPE QUESTION PAPERS.
(i)   There are four alternatives for the answer to every question. For each question for which a wrong answer has been given by the candidate, one-third of the marks assigned to that question will be deducted as penalty.
(ii)   If a candidate gives more than one answer, it will be treated as a wrong answer even if one of the given answers happens to be correct and there will be same penalty as above to that question.
(iii)     If a question is left blank, i.e., no answer is given by the candidate, there will be no penalty for that question.


http://insightsonindia.com


INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST SERIES FOR CIVIL SERVICES PRELIMINARY EXAM 2014





http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                         Page 1


1. Which   of   the   following   are   the circumstances under which an elected Member of Parliament may be disqualified on the ground of defection?
1. If  he  voluntarily  gives  up  his membership of a political party
2.   If  he  votes  or  abstains  from  voting
contrary to any direction issued by his political  party  without  prior permission of the political party
3.   If he speaks against the political party
4.   If he joins a political party other than the party on whose ticket he contested and got elected

Select  the  correct  answer  from  the  codes  given below:

a)   1, 2 and 3 b)  1, 2 and 4 c)   1, 3 and 4 d)  2, 3 and 4




2.  Which  of  the  following  statements regarding judiciary in India are correct?
1.   Supreme Court of India is free from the control and influence of legislature and executive
2.   Subordinate courts are at the head of the judicial hierarchy of the state.
3.   The Chief Justice and other judges of the High Court are appointed by the  Governor  in consultation  with the Chief Justice of India
4.   A High Court can withdraw a case from a subordinate court and can deal with the case itself if it is satisfied  that  the  case  involves  a
substantial  point  of  constitutional law

Choose  the  correct answer  from  the codes  given below:

a)   1 and 2 b)   1 and 3 c)   1 and 4
d)  2, 3 and 4




3.    In which of the following case(s), the Chief Minister of a State in India is NOT eligible to vote in the Presidential election?
1.   If he himself is a candidate
2.   If he is yet to prove his majority on the floor  of the  Lower  House of the  State legislature
3.   If he is a member of the Upper House of the State legislature
4.   If he is a caretaker Chief Minister

Choose the correct answer using the codes below:

a)   1 and 2 only b)  1, 2 and 3
c)   Only 3 d)  2 and 3




4.  Which of the following was/were the demands of the Home Rule Movement started by Tilak?
1.   To overthrow the British government
2.   Education in vernacular languages
3.   Formation of linguistic states

Choose the correct answer using the codes below:

a)   1 and 2


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                             Page 2
b)  2 and 3 c)   1 and 3 d)  Only 1


5.    Convertibility of the rupee implies:
a)   being able to convert rupee notes into gold
b)  allowing the value of the rupee to be fixed by market forces
c)   freely  permitting  the  conversion  of
rupee to other major currencies and vice versa
d)  developing  an  international  market
for currencies in India


6.  Which  of  the  following  statements regarding the advisory jurisdiction of the Supreme Court are correct?
1.   It is binding on the Supreme  Court to
give its opinion on any matter referred to it by the President.
2.   The  full  bench  of  the  Supreme  Court
hears any reference made to it under its power of advisory jurisdiction.
3.   The   opinion   given   by   the   Supreme
Court on a reference under advisory jurisdiction is not binding on the government.

Choose  the  correct answer  from  the codes  given below:

a)   1 and 2 b)  1 and 3 c)   2 and 3 d)  Only 3


7.    Which  one  of  the  following   statements
regarding „Exit Poll‟ is correct  ?
a)   „Exit Poll‟ is a  term  used to  denote a post-election  survey  of  voters regarding   the   candidate   in   whose
favour    they    had    exercised    their franchise
b)  „Exit  Poll‟  and  „Opinion  Poll‟ are  one
and the same
c)   „Exit Poll‟  is  a  device   through which results of voting can be most exactly predicted
d)  „Exit Poll‟ is an  administrative device made recently by the Chief Election Commissioner  to  prevent impersonation


8.    Consider  the  following  statements  about the Komagata Maru incident in September
1914:
1.   Thousands of Indians were killed by the Canadian authorities when they tried to enter into the national boundaries of Canada.
2.   This incident was one of the reasons for the fuelling of the Ghadr Movement.
3.   The  incident  evoked  a  sharp  response
from the Indian revolutionaries because people from almost all parts of India were onboard the Komagata Maru ship.

Choose  the  correct answer  from  the codes  given below:

a)   1 and 2 b)  1 and 3 c)   2 and 3 d)  Only 2


9.   Consider the following statements
1.   This  river   rises  on  Brahmagiri  Hill  of the                                   Western Ghats in southwestern Karnataka state
2.   In Karnataka the  river  bifurcates  twice, forming the sacred islands of Srirangapatnam and Sivasamudram

To   which   of   the   following   rivers,   the   above statements refer to?

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                             Page 3
a)   Sharavati b)  Kabini
c)   Kaveri
d)  Netravati


10. The   principal   reason   why   national, economic planning is still being pursued inspite  of  embracing  a  market  economy since 1991 is that:
a)   It is a Constitutional requirement
b)  The vast quantity of capital already deployed  in the public sector needs to be nurtured
c)   Five-Year   Plans   can   continue   to provide  a  long-term  perspective  to the economy in market-friendly fashions
d) The  market  economy  is  mainly confined  to industry and commerce and central planning in agriculture is necessary




11.  Which  of  the  following  electoral  systems have been adopted for various elections in India ?
1.   System of direct elections on the basis of adult suffrage.
2.   System  of  proportional  representation by means of the single transferable vote.
3.   List         system        of         proportional
representation.
4.   Cumulative system of indirect elections.

Choose  the  correct answer  from  the codes  given below:

a)   1 and 2 b)  1 and 3
c)   1, 2 and 3
d)  2, 3 and 4
12. The   basic   reason   for   the   extraordinary sparkle of a suitably cut diamond is that
a)   it has a very high transparency
b)  it has a very high refractive index c)   it is very hard
d)  it has well-defined cleavage planes


13.  Water  is  a  good  solvent  of  ionic  salts because
1.   It has a high boiling point
2.   It has a high dipole moment
3.   It has a high specific heat

Choose the correct answer using the codes below:

a)   1 and 2 b)  2 and 3 c)   1 and 3 d)  Only 2




14.  Who among the following have the right to vote in the elections to both Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha ?
a)   Elected members of the Lower House
of the Parliament
b)  Elected members of the Upper House of the Parliament
c)   Elected members of the Upper House of the State Legislature
d)  Elected members of the Lower House
of the State Legislature




15. With   reference   to   the   Financial   Sector Legislative Reforms Commission (FSLRC) recommendations, consider the following statements
1.   The  Commission  has  recommended  a
seven-agency structure for the financial sector
2.   The FSLRC report emphasizes financial
consumer protection.

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                             Page 4
Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)   1 Only b)  2 Only c)   Both
d)  None


16.  Agricultural income-tax is assigned to the
State Governments by
1.   The Finance Commission
2.   The National Development Council
3.   The Inter-State Council
4.   The Constitution of India

Choose the correct answer using the codes below;

a)   Only 1 b)  2 and 3 c)   1 and 4 d)  Only 4


17.  As an alternative to the partition of India, Gandhiji suggested to Mountbatten that he
a)   Postpone granting of independence
b)  Invite Jinnah to form the government c)   Invite Nehru and Jinnah to form the
government together
d)  Invite the army to take over for some time


18. Consider the following statements
1.   The       Nilgiri       Tahr       is endemic to the Nilgiri     Hills and     the     southern portion of the Western Ghats
2.   The   Nilgiri   Tahr   is   categorized   as
Endangered species under IUCN list

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)   1 Only b)  2 Only c)   Both
d)  None
19.  An air bubble in water will act like a:
a)   Convex mirror b)  Convex lens
c)   Concave mirror
d)  Concave lens


20.  Most  of  the  desert  plants  bloom  during night time because
a)   their  blooming   is  controlled   by low temperature
b)   they are sensitive to the phases of moon
c)   the desert insects eat away flowers
during day time
d)  the desert insects are active during night time


21.  In the Indian context the term De-notified
tribes‟ refers  to
a)   tribes which are aboriginals b)  nomadic tribes
c)   tribes practising shifting cultivation
d)  tribes which were earlier classified as criminal tribes


22. With   reference    to   the    Coriolis    Force, consider the following statements
1.   It  is  most  apparent  in  the  path  of an
object moving longitudinally.
2.   An object moving from equator towards the  pole  will  undergo  apparent deflection  to the right in the Northern Hemisphere
3.   This rightward deflection is because of
Earth‟s eastward rotation

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)   1 and 2 Only b)  2 and 3 Only c)   1 and 3 Only
d)  All



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                             Page 5
23.  When the Chief Justice of a High Court acts in an administrative capacity, he is subject to
a)   The  writ  jurisdiction  of  any  of  the
other judges of the High Court
b)  Special control exercised by the Chief
Justice of India
c)   Discretionary powers of the Governor of the state
d)  Special powers provided  to the Chief
Minister in this regard




24.  Which of the following professional (s) are more likely to run the risk of a permanent change in their  cell‟s DNA ?
1.   Researchers using carbon-14 isotope
2.   X-ray technician
3.   Coal miner
4.   Dyer and Painter

Select the correct answer by using the codes given below :

a)   2 only
b)  1, 2 and 3 c)   1, 2 and 4 d)  1, 3 and 4


25.  When an air bubble at the bottom of a lake rises to the top, it will
a)   increase in size b)  decrease in size c)   maintain its size
d)  flatten into a disk-like shape




26.  A        British        citizen        staying        in
India cannot claim Right to
a)   Freedom of trade and profession b)  Equality before the Law
c)   Protection of life and personal liberty
d)  Freedom of religion



27. Consider   the   following   statements regarding the National Human Rights Commission of India:
1.   Its  Chairman  must  be  a  retired  Chief
Justice of India.
2.   It has formations in each state as State
Human Rights Commission.
3.   Its powers are only recommendatory in nature.
4.   It is mandatory to appoint a woman as a member of the Commission.

Which of the above statements are correct?

a)   1, 2, 3 and 4 b)  2 and 4
c)   1, 2 and 3
d)  1 and 3




28. Which of the following was/were the difference(s) between the moderates and the extremists?
1.   Boycott of legislative councils
2.   Boycott of government Institutions and strikes
3.   Self-government for India

Choose the correct answer using the codes below:

a)   1 and 2 b)  2 and 3 c)   1 and 3
d)  All of the above




29.  Which of the following was/were the parts of the Ghadr Programme  during the  First World War?
1.   Assassinate government officials
2.   Work among Indian troops abroad and raise funds

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                             Page 6
3.   Bring about a simultaneous revolt in all colonies of Britain.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below:

a)   1 and 2 b)  2 and 3 c)   1 and 3
d)  All of the above






30.  The  Speaker  can  ask  a  member  of  the House to stop speaking and let another member speak. This phenomenon is known as
a)   decorum
b)   crossing the floor c)   interpellation
d)  yielding the floor


31. With reference to Antarctic region, consider the following statements
1.   It  is     governed  in accordance  with
the   international   legal   regime   of the Antarctic Treaty System
2.   Polar bear is a major wildlife found in
the  region  along  with  few  endemic birds

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)   1 Only b)  2 Only c)   Both
d)  None


32. Low     temperatures     (Cryogenics)     find application in
1.   Space travel
2.   Surgery
3.   Magnetic levitation
4.   Telemetry
Choose the correct answer using the codes below:

a)   1, 2 and 3 b)  2, 3 and 4 c)   1, 2 and 4 d)  1, 3 and 4


33. Consider the following statements


1.    The Indian  Monsoon  Current refers  to the           seasonally           varying ocean current regime               found               in the tropical regions              of              the northern Indian Ocean
2.    During summer, the flow of the upper ocean  is  directed  westward  from  near the Indonesian                   Archipelago to the Arabian Sea
3.     During    the    winter,    the    direction
reverses, with eastward flow extending from Somalia into the Bay of Bengal.

Which of the above statements is/are incorrect?

a)   1 and 2 Only b)  2 and 3 Only c)   1 Only
d)  1 and 3 Only


34.  Which of the following are the regulative functions of the forests?
1.   Absorption, storage and release of vital
gases like oxygen, carbon dioxide etc.
2.   Conservation of soil and water
3.   Prevention of drought

Choose the correct answer using the codes below:

a)   1 and 2 b)  2 and 3 c)   1 and 3 d)  Only 1

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                             Page 7
35. Consider the following statements about social forestry and agro-forestry?
1.   Agroforestry  is a  collective  name  for land-use systems involving trees combined  with crops and/or animals on the same unit of land.
2.   Social Forestry is the forestry outside
the Conventional Forestry that aims at providing  continuous  flow  of  goods and services for the benefit of the rural people by managing forests of their choice.
3.   Social  Forestry  has  manifold  targets
like timber, fuelwood, fodder, wild vegetables,  fruits,  water  to cover almost all the needs of the people.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below:

a)   1 and 2 b)  2 and 3 c)   1 and 3
d)  All of the above


36. Which   of   the   following   were   the outcome(s)   of   the   Lucknow   Session   of Indian National Congress and Muslim League n 1916?
1.   A    joint    scheme    of    constitutional
reforms by the two parties submitted to government
2.   Return of some extremists to Congress
3.   Congress accepted separate electorates for Muslims

Choose the correct answer using the codes below:

a)   1 and 2 b)  2 and 3 c)   1 and 3
d)  All of the above


37.  Consider  the  following  statements  about the Attorney-General of India :
1.   He  is  appointed  by  the  President  of
India.
2.   He must have the same qualifications as are required for a Judge of the Supreme Court.
3.   He must be a member of either House of
Parliament.
4.   He can be removed by impeachment by
Parliament.

Which of these statements are correct ?

a)   1 and 2 b)  1 and 3
c)   2, 3 and 4 d)  3 and 4


38. Sunspot is a
a)   A   spot   on   the   Sun   where   lowest radiation is recorded
b)  A vortex   of   gas   on   the   surface   of the Sun associated   with   strong   local magnetic activity.
c) A spot on the Sun where extreme temperature is recorded once in a year
d)  None of the above


39.  Consider  the  following  features  of newer models of motor cars :
1.   Radial tyres
2.   Streamlined body
3.   Multipoint fuel injection
4.   Catalytic converter with exhaust

Which of these features make the newer models of motor cars more fuel efficient?

a)   1 and 2 b)  2 and 3
c)   2, 3 and 4 d)  1, 3 and 4


40.  Which  of  the  following  are  parts  of  the
Gandhi‟s technique of Satyagraha?

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                             Page 8
1.   Never bow before the evil/wrong-doer
2.   Love the evil-doer
3.   Accept suffering in his struggle against the evil as love for truth

Choose the correct answer using the codes below:

a)   1 and 2 b)  2 and 3 c)   1 and 3
d)  All of the above


41. The Princely states in India were:
1.   Not  a part  of „British India‟ as per  the
Montague declaration of 1917
2.   Were  sovereign  in all  matters  except foreign policy
3.   Were subject to all legislations passed by the British government

Choose   the  correct  statements   from  the  codes below:

a)   Only 1 b)  1 and 2
c)   1, 2 and 3
d)  2 and 3


42.  A small pouch containing silica gel is often found in bottles of medicine in tablet or powder form because silica gel
a)   kills bacteria
b)   kills germs and spores c)   absorbs moisture
d)  absorbs all gases present inside the
bottle


43. Consider the following statements
1.   The   Madden–Julian   oscillation,   or (MJO) is a ocean phenomenon that is observed in deep waters of the Pacific Ocean
2.   The Madden–Julian oscillation has an effect on Indian monsoon
Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)   1 Only b)  2 Only c)   Both
d)  None


44. Consider the following functionaries:
1.   Cabinet Secretary
2.   Chief Election Commissioner
3.   Union Cabinet Ministers
4.   Chief Justice of India

Their correct sequence, in the Order of Precedence is

a)   3, 4, 2, 1 b)   4, 3, 1, 2 c)   4, 3, 2, 1 d)  3, 4, 1, 2


45. The Parliament  can make any law for the whole or any part of India for implementing International treaties
a)   with the consent of all the States
b)   with the consent of the majority of
States
c)   with   the   consent   of   the   States concerned
d)  without the consent of any State


46. Which   of   the   following   is   the   major
producer of Earth‟s magnetic field?
a)   Ferrous   elements   present   in   the interior of the earth
b)   The geomagnetic dynamo c)   Sun‟s magnetic activity
d)  None of the above


47.  Consider  the  following  statements  about
Dark matter:
1.   The evidence for Dark Matter is that the    mass    required    to    produce
gravitational  force  binding  the  fast-

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                             Page 9
moving galaxies is far less than the mass that has been observed by scientists.
2.   Dark matter does not emit any kind
of electromagnetic radiation.
3.   It is estimated that about 80% of the matter in the universe is Dark matter.

Choose   the  correct  statements   from  the  codes below:

a)   Only 1 b)  1 and 2
c)   1, 2 and 3
d)  2 and 3


48. Consider  the  following  statements  about Radio-  Frequency  Identification  (RFID) Tags:
1.   Radio-frequency waves are   used   to
transfer data, for the purposes of automatically  identifying  and tracking tags attached to objects in a RFID tag.
2.   The  RFID  tag  does  not  necessarily have to be in line of sight of the tag reader.
3.   The range of RFID tags is very short, not more than around 10 meter.

Choose   the  correct  statements   from  the  codes below:

a)   Only 1 b)  1 and 2
c)   1, 2 and 3 d)  2 and 3


49. The Rowlatt Act provided for:
1.   Stricter control of the Press
2.   Arrests without warrant
3.   Indefinite detention without trial
Choose   the  correct  statements   from  the  codes below:

a)   Only 1 b)  1 and 2
c)   1, 2 and 3 d)  2 and 3


50.  Which one of the following is not a feature of the Government of India Act of 1935?
a)   Diarchy at the Centre as well as in the provinces
b)  A bicameral legislature
c)   Provincial autonomy
d)  An             All-India             Federation


51. If in an election to a State Legislature Assembly the candidate who is declared elected loses his deposit, it means that
a)   the polling was very poor
b)  the election was for a multi-member constituency
c)   the  elected candidate‟s  victory  over his nearest rival was very marginal
d)  a  very  large  number  of  candidates
contested the election



52.  Consider the following statements: Assertion   (A):   Large   cold   storage   plants   use
ammonia      as      refrigerant      while      domestic refrigerators use chlorofluorocarbons.

Reason (R): Ammonia can be liquified at ambient temperatures at low pressures.

In  the  context  of the  statements  above,  which  is true?

a)   Both A and R are  true, and R  is the correct explanation of A
b)  Both A and R are true, but R is not a
correct explanation of A

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                           Page 10
c)   A is true, but R is false d)  A is false, but R is true




53. Consider the following statements
1.   Diatomic nitrogen forms the bulk of the atmosphere composition
2. Amount of Argon present in the atmosphere  is  more  than  the amount of Carbon Dioxide present

Which of the above statements is/are incorrect?

a)   1 Only b)   2 Only c)   Both
d)  None


54.  The    Communal    award    of    McDonald
Ramsay provided for:
1.   Separate   electorates   for   Muslims, Sikhs, Christians and Anglo-Indians
2.   Special  constituencies  for  depressed classes
3.   Election   of   women   on   communal
basis from special constituencies

Choose   the  correct  statements   from  the  codes below:

a)   Only 1 b)  1 and 2
c)   1, 2 and 3 d)  2 and 3




55.  Which  of  the  following  can  be  used  for cloud seeding?
1.   Silver Iodide
2.   Dry ice
3.   Table salt

Choose the correct options from the codes below:
a)   Only 3 b)  1 and 2
c)   1, 2 and 3 d)  2 and 3


56. In what way does the Indian Parliament exercise control over the administration?
a)   Through Consultative Committees of various ministries
b)  Through Parliamentary Committees
c)   By  making  the  administrators  send periodic reports
d)  By compelling the executive to issue
writs


57.  Which among the following movements in the freedom struggle of India were abruptly withdrawn due to eruption of violence?
1.   Civil Disobedience Movement
2.   Non-Cooperation movement
3.   Quit India movement

Choose the correct options from the codes below:

a)   Only 2 b)  1 and 2
c)   1, 2 and 3 d)  2 and 3


58. With   reference   to   Ultraviolet   radiation, consider the following statements
1.   Most   of   the   ultraviolet   radiation   in
sunlight   is   absorbed   by   oxygen   in Earth‟s     atmosphere,    which    forms the ozone        layer of        the        lower stratosphere
2.    UVA  (400–315  nm),  also  called black
light,  never reaches the Earth‟s surface

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)   1 Only b)  2 Only
c)   Both

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                           Page 11
d)  None


59.  In which one of the following areas does the  State  Government  NOT  have  control over its local bodies?
a)   Citizen‟s grievances
b)  Financial matters c)   Legislation
d)  Personnel matters

60.  Consider the following statements: Assertion (A): Scientists can cut apart and
paste together DNA molecules at will, regardless of the source of the molecules.

Reason (R): DNA fragments can be manipulated  using  restriction endonucleases and DNA ligases.

In  the  context  of  the  statement  above,  which  is true?

a)   Both A and R are individually true and
R is the correct explanation of A
b)  Both A and R are individually true but R
is NOT a correct explanation of A
c)   A is true but R is false d)  A is false but R is true




61.  Consider  the  following  statements  about
Induced Pluripotent Stem (iPS) Cells:
1.   It is artificially achieved from a non- pluripotent cell.
2.   It   resembles   natural   pluripotent cells.
3.   In the future they may be used to
regenerate    missing   or   damaged body parts.

Choose the correct options from the codes below:

a)   Only 1
b)   1 and 2
c)   1, 2 and 3 d)  2 and 3


62.  What   is   edge   effect   in   the   context   of ecology?
a)   The  tendency  of  increased  variety
and  density  of some  organisms  at the community orders.
b)   The  tendency  of  abundance  of  a
certain variety of terrestrial species at the edge of water bodies.
c)   The  stratification  from  surface  to
bottom in a lake which results in inefficient use of nutrients and oxygen by the organisms.
d)  None of the above.


63. As   succession   reaches   its   climax   in  an ecosystem, which of the following community functions are observed?
1.   Complex food chains and food web
2.   High energy use efficiency
3.   Low nutrient conservation

Choose the correct options from the codes below:

a)   Only 1 b)   1 and 2
c)   1, 2 and 3 d)  2 and 3


64. Consider the following statements:
1. In aquatic systems, productivity is generally limited by light, which decreases with increasing water depth.
2.   In deep oceans, nutrients often become limiting for productivity.
3.   Nitrogen   is   regarded   as   the   most important nutrient limiting productivity in marine ecosystems.

Choose   the  correct  statements   from  the  codes below:

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                           Page 12
a)   Only 1 b)  1 and 2
c)   1, 2 and 3 d)  2 and 3


65. The  Sholas  found  in  mountain  regions  of
South India are
a)   Large tracts of tall rainforest trees
b)  Tracts of grasslands at the foothill of
Western Ghats
c)    Patches of stunted tropical montane forest found  in valleys  amid  rolling grasslands on hill tops
d)   None of the above




66. Arrange  the  following  ecosystems  in decreasing order of the organic matter decomposition that microorganisms can do within a certain amount of time:
1.   Tropical desert
2.   Tropical rainforest
3.   Steppe

Choose the correct order from the codes below:

a) 2>1>3 b) 2>3>1 c) 3>2>1 d)  3>1>2


67. The  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  was established in 2009 under the aegis of which of the following groupings?
a)   G-8 b)  G-20
c)   APEC
d)  None of the above


68. Which one of the following duties is NOT performed by the Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) of India ?
a) To   audit   and   report   on   all expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India
b)  To     audit     and     report     on     all
expenditure   from  the  Contingency
Funds and Public Accounts
c)  To audit and report on all trading, manufacturing, profit and loss accounts
d)  To  control  the  receipt  and  issue  of
public money, and to ensure that the public revenue is lodged in the exchequer


69. Consider the following statements
1.   Black soils are derivatives of trap lava in India
2.   Black Soils have high clay content
3.   Black soils are very rich in humus

Which of the above statements is/are incorrect?

a)   1 Only b)  2 Only c)   3 Only d)  None


70.  Who among the following are appointed by the President of India ?
1.   The Chairman, Finance Commission.
2.   The     Deputy     Chairman,     Planning
Commission
3.   The Chief Minister of a Union Territory.

Choose  the  correct answer  from  the codes  given below:

a)   1 only
b)  1 and 2 only c)   1 and 3 only d)  2 and 3 only



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                           Page 13
71. Which  of  the  following  factors  determine the outcome of global competition of India?


a)   There  is  adverse  tax  treatment  of non-resident participants
b)   Markets in India are not open at all hours
c)   There      are       bureaucratic       and procedural overheads
d)  All the above


72.  Which of the following is/are among the functions  of  the  Election  Commission  of India ?
1.   Conduct of election for the posts of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker, Lok Sabha and the Deputy Chairman, Rajya Sabha.
2.   Conduct of election to the Corporations
and Municipalities.
3. Deciding on all doubts and disputes arising out of the elections.

Select  the  correct  answer  from  the  codes  given below.

a)   I and 2 b)  I and 3 c)   2 and 3
d)  None of these


73. How  is the word “Swadeshi” different from “boycott”, as far as the Indian freedom struggle is concerned?
1.   Swadeshi    was    essentially    economic
movement, boycott was not.
2.   While   Swadeshi   attracted   the   lower strata  of  Indian  society,  Boycott attracted the higher strata.

Which of these is/are true?

a)   Only 1 b)  Only 2
c)   Both
d)  None of the above


74.  Consider  the  following  statements  about
Conservation tillage:

Assertion (A): In this method, the organic matter of the soil is increased to enhance its productivity.

Reason (R): Residues from previous crops are left on the field before sowing the next crop.

In  the  context  of the  statements  above, which  of these is true?

a)   Both  A  and  R  are  true  and  R  is  the correct explanation for A.
b)  Both A and R are true and R is not the correct explanation for A.
c)   A is incorrect but R is correct.
d)  A is correct but R is incorrect.


75.  According   to   RBI,   Banks   will   now   be required  to  classify  Special  Mention Accounts (SMA) into three sub-categories: SMA-0, SMA-1 and SMA-2. This measure is to
a)   Increase the transparency
b)  Recognize and check stressed assets c)   Provide quicker loans
d)  None of the above


76. Which  of  the  following  factors  is  not  an influencing   factor   in   bringing   monsoon rains  to India‟s landmass?
a)   Heating of Tibet plateau in summer
b)  Inverted triangular shape of the Indian peninsula
c)   Presence of jet streams over India
d)  High  pressure  in  Northwestern  India during summer

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                           Page 14
77. Which  of  the  following  come  under  the definition of Non-banking financial institutions (NBFI) in India?
3.   Export-Import Bank of India (EXIM)
4.   National  Bank  for  Agriculture  and
Rural Development (NABARD)
5.   Small  Industries  Development  Bank of India (SIDBI)

Choose the correct answer using the codes below

a)   1 and 2 Only b)   2 and 3 Only c)   1 Only
d)  All


78. Which of the following is not true about the recommendations of Nachiket Mor committee on on Comprehensive Financial Services for Small Businesses and Low- Income Households?
a)   It has recommended  to focus more on large generalist institutions to bring financial inclusion in the country
b) Providing Universal Electronic Bank Account  while  providing  Aadhar number
c) Strengthening existing regional banks before creating new ones
d)  Subsidies   to  be  channelled   as  direct benefit  transfers  (DBTs)  rather  than as subventions or waivers






79. Consider the following statements
1.   RBI has powers to supersede any bank board that acts in rogue fashion, and appoint an administrator for managing the bank for up to one year
2.   Out  of many applicants  for opening a new   bank,   only   three   were   given licenses recently

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)   1 Only b)  2 Only c)   Both
d)  None


80. Rationalization  of  withholding  tax  (WHT) on FIIs for G-Secs and corporate bonds was one of the measures taken by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs to improve the regulatory regime and stimulate the growth of  the  corporate  bond  market.  What  is  a
„withholding tax‟?
a)    Requirement to withhold a percentage of  that  payment  of  the  employee  and pay the amount withheld to the government as tax
b)  Withholding    payment    to    pay    for
corporate social activities
c)   Withholding payment of the employee and pay it to finance infrastructure fund
d)  None of the above


81. Consider the following statements
1.   Secondary  Market  refers  to  a  market where securities are traded after being initially offered to the public in the primary market and/or listed on the Stock Exchange
2.   In the Secondary market, securities are
offered to public for subscription for the purpose of raising capital or fund

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)   1 Only b)  2 Only c)   Both
d)  None

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                           Page 15
82. The   K  M Chandrasekhar  Committee  was constituted by the SEBI to
a)   To   suggest   measure   to   improve
efficiency of public sector banks
b)   To   suggest   measures   to    simplify foreign investment norms
c) To  suggest  measures  to  better regulate secondary markets
d)   None of the above


83.  One  of  the  major  achievements   of  the Swrajists was  that  they  defeated the  „Public Safety Bill‟ in 1928. What  was the bill about? a)   Empowering    the    government    to deport  undesirable  and  subversive
foreigners
b)  Empowering    the    government    to shoot anti-social elements on sight who  were  propogating  seditious ideas
c)   Empowering    the    government    to
deploy  heavy  armed  forces  both  in the interior and exterior of India, the funding of which was to come at the expense of Indian taxpayers
d)  None of the above


84.  Bhagat Singh and Batukeshwar Dutt threw a bomb in the Central Legislative Assembly to show protest against which of the following?
1.   Public Safety Bill
2.   Trade Disputes Bill
3.   Rowlatt Act

Select  the  correct  answer  from  the  codes  given below.

a)   1 and 2 b)  1 and 3 c)   2 and 3
d)  None of these
85. Consider the following statements about the
Nehru report, 1928:
1.   It was the first major attempt by Indians to draft a constitutional framework for the country.
2.   The  report  was  published  by  a  sub-
committee    chaired   by   Jawahar    Lal
Nehru.
3.  The report did not aim for complete independence of India and instead envisaged only a dominion status.

Choose the correct statements from the codes given below.

a)   1 and 2 b)  1 and 3 c)   2 and 3
d)  None of these


86.  Consider  the  following  statements  about
Bio-fertilizers:
1.   It  increases  the  availability  of  natural soil nutrients and builds soil organic matter.
2.   It  can  also  protect  the  crop   against drought and soil-borne diseases.
3.   It   works    slower    than   conventional
chemical fertilizers.

Choose the correct statements from the codes given below.

a)   1 and 2 b)  1 and 3 c)   2 and 3
d)  All of the above


87. Consider the following about Breeding and
Recombinant DNA technology:
1.   The change in genotype can be precisely controlled  in  Recombinant  technology,


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                           Page 16
whereas change occurs in multiple traits in breeding.
2.   Recombinant technology can recombine DNA  across  biological  kingdoms  too, but in breeding it cannot be.

Which of these is/are true?

a)   Only 1 b)  Only 2 c)   Both
d)  None of the above


88.  Which of the following can be the harmful effects of transgenic crops?
1.   Toxicity
2.   Allergic reaction
3. Anti-biotic    resistance    in    micro- organisms  present  in alimentary  canal of humans

Choose  the  correct options from  the  codes given below.

a)   1 and 2 b)  1 and 3 c)   2 and 3
d)  All of the above


89. The RBI recently launched guidelines for establishing  Small and Payments Banks to further the goal of financial inclusion. Consider the following statements about it.
1.   Small banks will offer deposits as well as loans.
2.   Payments bank will not accept deposits.
3.   Small  banks  will  not  be  allowed   to invest  in  sophisticated  and  risky financial products.
4.   For a payments bank, the access point can be its own branch, business correspondents (BCs) or other network partners.
5.   Inter alia, mobile telephone companies, supermarket chains, companies, real sector cooperatives and public sector entities are allowed to start a payments bank.

Choose the correct statements from the codes given below:

a)   All except 5 b)  All except 2
c)   All except 2 and 3 d)  All except 1 and 5


90.  In  January  2014,  Reserve  Bank  of  India (RBI) constituted an Expert Committee, under the Chairmanship of Shri P.J.Nayak, to  review  “Governance  of  the   Boards   of Banks  in  India.  The  committee  has submitted  its  report  recently.  Which amongst the following are its recommendations?
1.   Scrapping of Bank Nationalisation Acts,
SBI Act and SBI (Subsidiary Banks) Act.
2.   Converting   all   Public   Sector   Banks (PSBs) into Companies under the Companies Act.
3. Formation of  a  “Bank  Investment Company” (BIC) under the  Companies Act and transfer of all Shares held by the Central   Government   in   PSBs   to   the newly formed BIC.
4.   Controlling    authority/power    of    the
Central Government over PSBs to the transferred                                                to BIC which would, in turn, hand over the same to respective Boards of the PSBs.
5.   Reduction    of    Government‟s     share-
holding to 40%.

Choose  the  correct  ones  from  the  codes  given below:

a)   All except 2 and 5

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                           Page 17
b)  1 and 4 only
c)   All of the above d)  2, 3 and 5




91. Consider  the  following  statements  about White Label ATMs, a device to achieve financial inclusion,  recently announced  by the RBI:
1.   It   can   be   opened   by  any  non-bank
entity, and not just NBFCs.
2. There is a provision for compulsory establishment of such ATMs in rural areas for every such ATM established in urban/semi-urban areas.
3.   The   money   in   this   ATM   will   be
provided by the sponsor bank.

Choose   the  correct  statements   from  the  codes below:

a)   Only 1 b)  2 and 3
c)   All of the above
d)  Only 2


92. Consider the following statements about Sarojini Naidu, who was a member of the constituent assembly of India:
1.   She was the first Indian to become the governor of an Indian state.
2. She  was  the  first  Indian  woman president of the Indian National Congress.
3.   In 1931, she participated in the Round table       conference       with       Gandhi and Madan Mohan Malaviya.

Choose   the  correct  statements   from  the  codes below:

a)   Only 1 b)  2 and 3
c)   All of the above
d)  None of the above


93.  Consider  the  following  statements  about the Trade facilitation Agreement signed between the WTO member nations at Bali Ministerial conference:
1.   The Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA)
contains provisions for faster and more efficient    customs    procedures in    the context of trade in goods.
2.   It also contains provisions for technical assistance   and   capacity   building   for trade  facilitation  and  customs compliance issues.
3.   India has not ratified the TFA because the TFA is discriminatory in nature and benefits  the  developed   nations  more than the developing nations.

Choose   the  correct  statements   from  the  codes below:

a)   Only 1 b)  2 and 3
c)   All of the above d)  1 and 2


94. Consider the following statements about the
„New Development Bank‟ to be established as per the agreement in the latest BRICS summit:
1.   It   will   only   focus   on   development
finance and will not assist member countries  in  case  of  financial emergencies.
2.   Every member nation has equal voting rights in the proposed bank.
3.   Every nation will contribute equally for
the bank‟s capital base.

Choose   the  correct  statements   from  the  codes below:

a)   Only 2

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                           Page 18
b)  2 and 3
c)   All of the above d)  1 and 2


95. The Essential Commodities  Act (ECA)  was enacted by the Central Government in 1955 to control and regulate trade and prices of commodities declared essential under the Act. Some items have been added to the list recently. Consider the following statements about  The Essential  Commodities  Act (ECA):
1.   The Act empowers the Central and state
governments concurrently to control production,  supply and distribution  of certain commodities in view of rising prices.
2.   The measures that can be taken under the provision of the Act include, among others, licensing, distribution and imposing stock limits.
3.   The governments also have the power to
fix price limits, and selling the particular commodities above the limit will attract penalties.
4.   The Drug Price Control Order (DPCO),
2013 has been issued under the powers of the ECA.
5.   The Act covers important commodities like  petroleum,  iron,  steel,  fertilizers, Jute and textiles.

Choose the correct options from the codes below:

a)   All except 4 and 5 b)  All except 1 and 5 c)   All except 1 and 3 d)  All except 5


96. What is „Financial Repression‟?
a)   Financial repression  refers to a set of governmental  policies  that  keep  real
interest   rates   low   or   negative   and
regulate or manipulate a captive audience into investing in government debt.
b)  It   refers   to   discontinuous   financial
recessions which affect the security markets  very  deeply  and  thus  affect the private sector savings.
c)   It refers to the recession caused by a massive hoarding of funds by the private sector which is not being invested anywhere.
d)  None of the above


97. What is tax buoyancy?
a)   It is the increase in tax revenue of the   government   with   increase   in GDP of the nation.
b)   It is the decrease in tax revenue of the   government   with   increase   in GDP of the nation.
c) It is the total tax avoided by multinational due to loopholes and lack of retrospective amendments to tax them.
d)  It  is  the  loss  of  tax  income  to  the
government    due    to    major    tax exemptions given to corporate.


98. Consider the following statements
1.   This  biosphere  reserve  in  India has  a remnant population of the Red panda
2.    Along with Balpakram,  this biosphere reserve is a hotspot of biodiversity

To which of the following Biosphere Reserves, do the above statements refer to?

a)         Nanda Devi Biosphere Reserve b)         Nicobar Islands
c)         Nokrek Biosphere Reserve d)         Simlipal Biosphere Reserve


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                           Page 19
99. With reference  to Himalayas,  consider the following statements
1.   The   mountain-building   process   that created the range is still active.
2.   Namcha  Barwa  peak  is  the  western end of the Himalayas

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)   1 Only b)  2 Only c)   Both
d)  None


100.            With  reference   to  seismic   waves, consider the following statements
a)   P   wave or primary   wave   is   the fastest kind of seismic wave, and, consequently, the first to 'arrive' at a seismic station.
b)   S wave or secondary wave can only move  through  solid  rock,  not through any liquid medium.

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)   1 Only b)  2 Only c)   Both
d)  None












































http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                           Page 20

































































http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                           Page 21
