INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 17 SOLUTIONS




1.   Solution: c)

The monsoons are experienced in the tropical area roughly between 20° N and 20° S. To understand the mechanism of the monsoons, the following facts are important.

(a) The differential heating and cooling of land and water creates low pressure on the landmass of India while the seas around experience comparatively high pressure.

(b) The shift of the position of Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) in summer, over the Ganga plain (this is the equatorial trough normally positioned about 5°N of the equator – also known as the monsoon- trough during the monsoon season).

(c) The presence of the high-pressure area, east of Madagascar, approximately at 20°S over the Indian Ocean. The intensity and position of this high-pressure area affects the Indian Monsoon.

(d) The Tibetan plateau gets intensely heated during summer, which results in strong
vertical air currents and the formation of high pressure over the plateau at about 9 km above sea level.

(e) The movement of the westerly jet stream to the north of the Himalayas and the presence of the tropical easterly jet stream over.




2.   Solution: d)

Aerosols are fine particles suspended in the atmosphere. Others are volcano ash, water vapour and dust.



3.   Solution: d)

     It is located In Kullu, Himachal Pradesh.
     At a height of 1500-6000m, the climate type is Western Himalayan temperate and alpine type.
     Some rare species found in the park like Himalayan Tahr, Blue Sheep, Giffon Vulture and Cheer Pheasant. A few of them are endangered (Musk Deer and Snow leopard), but not critically endangered.
     The park also has some glaciers.
     Rivers flowing through the park:  Tirthan, Sainj, Jiwa Nal, and Parvati. (all get water from glaciers)
     Sanctuaries near the park: Sainj, Tirthan




4.   Solution: c)




http://insightsonindia.com                        Insights Mock Test 17                                                      Page 1
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 17 SOLUTIONS


Chirand is a stratified Neolithic, Chalcolithic, and Iron Age settlement in the eastern Ganges
Valley of Bihar in northern India, between about 2500-AD 30. The Neolithic occupation (2500-1345 BC) contains evidence of small circular huts, and small scale farming of wheat, rice, mung, masur, and peas. Excavations at Chirand have been conducted by the Directorate of Archaeology and Museums in Bihar since the early 1960s.













































5.   Solution: d)

The handful of unusual events observed in the underground experiments at the Kolar Gold Field (KGF) mines during the 1960-70s and the 1980s, which have remained unexplained to this day, may have been due to the decays of hitherto unseen Dark Matter (DM) particles.

The postulate of DM was put forward to account for the extreme velocities with which galaxies and clusters of galaxies are observed to be rotating, that the gravity generated by their observable matter alone cannot explain.

At such speeds they should have been torn apart long ago. It is believed that something that cannot be seen directly with light (electromagnetic radiation, in general) — and hence the

http://insightsonindia.com                        Insights Mock Test 17                                                      Page 2
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 17 SOLUTIONS


name — is providing that extra mass, generating the extra gravity, needed to hold them together.

DM dominates the matter in the universe, outweighing all the visible matter by nearly six times, but its existence can be inferred only from the gravitational effect it seems to have on visible matter.
Though existence of DM is now accepted, and it is all around us with varying densities, its
nature has remained a mystery and various candidate DM particles have been proposed.



6.   Solution: a)

Osmosis basically means the flow of concentrated water to the diluted water through a membrane. This is observed in plants. Capillary action facilitates this movement.



7.   Solution: b)

CONCERNS RAISED BY THE REPORT
· The report has warned that the increasing magnitude of global warning will have severe, pervasive and irreversible impact on the climate
· The report says that heaviest rainfall in 200 years, and floods and gales experienced in
Britain this year are a sign of things to come
· Two types of extreme events are going to occur more frequently — extreme precipitation and heat waves.
· It has outlined the impact of warming on the seas as well as on the freshwater systems. As per the report oceans will become more acidic, which threatens the coral and other species that rely on them.
· Fisheries will also be affected, with ocean chemistry thrown off balance by climate change.
Some fish in the tropics could become extinct.
· Crop yields would fall by 2 per cent a decade and affect all the parts of world. The Mediterranean will have severe problems with water scarcity which will impact on food. Some parts of Africa could have declines of 50 per cent [in crop yields] as soon as 2020.
· Due to sea level rise throughout the century and beyond, coastal and low-lying areas will increasingly experience adverse impacts such as coastal erosion and flooding.



8.   Solution: c)

Hampi is located in the Krishna-Tungabhadra basin, which formed the nucleus of the Vijayanagara Empire, founded in 1336. The magnificent ruins at Hampi reveal a well- fortified city. No mortar or cementing agent was used in the construction of these walls and the technique followed was to wedge them together by interlocking.




9.   Solution: c)

Mahatma Gandhi was profoundly critical of the modern age in which machines enslaved humans and displaced labour. He saw the charkha as a symbol of a human society that



http://insightsonindia.com                        Insights Mock Test 17                                                      Page 3
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 17 SOLUTIONS


would not glorify machines and technology. The spinning wheel, moreover, could provide the poor with supplementary income and make them self-reliant.

10. Solution: b)

The members of the Constituent Assembly were chosen on the basis of the provincial elections of 1946. Apart from the members sent by the provinces of British India, the Assembly also had representatives of the princely states, sent as these states joined the Union one by one. The Muslim League chose to boycott the early sittings (i.e., those held
before 15 August 1947), making it effectively a one-party show as 82 per cent of the members of the Assembly were members of the Congress Party.




11. Solution: c)

The Himalaya consists of three parallel ranges in its longitudinal extent. A number of valleys lie between these ranges. The northern most range is known as the Great or Inner Himalayas or the ‗Himadri‘. It is the most continuous range consisting of the loftiest peaks with  an average height of 6,000 metres. It contains all the prominent Himalayan peaks.

The range lying to the south of the Himadri forms the most rugged mountain system and is known as Himachal or lesser Himalaya. The ranges are mainly composed of highly compressed and altered rocks. The altitude varies between 3,700 and 4,500 metres and the average width is of 50 Km.




12. Solution: d)

The Brahmaputra rises in Tibet east of Mansarowar lake very close to the sources of the Indus and the Satluj. It is slightly longer than the Indus, and most of its course lies outside India. It flows eastwards parallel to the Himalayas. On reaching the Namcha Barwa (7757 m), it takes a ‗U‘ turn and  enters India  in Arunachal Pradesh through a gorge.  Here,  it is called the Dihang and it is joined by the Dibang, the Lohit, the Kenula and many other tributaries to form the Brahmaputra in Assam.




13. Solution: d)

As of now, blending 5% ethanol is compulsory in petrol. However, due to high prices of ethanol and its unavailability the norm is followed more in breach than in practice.



14. Solution: c)

A meandering river across a flood plain forms cut-offs that later develop into ox-bow lakes. Spits and bars form lagoons in the coastal areas, eg the Chilika lake, the Pulicat lake, the


http://insightsonindia.com                        Insights Mock Test 17                                                      Page 4
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 17 SOLUTIONS


Kolleru lake. Lakes in the region of inland drainage are sometimes seasonal; for example, the
Sambhar lake in Rajasthan, which is a salt water lake. Its water is used for producing salt.

15. Solution: c)

It is CFC that depletes the ozone layer. The HFCs are considered to be a replacement of the CFC. However, it is a greenhouse gas. There is a negotiation going on between India and U.S. whether to include this gas in the Montreal framework or not.



16. Solution: a)

Tropical Deciduous Forests

These are the most widespread forests of India. They are also called the monsoon forests and spread over the region receiving rainfall between 200 cm and 70 cm. Trees of this forest-type shed their leaves for about six to eight weeks in dry summer.

On the basis of the availability of water, these forests are further divided into moist and dry deciduous. The former is found in areas receiving rainfall between 200 and 100 cm. These forests exist, therefore, mostly in the eastern part of the country – northeastern states, along the foothills of the Himalayas, Jharkhand, West Orissa and Chhattisgarh, and on the eastern slopes of the Western Ghats. Teak is the most dominant species of this forest. Bamboos, sal, shisham, sandalwood, khair, kusum, arjun, mulberry are other commercially important species.


17.  Solution: c)

The executive is responsible only to the Lok Sabha, not the whole Parliament, which includes Rajya Sabha too.
Governors hold the highest post in a state government. They being nominated characterizes undemocratic tendencies.
The fact that India has a written constitution nowhere proves that it is a democratic nation. Several autocratic nations like Syria have written constitutions, whereas democratic nations like the U.K. do not have a written constitution.



18. Solution: c)

Demographic transition theory can be used to describe and predict the future population of any area. The theory tells us that population of any region changes from high births and high deaths to low births and low deaths as society progresses from rural agrarian and illiterate to urban industrial and literate society. These changes occur in stages which are collectively known as the demographic cycle.

The first stage has high fertility and high mortality because people reproduce more to compensate for the deaths due to epidemics and variable food supply. The population growth is slow and most of the people are engaged in agriculture where large families are an


http://insightsonindia.com                        Insights Mock Test 17                                                      Page 5
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 17 SOLUTIONS


asset. Life expectancy is low, people are mostly illiterate and have low levels of technology. Two hundred years ago all the countries of the world were in this stage.

Fertility remains high in the beginning of second stage but it declines with time. This is accompanied by reduced mortality rate. Improvements in sanitation and health conditions lead to decline in mortality. Because of this gap the net addition to population is high.

In the last stage, both fertility and mortality decline considerably. The population is either stable or grows slowly. The population becomes urbanised, literate and has high technical know- how and deliberately controls the family size.

This shows that human beings are extremely flexible and are able to adjust their fertility. In the present day, different countries are at different stages of demographic transition.

19. Solution: d)

Rio de Janeiro Earth Summit, 1992 In June 1992, more than 100 heads of states met in Rio de Janeiro in Brazil, for the first International Earth Summit. The Summit was convened for addressing urgent problems of environmental protection and socio- economic development at the global level.

The assembled leaders signed the Declaration on Global Climatic Change and Biological Diversity. The Rio Convention endorsed the global Forest Principles and adopted Agenda 21 for achieving Sustainable Development in the 21st century.

Agenda 21 It is the declaration signed by world leaders in 1992 at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), which took place at Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. It aims at achieving global sustainable development. It is an agenda to combat environmental damage, poverty, disease through global co-operation on common interests, mutual needs and shared responsibilities. One major objective of the Agenda 21 is that every local government should draw its own local Agenda 21.

20. Solution: a)
























http://insightsonindia.com                        Insights Mock Test 17                                                      Page 6
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 17 SOLUTIONS






































21. Solution: d)

The Environment and Forests ministry has approved field trials of GM food crops on a conditional basis.
These include consent from the statutory appraisal committee i.e. Genetic Engineering
Appraisal Committee  (GEAC), and from respective state governments.
The ministry‘s decision was based on the approval by GEAC in March  2013 to allow  about
200 successful gene modification trials. Only those were approved which GEAC had sanctioned and which had been pending decision for almost a year.

• The decision would allow field trials of many varieties, including in rice, wheat, maize, castor and cotton.
• Earlier the ministry had  taken the view  that  it was not prudent to go ahead with  the trials while the Supreme Court was hearing a case on the subject of field trials and the regulatory regime for GM technology in India. However, now the ministry says that the apex court had not explicitly ordered any stay against clearing field trials while the case went on.




22. Solution: d)

Anti-retroviral therapy (ART) is a treatment for HIV/AIDS. It does not cure the disease; rather, it aims to increase life expectancy reduce opportunistic infections, and may potentially reduce the likelihood that an infected individual transmits the virus to another.

http://insightsonindia.com                        Insights Mock Test 17                                                      Page 7
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 17 SOLUTIONS


A successful ART program requires all of the following:
o Diagnosis. It means for testing individuals to identify those in need of treatment. In the case of ART, diagnosis consists of more than merely testing an individual for HIV/AIDS. This is because when the disease is far enough along, the toxicity of the drugs may outweigh the benefits of starting treatment.
o Distribution. A method for distributing the drugs to those who need them. o Drugs. Antiretroviral drugs can be costly.
o Patient adherence to drug regimen. ART consists of a relatively complex drug regimen to which patients must strictly adhere. And because ART does not cure HIV/AIDS, patients must adhere to the regimen as long as they remain alive.
o Monitoring of the patient's response to treatment. ART may cause negative side
effects in a patient. In addition, laboratory monitoring may be needed for purposes of noticing decreased efficacy or the
development of resistance.




23. Solution: c)

Success of organ transplants depend on a proper matching of histocompatibility antigens that occur on all cells of the body. The best matches happened within a family. The biological preference order is Identical twins>Sibling>Parents



24. Solution: c)

The President must give assent to such a bill. He can not withhold assent or return the bill for reconsideration. Besides, there is no provision of a joint sitting of both the houses



25.  Solution: d)

The inactivated polio vaccine produces antibodies in the blood to all three types of poliovirus. In the event of infection, these antibodies prevent the spread of the virus to the central nervous system and protect against paralysis.

Advantages
     As IPV is not a 'live' vaccine, it carries no risk of vaccine-associated polio paralysis.
     IPV triggers an excellent protective immune response in most people.

Disadvantages
     IPV induces very low levels of immunity in the intestine. As a result, when a person immunized with IPV is infected with wild poliovirus, the virus can still multiply inside the intestines and be shed in the faeces, risking continued circulation.
     IPV is over five times more expensive than oral polio vaccine.
     Administering the vaccine requires trained health workers and sterile injection equipment and procedures.

Safety
IPV is one of the safest vaccines in use. No serious systemic adverse reactions have been shown to follow vaccination.

http://insightsonindia.com                        Insights Mock Test 17                                                      Page 8
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 17 SOLUTIONS



Efficacy
IPV is highly effective in preventing paralytic disease caused by all three types of poliovirus.




26. Solution: d)

He neither resigns, nor ceases to be the chairman of the RS. He only stops presiding over its proceedings. Preferably the Deputy Chairman takes his position temporarily.



27. Solution: d)

Indian start tortoise is not even vulnerable as per IUCN. Olive ridley is vulnerable not endangered.
Dwarf gecko is a newly found species.

28. Solution: b)

Refer to the first chapter of Laxmikanth Indian polity for full details about the Act. It is a classical question. So be informed of all the provisions of the Act.



29. Solution: a)

Some facts about Jackfruit:
     It originated from India and then Spread to South Asian countries. It is also the
largest edible  fruit and called  by the name poor  man‘s  fruit too.
     It is rich in potassium, calcium, and iron.
     Mostly Grown in South western states of India, coastal areas, Himalayan foothills.
     Climate requirement: Humid tropical
     Soil: Sandy, stony, laterite soil.
     It can survive drought, frost, pest, high temperature.



30. Solution: c)

A new form of Buddhism,known as Mahayana Buddhism,now developed. This had two distinct features. Earlier,  the Buddha‘s presence was shown in sculpture by using certain signs.

For instance, his attainment of enlightenment was shown by sculptures of the peepal tree. Now, statues of the Buddha were made. Many of these were made in Mathura, while others were made in Taxila.

The second change was a belief in Bodhisattvas. These were supposed to be persons who had attained enlightenment. Once they attained enlightenment, they could live in complete
isolation and meditate in peace. However, instead of doing that, they remained in the world



http://insightsonindia.com                        Insights Mock Test 17                                                      Page 9
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 17 SOLUTIONS


to teach and help other people. The worship of Bodhisattvas became very popular, and spread throughout Central Asia, China, and later to Korea and Japan.

Regarding Buddhist Art


During the 2nd to 1st century BCE, sculptures became more explicit, representing episodes
of the Buddha‘s life and  teachings. These took the form of votive  tablets or friezes, usually in relation to the decoration of stupas. Although India had a long sculptural tradition and a mastery of rich iconography, the Buddha was never represented in human form, but only
through Buddhist symbolism. This period may have been aniconic.

Artists were reluctant to depict the Buddha anthropomorphically, and developed sophisticated aniconic symbols to avoid doing so (even in narrative scene where other human figures would appear). This tendency remained as late as the 2nd century CE in the southern parts of India, in the art of the Amaravati School



31.  Solution: d)

Others critically endangered Indian birds are:
    Great Indian Bustard
    Sociable Lapwing
    Jerdon‘s  Courser
    Spoon-billed Sandpiper
    White-bellied Heron
    Red-headed Vulture
    Christmas Island Frigate



32. Solution: d)

The best-known of the rulers who controlled the Silk Route were the Kushanas, who ruled over central Asia and north-west India around 2000 years ago. Their two major centres of power were Peshawar and Mathura. Taxila was also included in their kingdom. During
their rule, a branch of the Silk Route extended from Central Asia down to the seaports at the mouth of the river Indus, from where silk was shipped westwards to the Roman Empire.
The Kushanas were amongst the earliest rulers of the subcontinent to issue gold coins. These
were used by traders along the Silk Route.



33. Solution: a)

Even though scientific studies are still going on the effect of aerosol on the rainfall pattern, but one thing is sure that it affects the rainfall patter. The exact transport mechanism of aerosols is being studies to establish better patterns.
However, aerosols heat the atmosphere and that gives them the ability to affect the rainfall.




http://insightsonindia.com                        Insights Mock Test 17                                                   Page 10
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 17 SOLUTIONS


34. Solution: a)

Carbon dioxide does not break down under deep water. High pressure has nothing to do with its break down.

35. Solution: c)

A minor chiefly family known as the Muttaraiyar held power in the Kaveri delta. They were subordinate to the Pallava kings of Kanchipuram. Vijayalaya, who belonged to the ancient chiefly family of the Cholas from Uraiyur, captured the delta from the Muttaraiyar in the middle of the ninth century. He built the town of Thanjavur and a temple for goddess Nishumbhasudini there.

The successors of Vijayalaya conquered neighbouring regions and the kingdom grew in size and power. The Pandyan and the Pallava territories to the south and north were made part of this kingdom. Rajaraja I, considered the most powerful Chola ruler, became king in 985 and expanded control over most of these areas. He also reorganised the administration of
the empire. Rajaraja‘s son Rajendra I continued his policies and even raided the Ganga valley, Sri Lanka and countries of Southeast Asia, developing a navy for these expeditions.




36.  Solution: a)

They control their body temperature by moving. Unlike the warm-blooded animals like mammals, they can not regulate their body temperature by their physiological activities.



37. Solution: a)

Arikamedu was a coastal settlement where ships unloaded goods from distant lands. A massive brick structure, which may have been a warehouse, was found at the site. Other finds include pottery from the Mediterranean region, such as amphorae (tall double-handled jars that contained liquids such as wine or oil) and stamped red-glazed pottery, known as Arretine Ware, which was named after a city in Italy. This was made by pressing wet clay into a stamped mould. There was yet another kind of pottery which was made locally, though Roman designs were used. Roman lamps, glassware and gems have also been found at the site.


38. Solution: a)

In summer and winter, water across layers of lake hardly mixes. So, either the upper layer or deep water is cold or warm. Hence, there is little churning of oxygen and nutrients. But, due to similar water temperatures at both surface and under water in autumn and spring, water tends to mix.



39. Solution: a)

http://insightsonindia.com                        Insights Mock Test 17                                                   Page 11
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 17 SOLUTIONS



The answer is self-explanatory. In tropical rain forests, heavy rainfall and heavy temperature leach the soil and make it nutrient poor.



40. Solution: a)

The answer is self-explanatory.



41. Solution: d)

The answer is self-explanatory.



42.  Solution: d)

The first two show and increasing population. The third one shows a stable population. The last one shows that the death rate is high and birth rate low, thus indicating a declining population of the biological species.



43. Solution: a)

This is also the reason why a great portion of the biomass is found at lower depths in aquatic systems.



44.  Solution: d)

India‘s  declining groundwater resources are the product of a number of drivers. Utilization of groundwater facilitates irrigated agriculture in areas far from rivers; in fact, this was key to the agricultural ―green revolution‖ that occurred from the mid 1960s. In places where surface water is available but unsafe for drinking or farming—more than  70% of India‘s surface water resources are polluted by human waste or toxic chemicals—groundwater has often been seen as a safe alternative. Urban water supply infrastructure is often poor and unreliable: well drilling is typically the most economical means of obtaining household water. In Delhi, the local government estimates that 40% of the water transmitted through the mains system is lost through leakages; for many, the only other alternative to bores are expensive supplies purchased from water-trucks.
In rural areas, electricity subsidies allowing farmers to pump groundwater cheaply have
become entrenched in the political landscape. They are likely to become even more so as energy requirements increase to extract water from greater depths. Low cost encourages excess water withdrawal, an inefficient usage pattern commonly exacerbated by ineffective application methods and the wastage of agricultural produce between farm and market. In order to feed a growing and wealthier population, it is projected that agricultural water demand in the India of 2030 would need double to 1,200 billion m3 if these inefficient practices continued. The problems are only going to get worse unless urgent changes occur.



45. Solution: a)

http://insightsonindia.com                        Insights Mock Test 17                                                   Page 12
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 17 SOLUTIONS


After the failure of the Cripps Mission, Mahatma Gandhi decided to launch his third major
movement against British rule. This was the ―Quit India‖ campaign, which began in August
1942. Although Gandhiji was jailed at once, younger activists organised strikes and acts of sabotage all over the country. Particularly active in the underground resistance were
socialist members of the Congress, such as Jayaprakash Narayan. In several districts, such as Satara  in the west and  Medinipur in the east, ―independent‖ governments were  proclaimed. The British responded with much force, yet it took more than a year to suppress the rebellion.

―Quit India‖ was genuinely a mass  movement, bringing into its ambit hundreds of thousands of ordinary Indians. It especially energised the young who, in very large numbers, left their colleges to go to jail. However, while the Congress leaders languished in jail, Jinnah and his colleagues in the Muslim League worked patiently at expanding their influence. It was in these years that the League began to make a mark in the Punjab and Sind, provinces where it had previously had scarcely any presence.


46.  Solution: a)

In a lake system, the biomass at the second trophic level is the highest. In land systems, generally the higher trophic levels have greater mass.



47. Solution: a)

Conservation tillage is any method of soil cultivation that leaves the previous year's crop residue (such as corn stalks or wheat stubble) on fields before and after planting the next crop, to reduce soil erosion and runoff. To provide these conservation benefits, at least 30% of the soil surface must be covered with residue after planting the next crop. Some conservation tillage methods forego traditional tillage entirely and leave 70% residue or more.
Conservation tillage is especially suitable for erosion-prone cropland. In some agricultural regions it has become more common than traditional moldboard plowing.



48.  Solution: a)

Inter-tidal zone is the space on the shores between the areas of high tide and low tide. It is very rich in nutrients and hence supports the growth of Mangroves the best.



49. Solution: a)

Potassium can not be commercially extracted. For that to happen it needs to be in abundance in sea-water. Chlorine, bromine and magnesium are.



50.  Solution: c)



http://insightsonindia.com                        Insights Mock Test 17                                                   Page 13
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 17 SOLUTIONS


When a man moves in a satellite, he is in a state of free fall, though he is not actually falling. The gravitational force acting on him equals the centrifugal force both cancelling each other. This makes his weight zero.



51.  Solution: c)

Methane burns invisibly, so does hydrogen. CNG is a safe fuel and it does not contain carcinogenics.




52.  Solution: d)



53.  Solution: d)

Bharat Emission Stage Standards

Who applies?
GoI - MoEF - CPCB



For what?
To regulate the emission of pollutants from motor vehicles, power plants, generator sets,
fuels etc.

Of what?
Co, HC, NOx, Particulate matter (PM)
It does not include Carbon Dioxide. There are nor regulations for it either in India just the way in Europe.
It permits some lead and sulphur content in fuels.

Present Status
BS-III have been applied all over India. BS-IV all over India is postponed for 2017. Presently it applies to 13 cities. They are adapted from Euro Norms based on the Indian climatic conditions.

It was based on the recommendations of Mashelkar Committee. In pursuance, National Auto Fuel Policy 2003 was announced. The latest committee is Saumitra chaudhary committee.

54. Solution: d)

Mahatma Gandhi announced that he would lead a march to break one of the most widely disliked laws in British India, which gave the state a monopoly in the manufacture and sale of salt. His picking on the salt monopoly was another illustration of Gandhiji‘s tactical wisdom. For in every Indian household, salt was indispensable; yet people were forbidden
from making salt even for domestic use, compelling them to buy it from shops at a high



http://insightsonindia.com                        Insights Mock Test 17                                                   Page 14
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 17 SOLUTIONS


price. The state monopoly over salt was deeply unpopular; by making it his target, Gandhiji hoped to mobilise a wider discontent against British rule.

Where most Indians understood the significance of Gandhiji‘s challenge, the British Raj apparently did  not. Although Gandhiji had given  advance notice  of his ―Salt March‖ to the Viceroy Lord Irwin, Irwin failed to grasp the significance of the action. On 12 March 1930, Gandhiji began walking from his ashram at Sabarmati towards the ocean. He reached his destination three weeks later, making a fistful of salt as he did and thereby making himself a criminal in the eyes of the law. Meanwhile, parallel salt marches were being conducted in other parts of the country.




55. Solution: c)

Self-explanatory. Being a non-metal or no-metal is not a criteria for stickiness.



56. Solution: b)

In many areas of present-day Bihar and Jharkhand, Chero chiefdoms had emerged by the twelfth century. Raja Man Singh, Akbar‘s  famous general, attacked and defeated the Cheros in 1591.

A large amount of booty was taken from them, but they were not entirely subdued. Under Aurangzeb, Mughal forces captured many Chero fortresses and subjugated the tribe. The Mundas and Santals were among the other important tribes that lived in this region and also in Orissa and Bengal.




57. Solution: d)

R-22 is used for air-conditioning applications, residential as well as process chillers and industrial refrigerant plants. Ozone Depleting Substances (ODS)(Regulation) Rules, 2000 regulates and restricts the import and export of ODS. Smuggling of such ozone depleting substances (ODS), reduces the incentives for users to shift to alternative technologies using ozone-and climate-friendly refrigerants and hence is a matter of concern. It also causes global warming.




58.  Solution: a)

U-235 weighs slightly less than U-238. So when the fuel is rotated in a container at a very high velocity, U-238 being heavier is left at margins and thus separated.



59. Solution: a)


http://insightsonindia.com                        Insights Mock Test 17                                                   Page 15
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 17 SOLUTIONS



Tilt has nothing to do with gravitation.
Rotation of earth is maximum at the equator and minimum at the poles. The rotation of the earth pushes objects away from its surface. The gravitational force pulls it inwards. The difference is the weight of the object.



60. Solution: a)

Refer to the link http://www.carsdirect.com/car-repair/advantages-and-disadvantages-of- radial-tires



61.   Solution: a)

Pygmy hog is the smallest wild pig and is very rare to find. It is found in the wild only in
Manas park.
Species like dwarf gecko are found in western ghats and they are not critically endangered.



62.  Solution: d)

The National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) had  recently issued a ―most urgent‖ advisory to all tiger reserves on the need to take effective steps, to prevent the likely outbreak of Canine Distemper (CD) disease among tigers and other feline animals. The disease is primarily carried from dogs to tigers, and unvaccinated dogs are said to be the
―domain reservoir‖ for virus infection in tigers.  Threats to tiger population from Canine Distemper virus (CDV) infection was now widely recognised and addressed in countries such as Indonesia and Bangladesh.




63.  Solution: d)

Infrasound would be used to check for an explosion on the missing Malaysian plane if there was a monitoring station nearby, ―or the explosion is at a level or at high altitude that  it could be detected.

Acoustic waves with very low frequencies that are inaudible to the human ear are called infrasound.
―Infrasound is produced by a variety of natural and man-made  sources — exploding volcanoes, earthquakes, meteors, storms and auroras in the natural world; nuclear, mining and large chemical explosions, as well as aircraft and rocket launches in the man-made arena.‖
The Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty  Organisation (CTBTO) uses ―infrasound‖ or
infrasonic sensors to monitor the earth mainly for atmospheric nuclear explosions.

64. Solution: a)

Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-In) has issued an alert asking all
Android smartphone users  to beware of a deadly virus ‗Dendroid,‘

http://insightsonindia.com                        Insights Mock Test 17                                                   Page 16
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 17 SOLUTIONS


Dendroid is a ―malicious application‖ through which an attacker can ―completely compromise the affected smartphone and control it remotely.‖

A malicious toolkit called Dendroid is being used to create Trojanised applications that infects Android based smartphones.

The malware is created by modifying the required permissions by any clean APK (Android Application Package) with Dendroid RAT functionality that allows detailed management of the infected devices.

The ―attack toolkit‖ can delete all call logs, open  web pages, dial any number, record calls and audio, intercept SMS, upload images and video to remote location and open applications.



65. Solution: b)

Neutrinos are colloquially called ―ghost particles‖ because
o They travel at almost the speed of light, o They hardly interact with matter, and
o They are very light.
· Therefore, trapping and measuring a neutrino requires extremely sensitive equipment shielded from interfering radiation.

Of late, interest has grown in the mass of neutrino-3 with respect to the other two, which is what INO and JUNO will study. Together, these detectors will join the already operating Hyper-Kamiokande in Japan and the NOvA in the U.S.



66. Solution: c)

The decentralised procurement scheme of the Government of India is in operation since
1997. Under this scheme, the designated States procure, store and also issue food grains as per allotments indicated by the Central Government under TPDS. The difference between the economic cost of the State Governments and the Central Issue Price is passed on to the State Governments as subsidy. This implies that weather centralized or decentralized, it does not reduce the subsidy burden of the central government, neither it passes on the subsidy burden to states.

Under this scheme, the designated states, procure, store, and issue food grains under the TPDS and welfare schemes of the Government of India. The difference between the economic cost fixed for the state and the CIP is passed on to the state government as subsidy. The decentralized system of procurement has the objectives of covering more farmers under MSP operations, improving efficiency of the PDS, providing food grains varieties suited to local tastes, and reducing transportation costs.

67. Solution: c)






http://insightsonindia.com                        Insights Mock Test 17                                                   Page 17
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 17 SOLUTIONS


BC, stands for ‗Before Christ.‘  We sometimes find AD before dates. This stands for two Latin words, ‗Anno Domini‘,  meaning ‗in the year of the Lord‘ (i.e. Christ). So 2005 can also be written as AD 2005.

Sometimes CE is used instead of AD and BCE instead of BC. The letters CE stand for
‗Common Era‘ and BCE for ‗Before Common Era‘. We use these  terms because the Christian Era is now used in most countries of the world. In India we began using this form of dating from about two hundred years ago.


68. Solution: d)

The fund is the brainchild of the National Innovation Council (NInC)
• The fund will be registered under SEBI‘s Alternative Investment Fund Category I
guidelines.
• It will have an initial corpus of Rs. 500 crore, with  the Ministry of MSME committing to Rs.
100 crore. The
balance will come from banks, insurance companies, and overseas financial and development institutions.
• The fund‘s eventual aim is to expand the corpus to Rs. 5,000 crore over the next 24 months.
• The fund would invest in innovative ventures that were  scalable, sustainable and, therefore, profitable.
However, it would also address the social needs of less privileged citizens in areas such as
healthcare, food,
nutrition, agriculture and education.
• The tenure of this joint venture fund is 9 years.
• The government would not be involved in the day to day operations of the fund, and it would be entrusted
to an Asset Management Company



69.  Solution: d)

Other than them, companies and several associations are also eligible to get benefits under the scheme. If a godown is built by a woman farmer, instead of the 25% support normally,
33% support is given.



70.  Solution: d)

Brownfield projects are not new projects but mere acquisition of old projects. They do not generate any additional employment.
Increasing CRR will further reduce liquidity and discourage industries to invest.



71.  Solution: c)

Broadly speaking, revenue expenditure consists of all those expenditures of the government which do not result in creation of physical or financial assets. It relates to those expenses incurred for the normal functioning of the government departments and various services,

http://insightsonindia.com                        Insights Mock Test 17                                                   Page 18
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 17 SOLUTIONS


interest  payments   on  debt  incurred  by  the  government,  and  grants  given  to  state governments and other parties (even though some of the grants may be meant for creation of assets).




72.  Solution: d)

The main items of capital receipts are loans raised by the government from the public which are called market borrowings, borrowing by the government from the Reserve Bank and commercial banks and other financial institutions through the sale of treasury bills, loans received from foreign governments and international organisations, and recoveries of loans granted by the central government. Other items include small savings (Post-Office Savings Accounts,  National  Savings  Certificates,  etc), provident  funds and  net receipts  obtained from the sale of shares in Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs).






73.  Solution: d)

The current account records exports and imports in goods and services and transfer payments. Trade in services denoted as invisible trade (because they are not seen to cross national borders) includes both factor income (payment for inputs-investment income, that is, the interest, profits and dividends on our assets abroad minus the income foreigners earn on assets they own in India) and non-factor income (shipping, banking, insurance, tourism, software services, etc.). Transfer payments are receipts which the residents of a country receive  ‗for free‘, without having to make  any present or future payments in return. They consist of remittances, gifts and grants. They could be official or private. The balance of exports and imports of goods is referred to as the trade balance. Adding trade in services and net transfers to the trade balance, we get the current account balance. The capital account records all international purchases and sales of assets such as money, stocks, bonds, etc. We note that any transaction resulting in a payment to foreigners is entered as a debit
and is given a negative sign. Any transaction resulting in a receipt from foreigners is entered
as a credit and is given a positive sign.

74. Solution: a)

The best-known of Chinese visitors are the Buddhist pilgrims, Fa Xian, who came to the subcontinent about 1600 years ago, Xuan Zang (who came around 1400 years ago) and I- Qing, who came about 50 years after Xuan Zang. They came to visit places associated with the life of the Buddha (Chapter 7) as well as famous monasteries.

Xuan Zang, who took the land route back to China (through the north-west, and Central Asia) carried back with him statues of the Buddha made of gold, silver and sandalwood, and over 600 manuscripts loaded on the backs of 20 horses. Over 50 manuscripts were lost when the boat on which he was crossing the Indus capsised. He spent the rest of his life
translating the remaining manuscripts from Sanskrit into Chinese.



http://insightsonindia.com                        Insights Mock Test 17                                                   Page 19
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 17 SOLUTIONS


Yijing

The written records of his 25-year travels contributed to the world knowledge of the ancient kingdom of Srivijaya, as well as providing information about the other kingdoms lying on the route between China and the Nālandā Buddhist university in India. He was also responsible for the translation of a large number of Buddhistscriptures from Sanskrit into Chinese. Yijing's full Buddhist title was "Tripiṭaka Dharma Master Yijing"






75.  Solution: b)

The two core sector industries affected would be fertilizers and power.
A hike in natural gas price will increase the input cost of the fertilizer. Agriculture would be adversely affected due to the increased cost of fertilizers.
FDI would be encouraged into India because the investors would get a better return on their investment.

76. Solution: c)

The emergence of large states changed the nature of Gond society. Their basically equal society gradually got divided into unequal social classes. Brahmanas received land grants from the Gond rajas and became more influential. The Gond chiefs now wished to be recognised as

Rajputs. So, Aman Das, the Gond raja of Garha Katanga, assumed the title of Sangram Shah. His son, Dalpat, married princess Durgawati, the daughter of Salbahan, the Chandel Rajput raja of Mahoba Dalpat, however, died early. Rani Durgawati was very capable, and started ruling on behalf of her five-year-old son, Bir Narain. Under her, the kingdom became even more extensive. In 1565, the Mughal forces under Asaf Khan attacked Garha Katanga. A strong resistance was put up by Rani Durgawati. She was defeated and preferred to die rather than surrender. Her son, too, died fighting soon after.




77.  Solution: a)

Ultra Mega Power Projects (UMPP) are a series of ambitious power projects planned by the Government of India. With India being a country of chronic power deficits, the Government of India has planned to provide "power for all" by the end of the Eleventh Five- Year Plan (2007–2012). This would entail the creation of an additional capacity of at least
100,000 MW by 2012. Ultra Mega Power projects, each with a capacity of 4000 MW or above,
are being developed with the aim of bridging this gap.
The UMPPs are seen as an expansion of the MPP (Mega Power Projects) projects that the Government of India undertook in the 1990s, but met with limited success. The Ministry of Power, in association with the Central Electricity Authority and Power Finance Corporation



http://insightsonindia.com                        Insights Mock Test 17                                                   Page 20
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 17 SOLUTIONS


Ltd., has launched an initiative for the development of coal-based UMPP's in India. These projects will be awarded to developers on the basis of competitive bidding.
Based on supercritical technology, 16,000 MW of capacity has been contracted through the
competitive bidding process for UMPPs. The average tariff for these projects is in the range of   2-3 per unit which is much lower than the recent cost plus tariffs.
Projects are generally taken up on a PPP basis.
UMPP were recently in news as there were changes in the mega power policy in the month of January.

78. Solution: c)

Hyacinths are native to South and Central America. They help the fishes to hide from the predators. Their excessive growth blocks sunlight and also does not augur well for the phytoplanktons.



79. Solution: b)

The Godavari is the largest Peninsular river. It rises from the slopes of the Western Ghats in the Nasik district of Maharashtra. Its length is about 1500 km. It drains into the Bay of Bengal. Its drainage basin is also the largest among the peninsular rivers. The basin covers parts of Maharashtra (about 50 per cent of the basin area lies in Maharashtra), Madhya Pradesh, Orissa and Andhra Pradesh. The Godavari is joined by a number of tributaries such as the Purna, the Wardha, the Pranhita, the Manjra, the Wainganga and the Penganga. The last three tributaries are very large. Because of its length and the area it covers, it is also known as the ‗Dakshin Ganga‘.




80.  Solution: d)

SEBI has issued a new set of regulations governing institutional and non-institutional foreign investors
investing in the Indian capital market, bringing them under the collective umbrella of
―foreign portfolio investors‖.
The new FPI rules are based on the Chandrasekhar Committee‘s recommendations for
simplifying and
unifying the entry norms for all types of foreign investors who wish to invest in listed Indian securities.

FPIs have been segregated into three categories under the new regulations, based on their perceived risk profile.

o Government and government-related investors fall under Category-I,
o regulated entities like mutual funds, banks and portfolio managers under
Category-II,
o Unregulated persons or entities such as individuals, corporates and trusts under
Category-III.



http://insightsonindia.com                        Insights Mock Test 17                                                   Page 21
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 17 SOLUTIONS



• Based on risk, these categories will entail  progressively more  stringent KYC norms.
• Besides,  the new class would be given  a permanent registration, as against the current practice of granting
approvals for one year or five years to the overseas entities seeking to invest in Indian markets.



81.  Solution: c)

At present India is the largest producer of Buffalo Milk (not cow milk) and pulses (closely followed by China). The largest producer of tea is China. Bangladesh is the largest producer of Jute.



82.  Solution: d)

The Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013, commonly referred to as the Land Acquisition Act, came into effect from January 1, 2014.

• The new legislation will guide all land  acquisitions of central and state governments, bringing in stricter
norms and increasing landowners‘ compensation significantly.

SOME OF THE PROVISIONS
• The law replaces the Land  Acquisition Act of 1894 by establishing new  rules  for
compensation as well as resettlement and rehabilitation.

• The developers will need  the consent of up to 80 per cent of people whose land  is acquired
for private
projects and of 70 per cent of the landowners in the case of public-private partnership projects.

• It also provides for compensation as high as four times more than the existing practice in rural areas and two times in urban areas.

• State governments will have to set up at least six bodies, including the state-level Land
Acquisition
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Authority, to hear disputes arising out of projects where land acquisition has been initiated by the state or its agencies.

• Further, the state  governments should take immediate steps  to create and establish the State Social Impact Assessment Unit, the office of the Commissioner Rehabilitation and Resettlement, and the State Level Monitoring Committee.



83.  Solution: d)

The Government had formed a three-member Cabinet committee in the month of January to examine the possibility of opening up agricultural land to Foreign Direct Investment (FDI),

http://insightsonindia.com                        Insights Mock Test 17                                                   Page 22
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 17 SOLUTIONS


following a Union Urban Development (UD) Ministry proposal on letting foreign realtors buy agricultural land.

At present, FDI is banned in farm land. Further, Indian banking rules disallow loans for the purchase of farm land even for domestic investors – except in the case of large-sized projects
–to safeguard against
speculative land acquisition and hoarding.

The UD Ministry‘s argument is that as farm land is already being acquired for township development,
permitting FDI will only help raise more funds for the purpose. Real estate developers will,
in any case, be applying for land use change after acquiring farm land, the Ministry has said.



84.  Solution: a)

External debt is the portion of a country's debt that was borrowed from foreign lenders including commercial banks, governments or international financial institutions. These loans, including interest, must usually be paid in the currency in which the loan was made.

• In order to earn the needed currency, the borrowing country may sell and export goods to
the lender's
country. The infamous 'debt crisis' occurs when some weak economy is unable to do so, or can only do it at unacceptably high social and environmental costs.

• An external commercial borrowing (ECB) is an instrument used to facilitate the access to
foreign money by Indian corporations and PSUs.

• ECBs include commercial bank  loans,  buyers' credit, suppliers' credit, securitised instruments such as
floating rate notes and fixed rate bonds etc., credit from official export credit agencies and commercial
borrowings from the private sector window of multilateral financial Institutions.

• ECBs cannot be used for investment in stock market or speculation in real estate.




85.  Solution: d)

The Empowerment Line measures the minimum economic cost for a household to fulfill eight most basic needs - food, health care, education, sanitation, water, housing, fuel, and social security — and ―others‘ that  included entertainment and  clothing.
• It is developed by a global research organization – McKinsey Global Institute (MGI).
• 680 million Indians or 56 per cent of the population falls under this empowerment line. It
is nearly 1.5 times  the number of people that India‘s official poverty line classifies as poor.
• Empowerment line comes out as average Rs. 1,544 per capita  per month.

86. Solution: a)




http://insightsonindia.com                        Insights Mock Test 17                                                   Page 23
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 17 SOLUTIONS


An increasing number of industrialized, polio-free countries are using IPV as the vaccine of choice. This is because the risk of paralytic polio associated with continued routine use of oral polio vaccine (OPV) is deemed greater than the risk of imported wild virus.

However, as IPV does not stop transmission of the virus, oral polio vaccine is used wherever a polio outbreak needs to be contained, even in countries which rely exclusively on IPV for their routine immunization programme (e.g. the polio outbreak in the Netherlands in 1992).

IPV is not recommended for routine use in polio-endemic countries or in developing countries at risk of poliovirus importations. In these countries, oral polio vaccines – either trivalent, bivalent or monovalent, depending on local epidemiology – are used.

Once polio has been eradicated, use of the oral polio vaccine will need to be stopped to prevent re-establishment of transmission due to vaccine-derived polioviruses. Switching to IPV is one option for this post-OPV era.



87.  Solution: d)

Election of the President and its manner only are to ratified by the states, not his term in the office.
Although Governors are the highest authority in the states, the consent of the states is not needed in amending provisions relating to the Governor.
Change in the Ordinance making powers with respect to the state list may needed to be ratified by the states.



88.  Solution: d)

Refer to the first chapter of Laxmikanth Indian polity for full details about the Act. It is a classical question. So be informed of all the provisions of the Act.



89.  Solution: d)

The CA was a partly elected and party nominated body. Indirect elections from the provincial assemblies and nomination by the princely states were provided. Besides, the seats were allotted proportionally for both categories of states.



90.  Solution: d)

Separation of powers and the leadership of the PM are the salient features of our democratic polity, not the federal structure.




91.  Solution: c)

It is a classical question. It has been asked several times in UPSC Prelims in one form or the other.

http://insightsonindia.com                        Insights Mock Test 17                                                   Page 24
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 17 SOLUTIONS


A written constitution is not a feature of the Indian parliamentary system; it is a feature of our federal system or more broadly the democratic polity. Same holds true for the independence of Indian judiciary.




92. Solution: d)

All these restrictions are mentioned in the constitution of India clearly. However, there can difference of opinion in deciding which situation qualifies on the above mentioned criteria.



93.  Solution: d)

The President can exercise his powers of pardon on laws made under any list. The
Governor, however, can not. He is restricted to only the state laws.

94. Solution: c)

A second Round Table Conference was held in London in the latter part of 1931. Here, Gandhiji represented the Congress. However, his claims that his party represented all of India came under challenge from three parties: from the Muslim League, which claimed to stand for the interests of the Muslim minority; from the Princes, who claimed that the Congress had no stake in their territories; and from the brilliant lawyer and thinker B.R. Ambedkar, who argued that Gandhiji and the Congress did not really represent the lowest castes.




95.  Solution: a)

Special officer for linguistic minorities is a constitutional post, not a statutory one.
The CVC and Chairperson NHRC are appointed on the recommendation of a panel which includes the Leader of opposition, inter alia.




96.  Solution: a)

Only the president and governors are to take the oath to defend and protect the constitution. The CJI and other judges uphold the constitution and the laws.




97.  Solution: d)

The PAC submits its report by itself. The NHRC submits its report to the central government and then the report is laid before the Parliament. Reports like that of CAG, Finance Commission etc. are only laid by the President.



http://insightsonindia.com                        Insights Mock Test 17                                                   Page 25
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 17 SOLUTIONS



98.  Solution: b)

Ministers without portfolio are also ministers officially. Hence, they are a part of the council of ministers. The cabinet secy. is a bureaucrat and he can not a part of the council of ministers for he is a civil servant who is not responsible to the Parliament. He, however, attends the cabinet meetings.



99. Solution: b)

Fungal infections kill close to 1.3 million people globally every year, matching the mortality rate of AIDS, cancer, malaria and tuberculosis, and also cause blindness to 300 million people annually. A million farmers get blind due to fungal keratitis in India, 17-30 million suffer from asthma and 1.7-4.7 million suffer from allergic asthma, also caused by fungal infections.
From the limited data available in India, among the three major fungal infections in hospitals, the prevalence of candidemia (300-500 cases per year) at any tertiary care institute (with 1,500 beds) is more than what obtains in the whole of Australia.

Unhygienic handling by healthcare staff causes invasive candidemia and the infection flows right up to the blood stream.



100.            Solution: b)

It is spread over an area of 893 km2. It is increasingly getting threatened by growing human
encroachments, rampant poaching, illegal wood felling and habitat loss.

The sanctuary is one of the richest Teak forests in the State with dense pristine areas free of human disturbance. The River Kadam flows through this area. Dry Deciduous Teak Forests
mixed with Bamboo, Terminalia, Pterocarpus, Anogeisus and Cassias.

Mammal species that have been sighted include tiger, leopard, gaur, cheetal, sambar, nilgai, barking deer, chowsingha, sloth bear. Several species of birds & reptiles are also found in the
sanctuary.





















http://insightsonindia.com                        Insights Mock Test 17                                                   Page 26
