INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 16 SOLUTIONS





1.   Solution: c)

This was not a major conference. It was a nominal conference. The INC did not attend it (not invited, in fact). The outcome of the conference was a ‗white paper‘ based  on which the Government of India Act, 1935 was formed.



2.   Solution: c)

Only if the CBI was constituted through a statue, can it be called a statutory body. A
body created by executive action can derive authority from the law of the land.



3.   Solution: c)


The Cerrado, is a vast tropical savanna ecoregion of Brazil, particularly in the states
of Goiásand Minas Gerais. The cerrado biome core areas are the plateaus in the center of Brazil. The main habitat types of the Cerrado include: forest savanna, wooded savanna, park savanna and gramineous-woody savanna. Savanna wetlands and gallery
forests are also included.



4.   Solution: d)

The PAC looks into irregularities in public finances as brought to it by the CAG reports. The CVC looks into complaint against higher officers.
The NCDRC looks into the complaints by the citizens in case of their exploitation by either public or private companies.



5.   Solution: b)

It is ironical that one of the most progressive states does not have the institution of
Lokayukta, while the other relatively backward states have it.



6.   Solution: c)

The Pilot Scheme aims to introduce youth from rest of India to the North Eastern
Region (NER) and organise combined adventure activities along with the youth from


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                              Page 1
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 16 SOLUTIONS


NER. They will also be given exposure about local culture, traditions and life style. Conduct of adventure training will benefit the participants by inculcating spirit of adventure, environmental awareness, national integration, casualty evacuation, promotion of adventure tourism, channelising youth energy in positive direction, sense of self employment and self recognition.


7.   Solution: d)

The following persons cannot become chairperson of Lokpal:
    MPs and MLAs
    Persons convicted of any offense involving moral turpitude
    Less than 45 years of age
    Members of Panchayats or Municipality
    A person who was removed or dismissed from the public service
    A person who holds any office of trust / profit; if so, he would need to resign from Lokpal
    A person who is affiliated to a political party
    Carries on some business / profession; if so, he would need to quit some business

8.   Solution: c)

The Indian capitalist class had its own notions of how the anti-imperialist struggle ought to be waged. It was always in favour of not completely abandoning the constitutional path and the negotiating table and generally preferred to put its weight behind constitutional forms of struggle as opposed to mass civil disobedience. This was due to several reasons.

First, there was the fear that mass civil disobedience,especially if it was prolonged, would unleash forces which couldturn the movement revolutionary in a social sense (i.e., threatencapitalism itself).


Second, the capitalists were unwilling to support a prolonged all-out hostility to the government of the day as it prevented the continuing of day-to-day business and threatened the very existence of the class.



9.   Solution: d)

Page no. 165, Goh Cheng Leong




http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                              Page 2
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 16 SOLUTIONS


10. Solution: d)

The positive development within the Congress and within the Muslim League soon led to broad political unity among the two, an important role in this being played by Lokmanya Tilak and M.A. Jinnah. The two
organizations held their sessions at the d of 1916 at Lucknow, signed a pact known as the Lucknow Pact, and put forward common political demands before the Government including the demand for self-government for India after the war. The Pact accepted separate electorates and the system of weightage and
reservation of seats for the minorities in the legislatures. While a step forward in many respects — and it enthused the political Indian — the Pact was also a step back. The Congress had accepted separate electorates and formally recognized communal politics. Above all, the Pact was tacitly based on the assumption
that India consisted of different communities with separate interests of their own. It,
therefore, left the way open to the future resurgence of communalism in Indian politics.



11.  Solution: a)

There is only one section on Lokayukta in the act which says that within one year, the states shall enact the Lokayukta act. However, there is nothing regarding their composition, powers etc. In fact, states are free to define how their own Lokayuktas would be appointed, how they would work and under what circumstances they would serve.



12. Solution: b)

Coriolis force is absent at Equators. Once air has been set in motion by the pressure gradient force, it undergoes an apparent deflection from its path, as seen by an observer on the earth. This apparent deflection is called the "Coriolis force" and is a result of the
earth's rotation.


















http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                              Page 3
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 16 SOLUTIONS


As air moves from high to low pressure in the northern hemisphere, it is deflected to
the right by the Coriolis force. In the southern hemisphere, air moving from high to low pressure is deflected to the left by the Coriolis force.

The amount of deflection the air makes is directly related to both the speed at which the air is moving and its latitude. Therefore, slowly blowing winds will be deflected only a small amount, while stronger winds will be deflected more. Likewise, winds blowing closer to the poles will be deflected more than winds at the same speed closer to the equator. The Coriolis force is zero right at the equator.


13. Solution: c)

Page No. 983, India-2014



14.  Solution: d)

The accounts of these societies are audited from any amongst the panel/list provided by the state government. Remember these are not constitutional or statutory bodies. The government can only supersede their boards if it has some shareholding or it has given some loan or financial assistance to these societies.



15.  Solution: b)

The continued use of English was prescribed, not by the constitution, but by the Official
Languages Act, 1963.
The legislatures of the states decide their official language. The constitution is silent on deciding their official languages.



16.  Solution: c)

The choice of the states in choosing their official language is not limited to the 8th
schedule.



17.  Solution: d)

It is not the Governor of that state; it is the President of India.
The proceedings of the Supreme Court are in English. It is not allowed constitutionally to use any other language for hearing appeals.

http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                              Page 4
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 16 SOLUTIONS





18.  Solution: d)

The 42nd amendment to the constitution already provides for an all-India judicial service. Any amendment in the constitution to provide for this post would not be deemed as a constitutional amendment. No such law has been made for so far.



19. Solution: d)

As is well-known, Hindus and Muslims had fought shoulder to shoulder in the Revolt of 1857. The notion of Hindu-Muslim distinction at the non-religious
plane, not to speak of the clash of interests of Hindus and Muslims was by and large non-existent in the Press during the 1860s. The identity that the North Indian newspapers emphasised was that of the Hindustanis, especially vis-a-vis
European or British rulers.



20.   Solution: d)

Please refer to Laxmikanth Polity for knowing what all are the special provisions for each community.



21. Solution: b)

The cabinet mission recommended an undivided India and turned down the Muslim league's demand for a separate Pakistan. The Cabinet mission restricted the Communal representation.

It provided that all the members of the Interim cabinet would be Indians and there would be minimum interference by the Viceroy.

It also provided for formation of the constituent assembly on democratic principle of population.

It recognized Indian Right to cede from the Commonwealth. The Union Government and its legislature were to have limited powers, dealing with Finance, Foreign Affairs and Communications. The union would have powers necessary to raise the finances to manage the subjects. Thus, the Cabinet Mission plan proposed a weak Centre. We can realize what would have been of the country if this plan was approved and implemented.


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                              Page 5
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 16 SOLUTIONS



All subjects other than the Union Subjects and all the residuary powers would be vested in the provinces. The Princely states would retain all subjects and all residuary powers.

A Constituent Assembly will be formed of the representatives of the Provincial Assemblies and the Princely states. Each province had to be allotted a total number of seats in proportion to its population. The Constituent assembly had to comprise 293
Members from the British Provinces and 93 members from the Princely states. The
representation of the Provincial legislatures was to be break up into 3 sections. Section
A: Madras, UP, Central provinces, Bombay, Bihar & Orissa. Section B: Punjab, Sindh,
NWFP, Baluchistan Section C: Assam and Bengal.

Thus it seems that though the Cabinet Mission plan rejected the idea of separate Pakistan, yet it grouped the provinces in such a way that it gave weightage to the idea of Pakistan, because the Section B would get almost complete autonomy.




22.  Solution: d)

All these benefits go only to registered recognized parties. Even among these parties there are certain privileges for national and state parties.



23. Solution: c)

The complexity, the humanist approach, and anti-imperialist content of the Indian nationalist foreign policy were brought out in the approach to the problem of Palestine. While Arabs were fighting against British imperialism in Palestine, many of the Jews, hunted and killed in Nazi Germany and discriminated against and oppressed all over Europe. were trying to carve out under Zionist leadership a homeland in Palestine with British support. Indians sympathized with the persecuted Jews, victims of Nazi genocide, but they criticized their efforts to deprive the Arabs of their due. They supported the Arabs and urged the Jews to reach an agreement with the Arabs directly.


Gandhiji reiterated all these views in December 1938 in an important editorial in the
Harijan on the plight of the Jews in Europe. ‗My sympathies are all with the
Jews,‘ he wrote.  But it would also be ‗wrong and inhuman to impose the Jews on the
Arabs. . - It would be crime against humanity to reduce the proud Arabs.‘







http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                              Page 6
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 16 SOLUTIONS


24.  Solution: c)

The solution is self-explanatory.



25. Solution: a)

Areas of sinking air which result in high pressure are called anticyclones (the opposite
to an anticyclone is the cyclone or depression, which is covered next).

High pressure systems have small pressure gradients (ie the air pressure doesn't change rapidly).  This means that the winds are gentle. As the air sinks, it warms up, leading to
warm and dry weather.

Anticyclones are much larger than depressions and produce periods of settled and calm weather lasting many days or weeks. Anticyclones often block the path of depressions, either slowing down the bad weather, or forcing it round the outside of the high
pressure system. They are then called 'Blocking Highs'.

As air descends, air pressure increases. When air hits the ground, it has to go somewhere. The earth's rotation makes the air change direction. In the Northern Hemisphere the air is pushed clockwise. In the Southern Hemisphere the air is pushed anticlockwise. This can be seen in the diagram below (which shows a northern
hemisphere anticyclone).























Weather conditions in the UK can vary between summer and winter anticyclones, as
described below.

http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                              Page 7
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 16 SOLUTIONS



Characteristics of summer anticyclones            Characteristics of winter anticyclones


Few or no clouds. Strong sunshine will
make it hot

Cloudless skies




Light winds
Temperature drop, making the days cold and the nights even colder due to lack of
cloud cover


Cooling of ground leading to morning
mist

Fog and frost forming at night


Warm moist air rising from the ground
forming thunderstorms
Cold air from Asia bringing snow to the
east of the UK


Cloud cover over Eastern England caused by light winds blowing over the cooler
North Sea


Source: http://www.ecn.ac.uk/what-we-do/education/tutorials-weather- climate/tutorial-welcome/anticyclones-and-depressions/anticyclones


26. Solution: b)

While the policy was of non-interference in internal affairs, there was deviation from it. But it was not a part of this arrangement of paramountcy. The crown only handled their foreign affairs and defense.



27.  Solution: c)

It is inexistence since early British days. It was first introduced in the Bengal Regulation III of 1818. Then it was provided under the Defence of India act, 1939. Here the government could authorize the detention of a person if necessary in the defence and safety of the country and like.




http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                              Page 8
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 16 SOLUTIONS


28. Solution: c)

Refer to the discussion in Page 147, Chapter 8 – FRs and duties- D.D. Basu to get a richer perspective of these issues.
These interpretations are for the purpose of enforcing the fundamental duties. It is an endeavour of the court.



29.  Solution: c)

As per the Article 355 of the constitution, ―It shall be the duty of the Union….to ensure that the government of every state be carried on in accordance with the provisions of the constitution.‖ Hence, the centre  can issue orders to get the directives enforced.


The second statement came out of a ruling of the Supreme Court.



30.  Solution: c)

The judiciary in India is immensely powerful. Barring a few cases, it has the right to review most acts/rules and regulations. Decisions taken by regulatory authorities like TRAI are although subjected to the scrutiny of Appellate Tribunals, they can also be challenged in the High courts and Supreme Court.



31. Solution: c)

They are Arabic-speaking nomadic peoples of the Middle Eastern deserts, especially
of North Africa, the Arabian Peninsula, Egypt, Israel, Iraq, Syria, and Jordan.


The Bedouin constitute only a small part of the total population of the Middle East but inhabit or utilize a large part of the land area. Most of them are animal herders who migrate into the desert during the rainy winter season and move back toward the cultivated land in the dry summer months. Although the Bedouin, as a matter of caste, traditionally despise agricultural work and other manual labour, many of them have become sedentary as a result of political and economic developments, especially
since World War II. In the 1950s, Saudi Arabia and Syria nationalized Bedouin rangelands, and Jordan severely limited goat grazing. Conflicts over land use between Bedouin herders on the one hand and settled agriculturists on the other have increased
since then.




http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                              Page 9
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 16 SOLUTIONS


32. Solution: d)

The Education Commission headed by Dr. D.S. Kothari (1964-66) recommended that students  at  all'  stages  of  education  should  be  associated  with  some  form  of  social service. This was taken into account by the State Education Minister during their conference in April 1967 and they recommended that at the university stage, students could be permitted to join the National Cadet Corps (NCC) which was already in existence on a voluntary basis and an alternative to this could be offered to them in the form of a new programme called the National Service Scheme (NSS). Promising sportsmen,  however,  should  be  exempted  from  both  and  allowed  to  join  another scheme calle4d the National Sports Organisation (NSO), in view of the need to give priority to the development of sports and athletics.

On  September  24,  1969,  the  then  Union  Education  Minister  Dr.  V.K.R.V.  Rao, launched the NSS programme in 37 universities covering all States and simultaneously requested  the  Chief  Ministers  of  States  for  their  cooperation  and  help.  It  was appropriate that the programme was started during the Gandhi Centenary Year as it was Gandhi ji who inspired the Indian youth to participate in the movement for Indian independence and the social uplift of the downtrodden masses of our nation.

The cardinal principle of the programme is that it is organised by the students themselves and both students and teachers through their combined participation in social service, get a sense of involvement in the tasks of national development.

The scheme now extends to all the states and universities in the country and covers +2 level also in many states. Students, teachers, guardians, persons in authority in government, universities and colleges/schools and the people in general now realize the need and significance of NSS.





33. Solution: a)

Sports is part of the State List. Union government is trying since 12th Lok Sabha to bring it into the Concurrent List to formulate a comprehensive sports policy.

34. Solution: d)

The committee comprises of the CVC as chairperson, the vigilance commissioners, the Secy. Home affairs, and the Secy. Coordination and Public grievances in the cabinet secretariat.





http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 10
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 16 SOLUTIONS


There is a demand that the appointment process of the CBI director be made more transparent and broad based. Therefore, it has been recommended that the Director be selected in a similar manner as that of other high regulatory authorities in the government. The committee should include the leader of oppositions too.



35. Solution: c)

Under the Scheme, each village Panchayat and each Block Panchayat would be given one time seed capital grant of Rs.1 lakh and Rs.5 lakh, respectively. In addition, while village panchayats would be given annual acquisition grant and annual operational grant at Rs.10000 and Rs.12000 per annum, respectively, block panchayats would be given Rs.20000 and 24000 respectively. Each block panchayat would also be provided annual competition grant of Rs.50000 for holding block level competitions and each district will be provided annual competition grant of Rs.3 lakh for holding district level competitions. Further, prize money would also be provided to the winners (first three positions) in block level and district level competitions. The Mission outlay for the 11th Five Year Plan is Rs.1500 crore.


PYKKA aims at providing basic sports infrastructure and promoting games/sports in rural areas in a phased and time-bound manner through concerted efforts of all stakeholders, particularly the State Governments, panchayats, educational institutes, sports promotion bodies and youth clubs. Apart from contributing to public health, social inclusiveness, the promotion of indigenous games and the identification and nurturing of rural sports talent, PYKKA is also expected to stimulate the economic activities within the sports sector, as it would lead to an exponential growth in the demand for sports instructors, coaches, sports equipment and consumables and sports events and related support services.




36. Solution: a)

Apart from a medal and a citation, the Rajiv Gandhi Khel Ratna Awardee will receive a cash prize of Rs.7.5 lakh.




37. Solution: b)

http://www.nada.nic.in/writereaddata/mainlinkfile/File1610.pdf


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 11
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 16 SOLUTIONS


http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gene_doping

Anabolic steroids were first made in the 1930s, and are now used therapeutically in medicine to stimulate muscle growth and appetite, induce male puberty and treat
chronic wasting conditions, such as cancer and AIDS.

β2-adrenergic agonists, also known as β2-adrenergic receptor agonists, are a class of drugs that act on the beta2-adrenergic receptor, thereby causing smooth musclerelaxation, resulting in dilation of bronchial
passages, vasodilation in muscle and liver, relaxation of uterine muscle, and release
of insulin.

They are primarily used to treat asthma and other pulmonary disorders.



38. Solution: c)

The partition committee which was later called partition council existed even after 15th August 1947. Sardar patel represented the INC and the league was represented by Jinnah, Liyaqat Ali khan and others.



39. Solution: c)

The Dree Festival is an Apatani agricultural rite. It involves the sacrifice of fowls, eggs and animals to the gods – Tamu, Metii and Danyi Pilo(Sun and Moon God). The purpose of the festival is to appease these gods so that famine could be avoided. This rite is observed by the Apatanis in Arunachal Pradesh, India.The Apatanis, who inhabit a tranquil pine clad valley called Ziro at the core of Lower Subansiri District of Arunachal Pradesh, are famous for their unique practice of wet rice cultivation.

http://www.echoofarunachal.com/?p=11477




40. Solution: b)

Namdapha National Park is the largest protected area in the Eastern Himalaya biodiversity hotspot and is located in Arunachal Pradesh in Northeast India. It is also
the third largest national park in India in terms of area.






http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 12
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 16 SOLUTIONS


41. Solution: b)

Page – 972, India-2014




42. Solution: b)

The person who is to be appointed as the chairperson of the Lokpal should be either of the following:

    Either the former Chief Justice of India

    Or the former Judge of Supreme Court

    Or an eminent person with impeccable integrity and outstanding ability, having special knowledge and expertise of minimum 25 years in the matters relating to anti-corruption policy, public administration, vigilance, finance including insurance and banking, law and management.



43. Solution: d)

Page No. 984




44. Solution: c)

Page No. 1045 and 1047, India-2014




45. Solution: d)

Both are correct.

The First Amendment of the Constitution of India, enacted in 1951, made several changes to the Fundamental Rights provisions of the constitution. It provided against abuse of freedom of speech and expression, validation of zamindari abolition laws, and clarified that the right to equality does not bar the enactment of laws which provide
"special consideration" for weaker sections of society.





http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 13
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 16 SOLUTIONS


The formal title of the amendment is the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951. It was moved by the then Prime Minister of India,Jawaharlal Nehru, on 10 May 1951 and enacted by Parliament on 18 June 1951.
This amendment set the precedent of amending the Constitution to overcome judicial judgements impeding fulfilment of the government's perceived responsibilities to particular policies and programmes. The amendment's language giving it retrospective as well as prospective effect was used by Prime Minister Indira Gandhi during the Emergency, to render constitutional, actions that had been both illegal and unconstitutional.



46. Solution: b)

Article 72 of the Constitution prescribes that the total number of Ministers, including the Prime Minister, in the Council of Ministers shall not exceed 15 per cent of the number of members of the House of the People.

Prior to January 1, 2004 (effective date of 91st Amendment of the Constitution) the
Prime Minister had discretion to appoint any number in his council of ministers. But the
Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act in 2003 made a drastic change in curbing
such power of the Prime Minister.

This Amendment added clause (1A) in this Article which made a specific provision that, the total number of Ministers, including Prime Minister, in no case can exceed 15 per cent of the total number of Lok Sabha members.




47. Solution: a)

     The Constitution 118th Amendment Bill, 2012 was introduced in the Lok Sabha on September 7, 2012 by the Minister of Home Affairs, Mr. Sushil Kumar Shinde.  The Bill was referred to the Standing Committee on Home Affairs (Chairperson: Mr. M. Venkaiah Naidu), which is scheduled to submit its report by the first week of the Winter Session of the Parliament.

     A resolution to make special provisions for the Hyderabad-Karnataka Region was passed by the Legislative Assembly and Legislative Council of Karnataka in March 2012.  The resolution aims to establish an institutional mechanism to develop the region and promote inclusive growth.  It aims to reduce inter-region



http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 14
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 16 SOLUTIONS


and inter-district disparity in the State of Karnataka.  This Bill was introduced in
Parliament to give effect to this resolution.

     The Bill seeks to insert Article 371J in the Constitution to empower the Governor of Karnataka to take steps to develop the Hyderabad-Karnataka Region.  As per the Statements of Objects and Reasons of the Bill, this Region includes the districts of Gulbarga, Bidar, Raichur, Koppal, Yadgir and Bellary.

     The President may allow the Governor to take the following steps for development of the region: (i) setting up a development board for the Region; (ii) ensure equitable allocation of funds for development of the Region; and (iii) provide for reservation in educational and vocational training institutions, and state government positions in the Region for persons from the Region.




48. Solution: b)

•What is the Anti-Defection Law?
The Tenth Schedule — popularly known as the Anti-Defection Act — was included in the Constitution in 1985 by the Rajiv Gandhi ministry and sets the provisions for disqualification of elected members on the grounds of defection to another political
party.

The law was added via the 52nd Amendment Act, 1985, soon after the Rajiv government came to power with a thumping majority in the wake of the assassination
of prime minister Indira Gandhi. The Congress had won 401 seats in the Lok Sabha.

•What are the grounds for disqualification under the Anti-Defection Law's Articles
102 (2) and 191 (2)?

a) If an elected member voluntarily gives up his membership of a political party;

b) If he votes or abstains from voting in such House contrary to any direction issued by
his political party or anyone authorised to do so, without obtaining prior permission.

As a pre-condition for his disqualification, his abstention from voting should not be condoned by his party or the authorised person within 15 days of such incident.

•What were the loopholes?




http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 15
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 16 SOLUTIONS


As per the 1985 Act, a 'defection' by one-third of the elected members of a political party was considered a 'merger'. Such defections were not actionable against. The Dinesh Goswami Committee on Electoral Reforms, the Law Commission in its report on "Reform of Electoral Laws" and the National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution (NCRWC) all recommended the deletion of the Tenth Schedule provision
regarding exemption from disqualification in case of a split.

Finally the 91st Constitutional Amendment Act, 2003, changed this. So now at least two- thirds of the members of a party have to be in favour of a "merger" for it to have validity in the eyes of the law. "The merger of the original political party or a member of a
House shall be deemed to have taken place if, and only if, not less than two-thirds of the members of the legislature party concerned have agreed to such merger," states the
Tenth Schedule.

•Under which circumstances is a split in a party not considered a 'defection'?

A split in a political party will not be considered a defection if an entire political party merges with another; if a new political party is formed by some of the elected members of one party; if he or she or other members of the party have not accepted the merger between the two parties and opted to function as a separate group from the time of such
a merger.

•What are the powers of a party whip under the Constitution in case of a defection?

The whip upholds the party directives in the House as the authorised voice of the party. On defection of elected members of his party, the whip can send a petition on the alleged defection to the Chairman or the Speaker of a House for their disqualification. He can also expel the members from the party. But this does not necessarily mean that the members so expelled lose their seats in the House. They continue to hang on to their seats as long as the Chairman or the Speaker of a House gives a final decision on their disqualification from the House after a proper enquiry on the basis of the petition filed
by the party whip.

•What are the options before a disqualified elected member?

The members so disqualified can stand for elections from any political party for a seat in the same House. But he, naturally cannot get a ticket from his former party.

•Who is the deciding authority?



http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 16
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 16 SOLUTIONS


The decision on questions as to disqualification on ground of defection are referred to the Chairman or the Speaker of such House, and his decision is final. All proceedings in relation to any question on disqualification of a member of a House under this Schedule are deemed to be proceedings in Parliament or in the Legislature of a state. No court has any jurisdiction.

Source: The Indian Express

49.  Solution: c)

While it looks logical that the High courts should not intervene, as per a Supreme Court ruling in the Chndra Kumar case, they can. The Court declares review of CAT decisions by the HC as a part of the judicial review. It can not be taken away.



50. Solution: b)

As per the 1985 Act, a 'defection' by one-third of the elected members of a political party was considered a 'merger'. Such defections were not actionable against. The Dinesh Goswami Committee on Electoral Reforms, the Law Commission in its report on "Reform of Electoral Laws" and the National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution (NCRWC) all recommended the deletion of the Tenth Schedule provision
regarding exemption from disqualification in case of a split.

Finally the 91st Constitutional Amendment Act, 2003, changed this. So now at least two- thirds of the members of a party have to be in favour of a "merger" for it to have validity in the eyes of the law. "The merger of the original political party or a member of a
House shall be deemed to have taken place if, and only if, not less than two-thirds of the members of the legislature party concerned have agreed to such merger," states the
Tenth Schedule.




51. Solution: a)

In the Northern Hemisphere winds are deflected to the right.

52. Solution: d)
Rain shadow area is nothing but leeward slope region of a mountain. Refer page no. 109 Goh Cheng Leong


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 17
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 16 SOLUTIONS


53. Solution: c)


A sea breeze describes a wind that blows from the ocean inland towards land. This breeze occurs most often in the spring and summer months because of the greater temperature differences between the ocean and nearby land, particularly in the afternoon when the land is at maximum heating from the sun.

During the day, the sun heats up both the ocean surface and the land. Water is a good absorber of the  energy from  the  sun.  The  land  absorbs much  of the  sun‘s  energy as well.  However, water heats up much more slowly than land and so the air above the land will be warmer compared to the air over the ocean. The warm air over the land will rise throughout the day, causing low pressure at the surface. Over the water, high surface pressure will form because of the colder air. To compensate, the air will sink over the ocean. The wind will blow from the higher pressure over the water to lower pressure over the land causing the sea breeze. The sea breeze strength will vary depending on the temperature difference between the land and the ocean.

At night, the roles reverse. The air over the ocean is now warmer than the air over the land. The land loses heat quickly after the sun goes down and the air above it cools too.  This can be compared to a blacktop road. During the day, the blacktop road heats up and becomes very hot to walk on. At night, however, the blacktop has given up the added heat and is cool to the touch. The ocean, however, is able to hold onto this heat after the sun sets and not lose it as easily. This causes the low surface pressure to shift to over the ocean during the night and the high surface pressure to move over the land. This causes a small temperature gradient between the ocean surface and the nearby land at night and the wind will blow from the land to the ocean creating the land breeze.



Breeze
Sea Breeze                                                           Land



















Figure A

http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 18
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 16 SOLUTIONS


Sea Breeze (Left) and Land Breeze (Right).  Adapted from graphic by NOAA



54. Solution: d)


The winds are caused by moist weather patterns, originating off the Pacific
coast, cooling as they climb the western slopes, and then rapidly warming as they drop down the eastern side of the mountains. The Chinook usually begins with a sudden
change in wind direction towards the west or southwest, and a rapid increase in wind speed.

As moist weather patterns blow ashore on the coast, they run into a barrier of mountains. As they are forced to climb upwards to crest the mountains, they cool down at a specific rate. Weather patterns cool at rates of .54°C/100 m for moist systems, and
1°C/100 m for dry systems

55. Solution: b)

Depressions are actually a group of thunderstorms. They do not have clear circular structure as cyclones possess.

A tropical depression is designated when the first appearance of a lowered pressure and organized circulation in the center of the thunderstorm complex occurs. A surface pressure chart will reveal at least one closed isobar to reflect this lowering.

















Image provided by TPC

When viewed from a satellite, tropical depressions appear to have little organization. However, the slightest amount of rotation can usually be perceived when looking at a series of satellite images. Instead of a round appearance similar to hurricanes, tropical depressions look like individual thunderstorms that are grouped together. One such
tropical depression is shown here


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 19
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 16 SOLUTIONS


http://atmo.tamu.edu/weather-and-climate/weather-whys/617-depressions-tropical- storms-hurricanes-and-cyclones

56. Solution: a)

Please refer to the Conditions for Recognition as a National party in Laxmikanth polity

57. Solution: a)

The Westerlies, anti-trades,[1] or Prevailing Westerlies, are prevailing winds from the west toward the east in the middle latitudes between 30 and 60 degrees latitude. They originate from the high pressure areas in the horse latitudes and tend towards
the poles and steer extratropical cyclones in this general manner.[2]Tropical
cyclones which cross the subtropical ridge axis into the Westerlies recurve due to the increased westerly flow. The winds are predominantly from the southwest in
the Northern Hemisphere and from the northwest in the Southern Hemisphere.
























The Westerlies are strongest in the western hemisphere and at times when the pressure is lower over the poles, while they are weakest in the southern hemisphere and when pressures are higher over the poles. The Westerlies are particularly strong, especially in the southern hemisphere, where there is less land in the middle southern latitudes to cause the flow pattern to amplify, or become more north-south oriented, which would slow the Westerlies. The strongest westerly winds in the middle latitudes can come in the Roaring Forties, between 40 and 50 degrees latitude. The Westerlies play an important role in carrying the warm, equatorial waters and winds to the western coasts
of continents, especially in the southern hemisphere because of its vast oceanic expanse.


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 20
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 16 SOLUTIONS


58. Solution: d)

The Quit India movement was not a meticulously planned movement as the previous mass movements. The situation in British India had deteriorated to such an extent that these incidents were like a spark in the haystack.
Already the masses were frustrated with the British not giving them the right to self- govern. This became clear with the failure of the Cripps Mission which only offered a dominion status for India.
Then, the incoming famine made people even more impatient. In fact, as history tells us, they had become even more impatient than the leaders. When the leaders were released from jails, they did not even need to gather the people. They were already watiting for them.
Further, the news came in that the British have left Indian subjects to die in the war at Burma. But, they had evacuated British citizens. This infuriated the leaders and the masses. In their opinion, if there was invasion from the side of Burma, this would be the fate of Indians too. The British would simply flee.

All of this made a dangerous cocktail and led to the spontaneous Quit India movement.



59. Solution: a) http://arunachalpradesh.gov.in/aptribes.htm http://www.indianetzone.com/9/kokna_tribe.htm
60. Solution: d)

Much of Siberia comes under Taiga region. Hence it has conifer forests.















polar desert     tundra      alpine tundra      taiga      montane forest
temperate broadleaf forest      temperate steppe      dry steppe





http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 21
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 16 SOLUTIONS


61. Solution: d)

http://firstpeoplesofcanada.com/fp_groups/fp_inuit1.html




62. Solution: d)

Please refer to the Vision and mandate of the CBI in Laxmikanth latest edition polity. The CBI also has the mission to provide leadership to the police forces and to act as the nodal agency for enhancing inter-state and international cooperation in law enforcement.




63. Solution: d)

The following come under the jurisdiction of Lokpal:
    Prime Minister of India, under certain conditions as stipulated in the adjacent
box.
    All ministers of the Union
    Members of Parliament except for matters related to article 105 of constitution. (that is anything said or a vote given by him in Parliament)
    Group 'A' or Group 'B' officers
    Group 'C' or Group 'D' officials
    Any person who is or has been in-charge (director / manager/ secretary) of
anybody / society set up by central act or any other body financed / controlled by central government.
    Any other person involved in act of abetting, bribe giving or bribe taking

According to the Lokpal and Lokayukta Act 2013, the PM comes within the jurisdiction of Lokpal but Lokpal will not inquire the PM if the allegation of corruption is related to international relations, external and internal security, public order, atomic energy and space. Further, allegation against Prime Minister can be taken up for inquiry only when the two conditions as follows are satisfied:

    Full bench of the Lokpal consisting of its Chairperson and all Members considers the initiation of inquiry
    At least two-thirds of its members approves of such inquiry

Such inquiry against the Prime Minister will be done in camera. If the Lokpal concludes that the allegation is false and the inquiry should be dismissed, the records of the inquiry shall not be published or made available to anyone.


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 22
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 16 SOLUTIONS



64. Solution: d)

While the 97th amendment makes establishing cooperative societies a fundamental right, they are by no means constitutional bodies. They do not exercise any authority. They are not a part of the government of India.
The state legislature is empowered to make laws regulating the cooperative societies.
The laws and norms regulating them are similar to the corporate governance norms governing companies.



65. Solution: a)

An oceanic climate (also known as marine, west coast and maritime) is the climate typical of the west coasts at the middle latitudes of most continents, and generally features warm (but not hot) summers and cool (but not cold) winters, with a relatively narrow annual temperature range. It typically lacks a dry season, asprecipitation is more evenly dispersed throughout the year. It is the predominant climate type across much ofEurope, parts of the Appalachians, portions of southwestern South
America and small areas of Africa, in southeast Australia, and New Zealand as well as isolated locations elsewhere.

66. Solution: b)

Shrinking the target age group defining youth from the existing 13-35 years to 16-30 years and inclusion of groups — transgender, gay and lesbians along with those infected with HIV/AIDS and Tuberculosis who suffer from social or moral stigma — in
a new category are some of the salient features of the draft National Youth Policy (NYP)
2012.

The NYP, which is a step forward from the earlier such polices formulated in 1988 and
2003 with an aim to empower youth by bringing holistic development, will remain effective till 2022 once implemented by Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports.

Page No. – 941, India – 2014



67. Solution: d)

It is the central government which revises the election expenditure limits for
Parliamentary elections.



http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 23
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 16 SOLUTIONS


The requirement for being an elector of the state for being nominated to the RS was waved in 2003.


68. Solution: d)


The capitalists realized, as G.L. Mehta,  the president of FICCI, argued in 1943, that ‗A consistent . . . programme of reforms‘ was the most effective remedy against social upheavals.‘ It was with this reform  perspective that the ‗Post War Economic Development Committee,‘ set up by the capitalists in 1942, which  eventually drafted the Bombay Plan, was to function. Its attempt was to incorporate ‗whatever is sound and feasible in the socialist  movement‘ and see ‗how far socialist demands could  be accommodated without capitalism surrendering any of its essential features.‘ The Bombay Plan, therefore, seriously took up the question of rapid economic growth and equitable distribution, even arguing for the necessity of partial nationalization, the
public  sector, land  reform  and a series of workers‘ welfare schemes. One may add  that
the basic assumption made by the Bombay planners was that the plan could be implemented only by an independent national Government.



69.  Solution: d)

From 1878 onwards, the Government of India undertook a number of large-scale military expeditions outside India‘s frontiers and its armed forces were used in some of the wars waged by the British Government in Asia and Africa.
The Second Afghan War was waged in 1878-80. Voicing the Indian opinion,
Surendranath Banerjea publicly branded the war as an act of sheer aggression and ‗as one of the most unrighteous wars  that have blackened the pages  of history.‖ The Indians demanded that since the unjust war was waged in pursuance of Imperial aims and policies, Britain should meet the entire cost of the war. Similar wars were waged in Burma and Tibet.



70. Solution: a)


The Indian leaders argued that the expansionist policy of the Government of India‘s frontiers, a product of Britain‘s worldwide imperialist policy, was the most important cause of the maintenance of a large standing army, the increase in Indian military expenditure, the deplorable financial position of the Government, and the consequent increase of taxation in India after 1815.







http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 24
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 16 SOLUTIONS


71.  Solution: c)

At its Calcutta session, the Congress declared that the Indian struggle was a part of the worldwide struggle against imperialism. It also decided to open a Foreign Department to develop contacts with other peoples and movements fighting against imperialism.



72. Solution: c)

Once a Lokpal chairperson / member has ceased to be so, he cannot take up the following jobs:


    He cannot be reappointed as chairperson / member of Lokpal
    Cannot take any diplomatic assignment
    Cannot be appointed as administrator to a Union Territory
    Any constitutional / statutory post in which appointment is made by President
    Any other office under the government of India
    He cannot contest any of the elections such as President / Vice President / MLA
/ MLC/ Local bodies for 5 years after relinquishing the post.



73. Solution: d)

Refer to the discussion in the first half of the chapter  on ―The rise and growth of communalism‖ in Bipin Chandra.


74. Solution: d)

The Muslim communalists continued to follow the politics of loyalty after Syed Ahmed‘s death. They openly sided  with the Government during the Swadeshi Movement in Bengal during 1905-6 and condemned the Muslim supporters of the movement as ‗vile traitors‘ to Islam and as ‗Congress touts.‘
But the attempt to keep the growing Muslim intelligentsia politically passie or loyalist was not wholly successful. Badruddin Tyabji presided over the Congress session in
1887, and the number of Muslim delegates to the Congress increased in the succeeding
years. R.M. Sayani, A. Bhimji, Mir Musharaff Hussain, Hamid Ali Khan and numerous other Muslim intellectuals from Bombay, Bengal and Northern India joined the Congress. They pointed out that not even one of the Congress demands was communal or for Hindus only.







http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 25
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 16 SOLUTIONS


75. Solution: b)

The first session of the All-India Hindu Mahasabha was held in April 1915 under the presidentship of the Maharaja of Kasim Bazar. But it remained for many years a rather sickly child compared to the Muslim League. This was for several reasons.
The broader social reason was the greater and even dominant role of the zamindars, aristocrats and ex-bureaucrats among Muslims in general and even among the Muslim middle classes. While among Parsis and Hindus, increasingly, it was the modern intelligentsia, with its emphasis on science, democracy and
nationalism, and the bourgeois elements in general, which rapidly acquired intellectual, social, economic and political influence and hegemony, among Muslims the reactionary landlords and mullahs continued to exercise dominant influence or hegemony.

There were other reasons for the relative weakness of Hindu communalism. The
colonial Government gave Hindu communalism few concessions and little  Support, for it banked heavily on Muslim communalism and could not easily
simultaneously placate both communalisms.



76. Solution: a)

The high courts and other authorities as provided by the Parliament can also entertain election petitions.

77. Solution: d)

Declaring that the Nehru Report represented Hindu interests, Jinnah consolidated all the communal demands made by different communal organizations at different times into a single document which came to be known as Jinnah‘s Fourteen Points.  The Fourteen Points basically consisted of the four Delhi Proposals, the three Calcutta amendments and demands for the continuation of separate electorates arid reservation of seats for Muslims in government services and self- governing bodies. The Fourteen Points were to form the basis of all future communal propaganda in the subsequent years.



78. Solution:  b)

The awards were given to the Muslim, Sikhs, SCs, STs etc. so as to ensure separate electorates for them in the election to legislatures.






http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 26
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 16 SOLUTIONS


79. Solution: d)

While there was agreement among Congressmen on the question of attitude to the War and the resignation of the ministries, sharp differences developed over the question of the immediate starting of a mass satyagraha. Gandhiji and the
dominant leadership advanced three broad reasons for not initiating an immediate movement. First, they felt that since the cause of the Allies — Britain and France — was just, they should not be embarrassed in the prosecution of the War. Second, the lack of Hindu- Muslim unity was a big barrier to a struggle. In
the existing atmosphere any civil disobedience movement could easily degenerate into communal rioting or even civil war.



80.  Solution: d)

Even though Cripps announced that the aim of British policy in India  was ‗the earliest possible realization of self- government in India,‘ the Draft Declaration he brought with him was disappointing. The Declaration promised India Dominion Status and a constitution-making body after the War whose members would be elected by the provincial assemblies and nominated by the rulers in case of the princely states. The Pakistan demand was accommodated by the provision that any province which was not prepared to accept the new constitution would have the right to sign a separate agreement with Britain regarding its future status. For the present the British would continue to exercise sole control over the defence of the country.
Negotiations between Cripps and the Congress leaders broke down. The Congress objected to the provision for Dominion Status rather than full independence, the
representation of the princely states in the constituent assembly not by the people of the states but by the nominees of the rulers, and above all by the provision for the partition of India. The British Government also refused to accept the demand for the immediate transfer of effective power to the Indians and for a real share in the responsibility for the defence of India.



81.  Solution: a)

These are general observations about the Quit India movement.



82.  Solution: d)

The Congress accepted the proposals related to the Constituent assembly. But since, the Muslim league had been given disproportionate representation; it rejected the idea of the Interim Government. Congress also rejected the idea of a weak centre and division


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 27
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 16 SOLUTIONS


of India in small states. Congress was against decentralization and the idea was to have a strong centre. The Muslim league first approved the plan. But when Congress declared that it could change the scheme through its majority in the Constituent Assembly, they rejected the plan. On July 27, the Muslim League Council met at
Bombay where Jinnah reiterated the demand for Pakistan as the only course left open to
the Muslim League. On July 29, it rejected the plan and called the Muslims to resort to
"Direct Action" to achieve the land of their dream "Pakistan". August 16, 1946 was fixed as "Direct Action Day".



83. Solution: b)

The Grand Banks of Newfoundland are a group of underwater plateaus southeast
of Newfoundland on the North Americancontinental shelf. These areas are relatively shallow, ranging from 80 to 330 feet (24–101 m) in depth. The cold Labrador
Current mixes with the warm waters of the Gulf Stream here.

The mixing of these waters and the shape of the ocean bottom lifts nutrients to the surface. These conditions helped to create one of the richest fishing grounds in the world. Fish species include Atlantic cod, sword fish, haddock,
and capelin. Shellfishinclude scallop and lobster. The area also supports large colonies of sea birds such as Northern Gannets, shearwaters, andsea ducks and various
sea mammals such as seals, dolphins, and whales.




84.  Solution: d)

To discuss the provisions of the Wavell Plan a conference of 21 Indian Political leaders was invited to the Summer Capital of British Government Shimla. The leaders included Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, who was the President of the Congress at that time. Mohammad Ali Jinnah also reached in the conference. But here, Jinnah made a strange claim. He said that no non-league Muslim should be represented to the Executive Council because only Muslim League has right to represent the Muslims of India. So, it was said that Congress had no right to nominate any Muslim in the Executive council. Jinnah also demanded that in case of the division of votes and objection by the Mulism members, there should be a provision that vote is cleared only by 2/3rd of majority. Wavell had given place to 6 Muslims in the Executive Council of 14, and British had given it the power of Veto to any constitutional proposal which was not in its interest. But Muslims represented only 25% of Indian Population. Thus, these unreasonable demands were rejected by Congress. The Muslim league did not relent and Wavell dropped the plan. However, now it was almost clear to Congress that Muslim League can make or mar the fortune of Muslims of India. It was seen as strongest at this point


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 28
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 16 SOLUTIONS


of time, than ever before.



85.  Solution: d)

The British authorities were worried that they had lost control over the ‗Frankenstein monster‘ they had helped to create but felt it was too late to tame
it. They were frightened into appeasing the League  by Jinnah‘s ability  to unleash civil
war. Wavell quickly brought the League into the Interim Government on 26 October
1946 though it had not accepted either the short or long term provisions of the Cabinet Mission Plan and had not given up its policy of Direct Action. The Secretary of State argued that without the League‘s presence in the Government civil war would have been inevitable.



86.  Solution: a)

The war had ended, though Japan was yet to surrender. The heroic deeds of INA were about to end. More than 3 million people had lost lives in the Famine of Bengal, which was largely manmade as the Government stopped the supplies from Burma due to the fear of the Japanese invasion. Burma was the largest exporter of rice and the scarcity of the supplies coupled with the low rains and droughts in several parts of India from as early as 1942, when 10 princely states of Rajputana had declared themselves famine affected as per the famine code and wanted to get relief.



87.  Solution: a)

The Muslim league had escalated the demand for a separate sovereign state. There was a deadlock with the congress since 1939 resignations. On June 14, 1945, Lord Wavell came out with a plan which had the following schemes: A new Executive Council was to be formed at the Centre in which all but the Viceroy and the Commander in Chief will be Indians. This executive council was for the time being till a new permanent constitution could be agreed upon and come to force. All portfolios except the Defense would be held by the Indian Members.



88.  Solution: c)

The August offer was announced when the popular congress ministries resigned. It was to placate them.
Another proposal was that the number of Indians in the executive council was to be increased. As seen later, the Wavell plan provided for it.


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 29
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 16 SOLUTIONS


89.  Solution: d)

The satyagrahis, which included Pandit Nehru and Vinoba Bhave among others, were sent to jails immediately as per the Defence of India Act. The British did not want this movement to escalate no matter how small it seemed in the beginning.



90.  Solution: c)

The mutiny started as a strike regarding the service conditions in the Royal Indian navy (RIN). Later it spread to other areas. The mutiny was ended by the intervention of Sardar patel. The INC requested for an amnesty for those involved in the RIN mutiny.



91. Solution: a)

Doldrums, also called equatorial calms,  equatorial regions of light ocean currents and winds within the intertropical convergence zone (ITCZ), a belt of converging winds and rising air encircling Earthnear the Equator. The northeast and southeast trade
winds meet there; this meeting causes air uplift and often produces clusters of convective thunderstorms. They occur along the Equator in the Indian and western Pacific oceans and slightly north of the Equator off the African and Central American west coasts. The crews of sailing ships dreaded the doldrums because their ships were often becalmed there; the designation for the resultant state of depression was apparently thus extended to these geographic regions themselves.





















Source: http://www.theduttonfamily.com/?p=1823




http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 30
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 16 SOLUTIONS


92.  Solution: d)

The Mountbatten Plan, as the 3rd June, 1947 Plan came to be known, sought to effect an early transfer of power on the basis of Dominion Status to two successor states, India and Pakistan. Congress was willing to accept Dominion Status for a while because it felt it must assume full power immediately and meet boldly the explosive situation in the country. As Nehru put it, Murder stalks the streets and the most amazing cruelties are indulged in  by  both   the  individual  and   the  mob.‖ Besides  Dominion  Status   gave breathing time to the new administration as British officers and civil service officials could stay on for a while and let Indians settle in easier into their new positions of authority. For Britain, Dominion Status offered a chance of keeping India in the Commonwealth, even if temporarily, a prize
not to be spurned.



93.  Solution: d)

These were the major provisions of Act, other than partitioning India. It also provided a list of provinces which were to be a part of Pakistan.



94.  Solution: c)

The plan was unveiled by C rajagopalachari when nothing was working between the INC and the league. It was a sort of a middle way between the two extremes adopted by both the parties.



95. Solution: d)

Refer to the chapter – Crisis at Tripuri and the cripps mission in Bipin Chandra to understand the various contentions between the two groups in INC. For space constraints, it can not be reproduced here.



96.  Solution: a)

It did provide for heavy representation of Muslims. In fact, Jinnah disagreed with the proposals because he felt it gave them inadequate representation.








http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 31
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 16 SOLUTIONS


97. Solution: b)

Other important incidents that happened under his reign were: the arrival of cripps mission; beginning of 2nd world war etc. He was the longest serving Viceroy of India.



98.  Solution: d)

The rise of this party was due to the increasing left-wing influence in the Congress. Leaders like Acharya Vnoba Bhave and JP Narayan were holding the party together. It was an offshoot of the congress. The party believed in decentralized socialism.



99. Solution: a)

The members are to be appointed by President on the recommendations of a selection committee. This selection committee is made up of_:
    Prime Minister—Chairperson;
    Speaker of Lok Sabha
    Leader of Opposition in Lok Sabha
    Chief Justice of India or a Judge nominated by him / her
    One eminent jurist



100.           Solution: d)

The CBI has a dedicated division to look after economic offences. And recently CBI ha posted officers to the UK and USA to look into leads into transnational crimes.
























http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 32
