INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 10 - SOLUTIONS


1.   Solution: a)

The Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer (a protocol to the Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer) is an
international treaty designed to protect the ozone layer by phasing out the
production of numerous substances that are responsible for ozone depletion

The Montreal Protocol does not address HFCs, but these substances figure in the basket of six greenhouse gases under the Kyoto Protocol. Developed countries following the Kyoto Protocol report their HFC emission data to UNFCCC; parties to the Montreal Protocol have no such obligation.

Cartagena and Nagoya protocols are related to biodiversity.

http://www.unep.org/Documents.Multilingual/Default.asp?DocumentID=517&Ar ticleID=5668&l=en





2.   Solution: a)


It has been accepted as part of Indian medical system through legislation in 2010.


http://www.hindu.com/2010/08/28/stories/2010082861061800.htm


http://pib.nic.in/newsite/erelease.aspx?relid=52535



3.   Solution: d)

http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/health/post-chapra-incident-fao-wants- hazardous-pesticide-withdrawal-to-be-expedited/article4978713.ece

http://www.hindustantimes.com/india-news/newdelhi/is-monocrotophos-a- banned-pesticide-responsible-for-mid-day-meal-deaths/article1-1099689.aspx




4.   Solution: d)


Consolidated Fund of India is divided into three main divisions, namely:-

(a)    A Revenue Section with the two sub-divisions to account for Revenue Receipts
(Tax and Non-Tax) and Revenue Expenditure. (Major Head Codes 0020 to 1606 and
2011 to 3606)


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 1
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 10 - SOLUTIONS


(b)    A Capital Section which is divided into two subdivisions dealing with- (i) Capital Receipts. (Major Head Code 4000)
(ii) Capital Expenditure. (Major Head Codes 4046 to 5475)
(c)    Public Debt and Loans and Advances etc. (Major Head Codes 6001 to 7999). Contingency Fond being an imprest is accounted for under a single Major Head.
(Major Head Code 8000)

Public Account is divided into six sub-divisions, namely:—

(i) Small Savings, Provident Funds etc. (Major Head Codes 8001 to 8013) (ii) Reserve Funds. (Major Head Codes 8115 to 8235)
(iii) Deposits and Advances. (Major Head Codes 8336 to 8554)

(iv) Suspense and Miscellaneous. (Major Head Codes 8656 to 8680) (v) Remittances. (Major Head Codes 8781 to 8797)
(vi) Cash Balance. (Major Head Code 8999). http://cga.nic.in/html/book5/chapter1.htm
5.    Solution: a)

The quotas are to be provided to only SCs and STs which are socially backward. There is no provision for quotas to economically and educationally backward classes. In fact, in a famous case the SC cut down a 10% quota for economically backward classes.



6.   Solution: d)

http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/bioenergy-and-bioplastics-produced-by-novel- methods/article4785072.ece

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sewage_treatment#Anaerobic_digestion






http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 2
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 10 - SOLUTIONS


7.   Solution: b)

Doug Engelbart, the inventor of the computer mouse and developer of early incarnations of email, word processing programmes and the Internet, has died at the age of 88.

The Computer History Museum, where Engelbart had been a fellow since 2005, said he died early on Thursday. The museum in Mountain View, California, was notified of the death in an email from his daughter, Christina. The cause of death wasn‘t immediately known.

Back in the 1950s and ‗60s, when  mainframes took up entire  rooms  and were fed data on punch cards, Engelbart already was envisioning a world in which people used computers to share ideas about solving problems.


For more:

http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/technology/engelbart-inventor-of-computer- mouse-dies/article4880019.ece




8.   Solution: a)

Trichoderma viride is a fungus and a biofungicide. It is used for seed and soil
treatment for suppression of various diseases caused by fungal pathogens. It is also a pathogen in its own right, causing green mould rot of onion.

http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/science/bio-control-agent-to-control-tree- infestations/article4974329.ece




9.   Solution: c)

http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/co2-effect-focus-on-marine- fauna/article5068425.ece





10. Solution: b)


http://pib.nic.in/newsite/efeatures.aspx?relid=95141






http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 3
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 10 - SOLUTIONS


11. Solution: d)

Mosquitoes are crepuscular, most active during dawn and dusk. Being ectothermic, they seek warmth but are actually quite vulnerable to hot, dry conditions, and can easily overheat and dessicate in direct sunlight.

Mosquitoes generally do not like intense light, intense cold and windy conditions and so are most comfortable, become more active during dawn and dusk . polarised light, Change in CO concentration in the atmosphere and quiet wind velocities during dawn and dusk might be the triggers for mosquito activities.

UV Light (polarized light) is more predominant during dawn and dusk than infra red light and Mosquitoes are known to be attracted to and using UV light to find damp water sources. Infra red light which is more intense during day time is known to curtail mosquito activity.

While the dawn activity is brief as the heat and intensive light increases as the day progresses, the dusk activity gets prolonged well into night because of the increased efficiency of mosquito‘s thermal and odour receptors during  late evenings and early nights due to humid conditions. While in the day time the thermal receptors detect their victim at about 3 metres away, the efficiency increases three-fold during humid night time.

The odour receptors can detect their target victim at over 100 metres during the night and at more distances if the intended victim is big or pregnant exhaling more CO and has sweetish smell or had a pint of beer.

Mosquitoes do not bite only during the night hours. They can however if roused bite any time of the day irrespective of weather conditions. Certain species of mosquitoes are only active during the daytime, and in most cases, daytime feeders are a great deal more aggressive than night-time feeders.




12. Solution: b)

In pursuance to the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), India had enacted the Biological Diversity Act in 2002 following a widespread consultative process over a period of eight years. The Biological Rules were notified thereafter in 2004.The Act gives effect to the provision of the CBD. It also addresses access to biological resources and associated traditional knowledge to ensure equitable sharing of benefits arising out of their use to the country and its people, thereby contributing to achieving the third objective of the CBD. India is one of the first few countries to
have enacted such legislation. The Act is to be implemented through a three-tiered
institutional structure: National Biodiversity Authority (NBA), State Biodiversity


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 4
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 10 - SOLUTIONS


Boards (SBBs) and Biodiversity Management Committees (BMCs). Main Provisions
The NBA deals with all matters relating to requests for access by foreign individuals,
institutions or companies, and transfer of results of research to any foreigner. While granting approvals, NBA imposes conditions which secure equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the use of biological resources and associated knowledge. These benefits could include monetary gains; grant of joint ownership of Intellectual property Rights (IPRs), transfer of technology, association of Indian scientists in research and development, setting up of venture capital  funds etc. Further, NBA‘s approval is also required before seeking any IPR based on biological material and associated knowledge obtained from India. The NBA also has power to oppose grant of IPRs in any other country on biological resources or associated knowledge obtained or derived from India.




13. Solution: c)

The State Biodiversity Boards (SBBs), constituted by the State Governments, deal with all matters relating to access by Indians for commercial purposes. The Indian industry is required to provide prior intimation to the concerned SBB about the use of biological resources. The SBB has the power to restrict any such activity which violates the objectives of conservation, sustainable use and equitable sharing of benefits.


The institutions of self- government are required to set up Biodiversity Management Committees (BMCs) in their respective areas for conservation, sustainable use, documentation of biodiversity and chronicling of knowledge relating to biodiversity. The NBA and SBBs are required to consult the concerned BMCs on matters relating
to use op biological resources and associated knowledge within their respective jurisdictions. This mandatory consultation of BMCs by NBA and SBBs ensures formulization of prior informed consent by the communities through involvement of BMCs in decision making process. The BMCs may also levy collection fee for
collecting biological resource from their respective areas.











http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 5
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 10 - SOLUTIONS


14. Solution: d)

Fundamental rights establish political democracy. There is no such term as Gandhian democracy. Besides, there are many other non- Gandhian idea enshrined in the constitution.



15. Solution: d)


http://www.jsk.gov.in/total_fertility_rate.asp






16. Solution: c)

India adopted the route of imperative planning which continued till 1991. After that planning became indicative and less normative in nature. Refer to pages 4.7-4.8 in Ramesh Singh Indian economy 5th edition for better clarity.



17.  Solution: c)

Early childhood care is not a fundamental right even though we have a right of life.
It does not cover this right. Subsequent legislations although have ensured it as it is a
DPSP.




18. Solution: c)

The Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety is an international agreement on biosafety, as a supplement to the Convention on Biological Diversity. The Biosafety Protocol seeks to protect biological diversity from the potential risks posed by genetically modified organismsresulting from modern biotechnology.

The Biosafety Protocol makes clear that products from new technologies must be based on the precautionary principle and allow developing nations to balance public health against economic benefits. It will for example let countries ban imports of
a genetically modified organisms if they feel there is not enough scientific evidence that the product is safe and requires exporters to label shipments containing
genetically altered commodities such as corn or cotton.







http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 6
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 10 - SOLUTIONS


India is a Party to the CBD. The three objectives of the Convention are: conservation of biodiversity, sustainable use of its components, and the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the use of genetic resources. CBD is the first comprehensive global agreement addressing all aspects relating to biodiversity. It is a framework agreement that provides for flexible country-driven approach to its implementation. The Convention has near universal membership with 193 Parties. USA is the only major country which is not a Party to the CBD.


Two Protocols have so far been adopted under the aegis of CBD: the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety (CPB) adopted in 2000, and the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit Sharing adopted in 2010.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biosafety_Clearing-House




19. Solution: d)

Fair wage is a mean between minimum wage and living wage. Living wage contains the cost of education, health etc. other than the minimum wage. So the correct hierarchy is minimum wage< Fair wage< Living wage.



20. Solution: a)

The work is implemented by the state bureaucracy. The work may occasionally be implemented by the local bodies if their own formulated works are being funded under the MPLADS. The works are recommended to the District magistrate as s/he is the highest authority in the district.




21. Solution: d)

http://pib.nic.in/feature/feyr2003/ffeb2003/f250220031.html

http://pib.nic.in/newsite/efeatures.aspx?relid=103462

Wetlands are areas of land where the water level remains near or above the surface
of the ground for most of the year. The wetlands cover about  6 per cent of the earth‘s land surface. There are several kinds of wetlands such as marshes, swamps, lagoons, bogs, fens and mangroves. They are home to some of the richest and most diverse and fragile of natural resources. As they support a variety of plant and animal life,
biologically they are one of the most productive systems in the world.




http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 7
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 10 - SOLUTIONS


Wetlands perform many useful functions. They help check floods, prevent coastal erosion and mitigate the effects of natural disasters like cyclones and tidal waves. They also store water for long periods. Many wading birds and water fowl like ergets, herons and ibises nest in wetlands. These areas also provide food and shelter for mammals such as mink, otters and swamp antelopes like sitatunga. They also act as natural filters and help remove a whole range of pollutants from water such as viruses from sewage works or heavy metals from industrial plants. In short, the terrestrial, marine and atmospheric eco systems interact in complex, dynamic and often unknown ways




22. Solution: b)

a scheme  named ―Eco-Development Forces‖ is being implemented by the Ministry
in collaboration with the Ministry of Defence. The ‗Eco-Development Forces‘ scheme aims at Ecological restoration of terrains rendered difficult either due to severe degradation or remote location or difficult law and order situation. The Scheme provides reimbursement of expenditure incurred to the Ministry of Defence towards overhead cost of Eco Development Force deployed at different strategic stations for Afforestation work and tree planting in remote areas through engagement of personnel from regular Army/Territorial Army and Ex-Servicemen personnel.




23. Solution: c)

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Central_Pollution_Control_Board




24. Solution: d)

India produces CFC-11, CFC-12, CFC-113, Halon-1211, HCFC-22, Halon-1301, Carbontetrachloride (CTC), methyl chloroform and methyl bromide. These Ozone Depleting Substances (ODS) are used in refrigeration and air conditioning, fire fighting, electronics, foams, aerosol fumigation applications.


The Ministry has set up the Ozone Cell as a national unit. It looks after and to render necessary services to implement the Protocol and its Ozone Depleting Substances (ODS) phase-out programme in India without undue burden on the consumers and industry.


India has taken a series of fiscal and regulatory measures to facilitate ODS phase-out


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 8
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 10 - SOLUTIONS


in the country. Under fiscal measures, Government has accorded customs and excise duty exemptions on goods required for ODS phase-out projects and new investment with non ODS technology. All financial institutions and commercial banks have been directed not to finance new establishment with ODS technology. Trade in ODS with non-Parties to the Protocol has been banned. All ODS have brought under the ambit of licensing for purpose of both imports and exports. Exports of CFCs to Non-Article five countries has also been banned.

http://pib.nic.in/newsite/erelease.aspx?relid=20730







25. Solution: b)

http://www.finmin.nic.in/




26. Solution: a)

The present corpus is Rs 500 Crores.




27. Solution: a)

The target was to provide electricity to all villages, not households. A village is deemed to be electrified if 10% of the households have electricity connection; and if all public places have electricity like panchayat building, public school etc. Refer to the targets set under the 12th FYP in Ramesh Singh Indian economy 5th edition pages
5.35-5.36.



28. Solution:  d)

Refer to the first generation reforms in the pages 6.11-6.12 of Ramesh Singh. Decentralizing economic planning was not a part of LPG reforms. It was more of a political reform and does not fit in the category of the LPG. In fact, the reform was brought after the 1991 reforms in 1993 when the 73rd and 74th amendment was enacted. Other measures of decentralization like NDC, Zonal Councils were established much earlier than the LPG reforms.








http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 9
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 10 - SOLUTIONS


29. Solution: a)

They are similar to carbon nanotubes.

http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/nextgeneration-batteries-from-rice- husk/article4785073.ece

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Silicon_nanotubes




30. Solution:  b)

If a court finds that a law seeks to give effect to a fundamental duty, it may save it from unconstitutionality even if it violates the Articles 14 and 19 of the constitution.




31. Solution: c)

Refer Page No. 311, India-2014




32. Solution: a)

Refer to page 5.23-24 of Ramesh Singh Indian economy for a detailed understanding. It is however important to understand that the multi-dimensional nature of poverty basically means that a person can be poor even if he gets sufficient amount of food daily. He may be deprived of education, health, sanitation, drinking water, housing etc. These need to be taken into account for determining whether a person is poor or not objectively.




33. Solution: a)

Under government route, proposals are received by the Department of Economic
Affairs, Ministry of Finance




34. Solution: c)

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Financial_Sector_Legislative_Reforms_Commission

http://www.thehindu.com/business/Industry/finance-ministry-seeks-comments-
on-fslrc-recommendations/article4788390.ece



http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 10
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 10 - SOLUTIONS





35. Solution: d)


There are five organizations in World Bank group


     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)
     International Development Association (IDA)
     International Finance Corporation (IFC)
     Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA)
     International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID)


India is member of all of them except ICSID


http://www.worldbank.org/en/about





36. Solution: c)


National Housing Bank (NHB), a wholly owned subsidiary of Reserve Bank of India (RBI), was set up by an Act of Parliament in 1987. NHB is an apex financial institution for housing. It commenced its operations in 9th July 1988. NHB has been established with an objective to operate as a principal agency to promote housing finance institutions both at local and regional levels and to provide financial and
other support incidental to such institutions and for matters connected therewith


NHB registers, regulates and supervises Housing Finance Company (HFCs), keeps surveillance through On-site & Off-site Mechanisms and co-ordinates with other
Regulators.





37. Solution: b)


Salient features of NIF:
(i) The proceeds from disinvestment of CPSEs will be channelised into the National Investment Fund which is to be maintained outside the Consolidated Fund of India

(ii) The corpus of the National Investment Fund will be of a permanent nature



http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 11
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 10 - SOLUTIONS


(iii) The Fund will be professionally managed to provide sustainable returns to the Government, without depleting the corpus. Selected Public Sector Mutual Funds will be entrusted with the management of the corpus of the Fund

(iv) 75% of the annual income of the Fund will be used to finance selected social sector schemes, which promote education, health and employment. The residual 25% of the annual income of the Fund will be used to meet
the capital investment requirements of profitable and revivable CPSEs that
yield adequate returns, in order to enlarge their capital base to finance
expansion/ diversification

The NIF corpus was thus managed by three Public Sector Fund Managers. The income from the NIF corpus investments was utilized on selected social sector schemes, namely the Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM), Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP), Rajiv Gandhi Gramin Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY), Accelerated Power Development and Reform Programme, Indira Awas Yojana and National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (NREGS).
On the 5th of November 2009, CCEA approved a change in the policy on utilization of disinvestment proceeds. In view of the difficult situation caused by the global slowdown of 2008-09 and a severe drought in 2009-10, a one-time exemption was accorded to disinvestment proceeds being deposited into NIF for investment; this exemption was to be operational for period April 2009-March 2012. All disinvestment proceeds obtained during the three year period were to be used for selected Social Sector Schemes allocated for by Planning Commission/ Department of Expenditure.


The three year exemption, mentioned above was extended by CCEA on 1st March
2012 by another year, i.e. from April 2012 – March 2013, in view of the persistent difficult condition of the economy. The utilization of disinvestment proceeds were thus continued for funding of Social Sector Schemes till 31st March, 2013.

http://www.divest.nic.in/Nat_inves_fund.asp


http://pib.nic.in/newsite/erelease.aspx?relid=6769



38. Solution: d)


Women‘s reservation bill would bring  major changes in the composition of the Parliament and would thus require a constitutional amendment. But Political parties are non-constitutional bodies. They can internally allocate 33% seats to women without the need for any such amendment. However, their party constitution may need to be amended.



http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 12
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 10 - SOLUTIONS


39. Solution: c)


Maharashtra is the leading producer of sugar in the country.


Karnataka produces highest sugar than Tamil Nadu in South India and is the third
largest producer in the country





40. Solution: b)


http://www.bis.org.in/other/rgnqa_geninfo.htm



41. Solution: a)

PRISM is a clandestine mass electronic surveillance data mining program launched
in 2007 by the National Security Agency (NSA), with participation from an unknown date by the British equivalent agency, GCHQ.[1][2][3] PRISM is a government code name for a data-collection effort known officially by the SIGAD US-984XN.[4][5] The Prism program collects stored Internet communications based on demands made to Internet companies such as Google Inc. under Section 702 of the FISA Amendments Act of 2008 to turn over any data that match court-approved search terms.[6] The
NSA can use these Prism requests to target communications that were encrypted when they traveled across the Internet backbone, to focus on stored data that telecommunication filtering systems discarded earlier,[7][8] and to get data that is easier to handle, among other things

The phone-records program was built upon a provision in the USA Patriot Act, passed a month after the attacks. But the explosion of information proved problematic, and in 2003 the government launched a $16 billion effort to find a way to manage such "big data.‘

NSA stumbled in a number of its data-collection and management efforts, particularly a program called Trailblazer, but it began to gain traction with another program, which became known as Real Time Regional Gateway, or RTRG.

For more:

http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424127887323495604578535290627442
964





http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 13
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 10 - SOLUTIONS


42. Solution: d)


Expansion in the SC‘s mandate requires only a simple majority while a reduction in mandate requires a special majority with the consent of states. Change can mean both.
The case of changing the procedure of Election of only President requires special majority with consent of the states, not Vice- President. For, the state assemblies are involved in electing the president unlike in the case of the vice-president.



43. Solution: d)


Refer Page No. 399-400, India-2014


http://203.193.146.66/hfw/NRHM_Initiatives.asp?GL=8





44. Solution: d)


http://pib.nic.in/newsite/erelease.aspx?relid=94813


For latest info: page no. 401, India-2014



45. Solution: d)

National Afforestation Programme (NAP) is the flagship scheme of National Afforestation & Eco-development Board (NAEB).  It provides support, both in physical and capacity building terms, to the Forest Development Agencies (FDAs) which in turn are the main organ to move forwards institutionalisation of implement Joint Forest Management.  The FDA has been conceived and installed as a federation of Joint Forest Management Committees (JFMCs) at the Forest Division level to undertake holistic development in the forestry sector with people‘s  participation. It allows greater participation of the community, both in planning and
implementation, to improve forests and livelihood of the people living in and around forest areas.  The village is reckoned as a unit of planning and implementation and all activities under the programme conceptualised at the village level.

http://www.rajforest.nic.in/fda

http://pib.nic.in/newsite/erelease.aspx?relid=18395



http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 14
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 10 - SOLUTIONS







46. Solution: d)


The prior permission of the President is required only in the case of money bills and other bills like the one which seeks to divide a state. It can be introduced in any house.



47. Solution: d)

JSK has introduced two unique strategies named “Prerna” and  “Santushti”.

―Prerna‖ Jansankhya Sthirata Kosh (National Population Stabilization Fund) is an autonomous body of the MoHFW, Govt. of India has launched PRERNA, a Responsible Parenthood Strategy in 2008 in seven focus states (Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya     Pradesh,     Chhattisgarh,     Jharkhand,     Odisha,     and     Rajasthan). The strategy recognizes and awards couples who have broken the stereotype of early marriage       and       early       childbirth       and       helped       change       mindsets. In this scheme, the girl should have bee n married after 19 years of age and given birth to the first child at least after 2 years of ma rriage. The couple will get award of Rs. 10000/- if it is Boy child or Rs. 12000/- if it is Girl child. ' If birth of second child is at least after 3 years of first child birth and either parent voluntarily accept permanent method of family planning within one year of the birth of the second child, couple will get additional Rs. 5000/- if boy child and Rs. 7000/- if girl child. The scheme is only for BPL families Click here for detailed note on Prerna.


―Santusht ‖ is a Scheme of Jansankhya Sthirata Kosh (JSK) for high populated states of India viz Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh & Odisha. Under this scheme, Jansankhya Sthirata Kosh, invites
private sector gynecologists and vasectomy surgeons to conduct operations in Public
Private Partnership mode.
According to this Scheme, an accredited private Nursing Home/ Hospital (Quality
assurance manual for Sterilization services), can sign a MOU with JSK. Upon signing the MOU Pvt. Hospitals/NH shall be entitled for incentive, whenever it conducts 10 or more Tubectomy/Vasectomy cases in a month



48.  Solution: c)

DPSP is not self-enforceable. It requires the parliament to make laws to implement them. They were inherited from the British Instrument of instructions given to the governors and governor-generals under the Government of India Act 1935.





http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 15
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 10 - SOLUTIONS


49. Solution: a)


Page no. 407, IYB 2014





50. Solution: c)


District Mental Health Program (DMHP) is an approach to decentralize mental health care in the community using the public health infrastructure and other resources. This model has been pilot tested in Bellary District of Karnataka State and found to be very useful to address the basic mental health needs of the population. This model has been implemented in all the states and currently there are 125 DMHP
sites in India.


http://mohfw.nic.in/WriteReadData/l892s/ComprehensiveReport%20Part%202-
83145794.pdf





51. Solution: b)


It is being implemented in only three districts i.e. Nagaon, Kamrup and K.Long in
Assam (according to IYB-2014, page no. 417)


But according to The Hindu news,


The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has initiated a National Programme for Prevention and Control of Fluorosis (NPPCF) in 100 districts of 17 affected-States during the XIth Five Year Plan. Through this programme, support is being provided at the district level for consultants, setting up of laboratory along with a technician, field investigators for six months to carry out surveys, analysis of water and urine samples and awareness programmes for management of identified cases. At least
230 districts in 19 States are affected by fluorosis.


For more:


http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/energy-and-environment/provide-safe-
drinking-water-to-prevent-fluorosis/article4881730.ece





http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 16
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 10 - SOLUTIONS




52. Solution: b)

Indian planning was inspired from soviet planning which commenced shortly after the Bolshevik revolution.  USA did not have any central planning. Also, in India and Soviet Union more emphasis was laid on heavy industry than light industry and consumer goods were treated as residual category.






53. Solution: b)
If targets that are set in a specific sector say roads are very less then it may
discourage private investment. For, in such economies private investment is attracted by public investment. If the latter goes down, the former also goes down. Or the government can place restrictions on the production of certain classes of
goods and services via a law or an executive order.




54. Solution: d)

http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/science/every-rose-has-its-thorn-not-this- one/article4810825.ece

http://www.ihbt.res.in/about.htm



55. Solution: a)

The systems approach to planning basically takes the local culture, language etc. into account. Doing so makes the plan socially acceptable as it will be in accordance with people‘s  habits  and attitudes. Hence  both statements are true. The planning in India is shifting to this mode of planning.




56. Solution: c)

While the Gandhian plan asked for self-government; cottage industries and decentralization of economic structure; the NPC plan asked for more centralization and the promotion of heavy industries. Gandhi thought that industrialization is a colonial legacy and will not solve the problem of poverty in India and will instead aggravate it. NPC holded a contrary view to this and thought that every problem of India can be solved by industrialization and modernization.




http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 17
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 10 - SOLUTIONS





57. Solution: b)

Besides the first two objectives of planning in India, self-reliance is another objective. While self-reliance does not mean negating foreign trade, boosting international
trade has never been any major objective of planning in India.




58. Solution: b)

The aims and objectives of the proposed National Green Tribunal are effective and expeditious disposal of cases relating to environmental protection and conservation of forests and other natural resources including enforcement of any legal right relating to environment and giving relief and compensation for damages to persons and property and for matter connected therewith or incidental thereto


The Tribunal shall have the jurisdiction over all civil cases where a substantial question relating to environment (including enforcement of any legal right relating to environment), is involved. There is also a bar on the civil courts to entertain such cases. The alternative remedy provided by the wide jurisdiction of the Tribunal will substantially reduce the burden of environmental litigations on the higher courts. The specialised Tribunal is expected to dispose of such cases expeditiously.


The jurisdiction of the Tribunal is limited to civil cases and the environmental disputes of criminal in nature shall continue to be adjudicated by the existing criminal courts. Criminal cases require a hierarchy of courts and other paraphernalia needed for criminal proceedings which does not gel with the architecture of a Tribunal.

For more info:

http://pib.nic.in/newsite/efeatures.aspx?relid=74764



59. Solution: b)

Planning Commission only monitors the implementation. It can at best send advisories to the ministries and not directions. Directions have the force of a rule. They can only be sent by higher authorities to the lower authorities. In between PC and the Ministries there is no lower or higher authority.





http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 18
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 10 - SOLUTIONS



60. Solution: c)

It is also a non-constitutional body but plays a very important role in planning and monitoring of the five year plans in India. It can review the working of the plans and suggest measures to improve the working of the plans too.
Please refer to page 5.15-5.16 in Ramesh Singh Indian economy 5th edition for a full
list of the functions of the NDC.



61. Solution: b)


http://nrhm.gov.in/communitisation/asha/about-asha.html


     Empowered with knowledge and a drug-kit to deliver first-contact healthcare, every ASHA is expected to be a fountainhead of community participation in public health programmes in her village.
     ASHA will be the first port of call for any health related demands of deprived sections of the population, especially women and children, who find it difficult to access health services.
     ASHA will be a health activist in the community who will create awareness on health and its social determinants and mobilise the community towards local health planning and increased utilisation and accountability of the existing health services.
     She would be a promoter of good health practices and will also provide a minimum package of curative care as appropriate and feasible for that level and make timely referrals.
     ASHA will provide information to the community on determinants of health such as nutrition, basic sanitation & hygienic practices, healthy living and working conditions, information on existing health services and the need for timely utilisation of health & family welfare services.
     She will counsel women on birth preparedness, importance of safe delivery, breast-feeding and complementary feeding, immunization, contraception and prevention of common infections including Reproductive Tract Infection/Sexually Transmitted Infections (RTIs/STIs) and care of the young child.
     ASHA will mobilise the community and facilitate them in accessing health and health related services available at the Anganwadi/sub-centre/primary
health centers, such as immunisation, Ante Natal Check-up (ANC), Post Natal




http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 19
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 10 - SOLUTIONS


Check-up supplementary nutrition, sanitation and other services being provided by the government.
     She will act as a depot older for essential provisions being made available to all habitations like Oral Rehydration Therapy (ORS), Iron Folic Acid Tablet(IFA), chloroquine, Disposable Delivery Kits (DDK), Oral Pills & Condoms, etc.
     At the village level it is recognised that ASHA cannot function without adequate institutional support. Women's committees (like self-help groups or women's health committees), village Health & Sanitation Committee of the Gram Panchayat, peripheral health workers especially ANMs and
Anganwadi workers, and the trainers of ASHA and in-service periodic
training would be a major source of support to ASHA.





62. Solution: d)

Foreign currency convertible bonds (FCCBs) are a special category of bonds. FCCBs are issued in currencies different from the issuing company's domestic currency. Corporates issue FCCBs to raise money in foreign currencies. These bonds retain all features of a convertible bond, making them very attractive to both the investors and the issuers.

These bonds assume great importance for multinational corporations and in the current business scenario of globalisation, where companies are constantly dealing in foreign currencies.

FCCBs are quasi-debt instruments and tradable on the stock exchange. Investors are hedge-fund arbitrators or foreign nationals.

FCCBs appear on the liabilities side of the issuing company's balance sheet. These types of bonds are attractive to both investors and issuers. The investors
receive the safety of guaranteed payments on the bond and are also able to take
advantage of any large price appreciation in the company's stock. (Bondholders take advantage of this appreciation by means warrants attached to the bonds, which are activated when the price of the stock reaches a certain point.) Due to the equity side of the bond, which adds value, the coupon payments on the bond are lower for the
company, thereby reducing its debt-financing costs.









http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 20
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 10 - SOLUTIONS


63. Solution: a)

Fiscal consolidation was a top priority from the ninth plan onwards which was also the period following the economic reforms five year plan.
Not only governance but also growth with quality was considered one of the very important factors of development from the tenth plan onwards.





64. Solution: d)

TPP includes – Poverty alleviation; employment generation in rural areas, health, housing, education and practically every aspect of welfare in India. It was formed in
1975. It was restructured in 1986. 119 items were grouped under 20 points and thus the programme was called TPP.




65.  Solution: b)

NDC takes the concern of states into account before finalizing the five year plans.
In MPLADS, local MPs recommend works based on locally felt needs to the District
Magistrate who then implements it.
In MGNREGA, at least 50% of the works are to be planned and executed by the
Panchayats. All of them show that economic planning in India has been decentralized to a certain extent if not fully.



66. Solution: d)

Protectionism is a strategy adopted by nations which means saving domestic industries from the tough competition posed by the large MNCs. It helps to generate local employment as imports are also discouraged. This pushes the opening of domestic industries.
Import substitution supplements Protectionism. It means meeting the demand of the same goods which were earlier imported, from the domestic industries.



67. Solution: a)

India is its important member. G-20 countries are also its members.

The Financial Stability Board (FSB) is an international body that monitors and makes recommendations about the global financial system. It was established after the 2009
G-20 London summit in April 2009 as a successor to the Financial Stability Forum.




http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 21
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 10 - SOLUTIONS


The Board includes all G-20 major economies, FSF members, and the European
Commission. It is based in Basel, Switzerland




68. Solution: d)

Opening up security markets for global investors would be a move towards globalization, not privatization. For detailed explanations of the rest, please refer to Ramesh Singh page 6.8-6.9 5th Edition.





69. Solution: a)

A HeLa cell, also Hela or hela cell, is a cell type in an immortal cell line used in scientific research. It is the oldest and most commonly used human cell line. The line was derived from cervical cancer cells taken on February 8, 1951, from Henrietta Lacks, a patient who eventually died of her cancer on October 4, 1951. The cell line was found to be remarkably durable and prolific as illustrated by its contamination of many other cell lines used in research

http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/controlled-access-to-hela-genome- sequence/article4999675.ece



70.  Solution: d)

Eliminating inter-state barriers would allow local produce to be sold at competitive prices across states. This would boost the income of those farmers whose produce is in excess supply as compared to local demand.
Contract farming would benefit some farmers by giving them modern technology and linkages to big markets.
Future trade in commodities ensures that the produce of the farmers are to be
purchased or traded for sure in the commodity market. If there is little futures trade
and the produce of the farmer is not sold in the markets, he may suffer financially. Refer to pages 5.33-5.34 in Ramesh Singh.




71. Solution: d)

Every move that empowers the common citizen can be termed as one being a governance reform. Governance is more about service delivery to the citizen and less about a centralized government which unmindfully applies rules.
Involving civil society would make the laws more just and sensible.

http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 22
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 10 - SOLUTIONS


Use of IT would improve service delivery.
PRI would better the planning and implementation process in India.
Reforming the justice system is essential to maintaining the rule of law which in turn promotes economic growth.




72. Solution: b)

DPSP is fundamental to the governance of the nation, not fundamental rights as the vision of the nation is embodied in DPSP. Panchayat samitis at the block level are local bodies under the 73rd amendment to the Indian constitution, and are therefore covered under the definition of ‗State‘ under Article 12 of the constitution. The
‗State‘ is supposed to implement the DPSP.





73.  Solution: d)

Laws and rules will not be termed void by the SC if they intend to implement some of the directive principles even if they violate the FRs under Article 14 and 19. Judicial review is a basic feature. Any law can be questioned.




74. Solution: c)

All others except providing legal aid to the poor are either Gandhian or Liberal- Intellectual principles. You can refer to the chapter DPSP in Laxmikanth page 8.2  of
3rd edition Indian Polity.



75. Solution: a)

The  National Forest  Policy  1988 aims  for 33% of the  country‘s geographical area under the forest cover for ecological and environmental security. While aiming to expand the forest cover in the country, it is equally important to improve the state and quality of existing forests and protect them against various threats and drivers of  degradation.  The  threats  to  forests  include  encroachments,  forest  fires,  illicit felling for timber and firewood, grazing, diseases and incursion of weeds and other invasive species, etc. The staffs also face threats of illegal felling of trees from organized forest smugglers / timber mafia and encroachments form land mafia.

With a view to minimizing fire hazards and controlling forest fires a Centrally
Sponsored Scheme  ―Integrated Forest  Protection Scheme‖ was  launched during the
10th plan period. In 2009, the Integrated Forest protection Scheme (IFPS) has been
revised and  renamed ―Intensification  of Forest  Management Scheme‖ (IFMS). The


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 23
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 10 - SOLUTIONS


components of the scheme included forest fire control and management, survey, demarcation and preparation of working plans, strengthening of infrastructure such as roads, camp offices, watch towers, improved mobility, providing fire arms and use of modern information and communication technology etc.




76. Solution: c)

The vision of secularism although explicitly mentioned only after 42nd amendment, was ensured through the provision of a uniform civil code. It basically means having the same set of laws for every religion. It was provided for in the unamended constitution.



77. Solution: d)

Jansankhya Sthirata Kosh(JSK) has been registered as an autonomous society of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Government has provided a Rs100 crore Corpus fund to signify its commitment to the activities of the Kosh. JSK has to use
the interest on the Corpus and also raise contributions from organisations and
individuals that support population stabilisation.

JSK has been promoting a drive for membership from among experts in population studies and allied sectors, medical associations, associations of Industry and Trade, banks, NGOs, paramedics and general citizens. The main aim is to bring the need for population stabilisation into focus. The work is being undertaken according to decisions taken by Governing Board which has a blend of both government and non- government members with the governing members acting as umpires and
facilitators.

The JSK's Annual Report and Accounts are tabled in Parliament and its accounts can be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.




78. Solution:  a)

Statement 1 is true subsequent to the judgment of the SC in the Minerva Mills case (1980). It has not been mentioned in the constitution and this is why the court was moved in the first place to ascertain the status of DPSP vs FRs.



79. Solution: b)


http://pib.nic.in/newsite/erelease.aspx?relid=13971


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 24
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 10 - SOLUTIONS


http://www.seruminstitute.com/content/products/product_hepatitis.htm


Page no. 411, IYB – 2014



80. Solution: b)

PC is a non-constitutional non-statutory body. Despite that due to the presence of the Pm and other cabinet ministers, it has executive powers. Ironically it is not accountable to the Indian Parliament but Finance commission is. However, the plans prepared by the commission are vetted by the Parliament and the National Development Council (NDC).




81. Solution: b)

The slaughter of cows is permitted in states like Kerala and prohibited in states like U.P. It depends on state legislation as animal husbandry comes under the state list and not under the Centre list. However, it must be remembered that even the state legislatures have a moral obligation to fulfill this DPSP.




82.  Solution: d)

One of our fundamental duties ask us to develop scientific temper and develop a spirit of enquiry. It means rejecting all that is not based on reason and enquiry including superstitious beliefs. Scientific temper does not only mean appreciating science and engaging in science related activities, but also living rationally.
There is no such duty to pay taxes. It however is a punishable offence not to pay
taxes.




83.  Solution: b)

The Maharashtra Black magic act, 2013 seeks to promote scientific temper in the citizens of Maharashtra. It was enacted after the killing of the anti-superstition activist Narendra Dabholkar last year in 2013.
Lokpal and lokayuktas act strives to eliminate corruption from India. Preventing
corruption is not any of our fundamental duties.








http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 25
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 10 - SOLUTIONS


84.  Solution: c)


A constitutional amendment bill in this case can only be passed with both a 2/3rd majority of members present and voting and an majority of the total membership in the Parliament which is 545.
In case 1 – 173 members, the condition of absolute majority can not be fulfilled.
In case 3 – 50 members, the quorum is not fulfilled. The house would not even proceed.


85. Solution: d)


NSSK is a programme aimed to train health personnel in basic newborn care and resuscitation, has been launched to address care at birth issues i.e. Prevention of Hypothermia, Prevention of Infection, Early initiation of Breast feeding and Basic Newborn Resuscitation. Newborn care and resuscitation is an important starting- point for any neonatal program and is required to ensure the best possible start in life. The objective of this new initiative is to have a trained health personal in Basic newborn care and resuscitation at every delivery point. The training is for 2 days and is expected to reduce neonatal mortality significantly in the country.
http://nrhm.gov.in/nrhm-components/rmnch-a/child-health- immunization/child-health/schemes.html





86. Solution: c)


The President must give assent to such a bill. He cannot withhold assent or return the bill for reconsideration. Besides, there is no provision of a joint sitting of both the houses.





87. Solution: d)


The basic structure of the constitution contains these, amongst others: Welfare state; Separation of powers; Supremacy of the constitution. All these three cases try to disturb the basic structure. Thus they can be termed void by the Supreme Court.





88. Solution: c)

The USA being a truly federal nation gives power to its states to initiate amendments to the constitution. It is not the case in India which is a qausi-federal nation. For
more information refer to page no. 10.5 in Laxmikanth Indian Polity 3rd edition.



http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 26
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 10 - SOLUTIONS





89. Solution: a)

In the recent judgements of the Supreme Court, Articles 32, 136, 141 and 142 have come out to be a part of the basic structure. Article 136 refers to the provision of special leave to appeals by the SC.

Article 141 refers to the laws declared by the SC to be binding on the courts in India. Article 142 refers to the enforcement of decrees and orders of the SC etc.




90. Solution: c)

Ensuring socio-economic justice is one of the goals of the DPSP. Decentralization of planning would encourage self-government in local bodies.






91. Solution: c)

Refer to page 8.9 Laxmikanth Indian Polity 3rd edition for details. These are non- justiciable directives outside part IV of the constitution.



92. Solution: c)

The reforms were not based on a political consensus earlier but now they have come to be. It was initially forced by the IMF on India for helping it in a BoP crisis. However, with the economic progress that India has seen in the past two decades, every political party seems to favour these reforms.






93. Solution: c)

There is no such term either mentioned or defined in the constitution as ethnic minorities even though the constitution does not permit discrimination based on race.





94. Solution: d)


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 27
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 10 - SOLUTIONS



Agriculture was stressed in the first plan. And subsequently industry was stressed on heavily. Only after 2002 the PC declared agriculture to be the prime mover of the economy and since then every plan lays heavy emphasis on agriculture.




95. Solution: b)

The National Rural Employment Programme (NREP) – 1980; The Rural landless Employment guarantee programme (RLEGP) – 1983; Self- Employment to Educated Unemployed Youth Programme etc. were launched during the sixth plan.
The approach before this plan of the GoI was to make the growth trickle down by more and more economic growth.




96. Solution: b)

The composition of the NDC is: PM, all cabinet ministers, members of the PC, chief ministers of the states and administrators of the UTs.





97. Solution: d)

http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/of-birdsong-and-baby- babble/article4785070.ece




98. Solution: d)

Article 113 of the Constitution mandates that the estimates of expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India included in the Annual Financial Statement and required to be voted by the Lok Sabha are submitted in the form of Demands for Grants. The Demands for Grants are presented to the Lok Sabha along with the Annual Financial Statement. Generally, one Demand for Grant is presented in respect of each Ministry or Department. However, in respect of large Ministries or Departments more than one Demand is presented. In regard
to Union Territories without Legislature, a separate Demand is presented for each of the Union Territories . In budget 2013-14 there are 106 Demands for Grants. Each Demand first gives the totals of 'voted' and 'charged' expenditure as also the
'revenue' and 'capital' expenditure included in the Demand separately and also the
grand total of the amount of expenditure for which the Demand is presented. This is


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 28
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 10 - SOLUTIONS


followed by the estimates of expenditure under different major heads of account. The breakup of the expenditure under each major head between 'Plan' and 'Non- Plan' is also given. The amounts of recoveries taken in reduction of expenditure in the accounts are also shown. A summary of Demands for Grants is given at the beginning of this document, while details of 'New Service' or 'New Instrument of Service' such as, formation of a new company, undertaking or a new scheme, etc., if any, are indicated at the end of the document.

http://164.100.47.132/LssNew/abstract/process.htm




99.  Solution: a)

Although the constitution does not define revenue and capita related matters, the job of finance commission is restricted. The capital related issues of the states are taken care of by the Planning Commission which is seen to eclipse the role of a constitutional body FC.
The FRBM Act does restrict the fiscal deficit of states by giving them a direction. But,
it gives them further freedom to borrow from the markets in case they have enacted
their own fiscal responsibility legislations. They can thus fulfill their plan expenditure.





100.           Solution: d)

The new Companies Act (hereinafter referred as CA2013) is replacing old Companies Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred as CA1956). The CA2013 makes comprehensive provisions to govern all listed and unlisted companies in the country. The CA2013 is partially made effective w.e.f. 12th September, 2013, by way of implementing 98 Sections and repealing the relevant sections corresponded with CA1956. Some of the Salient features of the CA2013 are as under:

1.   Democracy of Shareholders: The CA2013 has introduced new concept of class action suits with a view of making shareholders and other stakeholders, more informed and knowledgeable about their rights.
2.   Supremacy of Shareholders: The CA2013 focused and provide major aspect on approvals from shareholders on various significant transactions. The Government has rightly reduced the need for the companies to seek
approvals to managerial remuneration and the shareholders have been vested with the power to sanction the limit.
3.   Strengthening Women Contributions through Board Room: The CA2013 stipulates appointment of at least one woman Director on the Board of the
prescribed class of Companies so as to widen the talent pool enabling big
Corporates to benefit from diversified backgrounds with different viewpoints.

http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 29
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 10 - SOLUTIONS


4.   Corporate Social Responsibility: The CA2013 stipulates certain class of Companies to spend a certain amount of money every year on activities/initiatives reflecting Corporate Social Responsibility.  There may be difficulties in implementing in the initial years but this measure would help in improving the Under-privileged & backward sections of Society and the Corporate would in fact gain in terms of their reputation and image in the Society.
5.   National Company Law Tribunal: The CA2013 introduced National Company
Law Tribunal and the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal to replace the Company Law Board and Board for Industrial and Financial
Reconstruction. They would relieve the Courts of their burden while simultaneously providing specialized justice.
6.   Fast Track Mergers: The CA2013 proposes a fast track and simplified procedure for mergers and amalgamations of certain class of companies such as holding and subsidiary, and small companies after obtaining approval of the Indian government.
7.   Cross Border Mergers: The CA2013 permits cross border mergers, both ways;
a foreign company merging with an India Company and vice versa but with prior permission of RBI.
8.   Prohibition on forward dealings and insider trading: The CA2013 prohibits directors and key managerial personnel from purchasing call and put options
of shares of the company, its holding company and its subsidiary and associate companies as if such person is reasonably expected to have access to price-sensitive information (being information which, if published, is likely to affect the price of the company's securities).  Earlier these provisions were contained in regulations framed by SEBI, as the capital market regulator. Now, it has also been informed that SEBI is expected to discuss changes in certain norms for listed firms so as to make them in line with the rules in the new Act.
9.   Increase in number of Shareholders: The CA 2013 increased the number of maximum shareholders in a private company from 50 to 200.
10. Limit on Maximum Partners: The maximum number of persons/partners in
any association/partnership may be upto such number as may be prescribed but not exceeding one hundred. This restriction will not apply to an association or partnership, constituted by professionals like lawyer, chartered accountants, company secretaries, etc. who are governed by their special laws. Under the CA1956, there was a limit of maximum 20 persons/partners and there was no exemption granted to the professionals.
11. One Person Company: The CA2013 provides new form of private company, i.e., one person company is introduced that may have only one director and
one shareholder. The CA1956 requires minimum two shareholders and two directors in case of a private company.
12. Entrenchment in Articles of Association: The CA2013 provides for
entrenchment of articles of association have been introduced.
13. Electronic Mode: The CA2013 proposed E-Governance for various company processes like maintenance and inspection of documents in electronic form,


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 30
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 10 - SOLUTIONS


option of keeping of books of accounts in electronic form, financial statements to be placed on company's website, etc.
14. Restriction on Composition: Every company shall have at least one director who has stayed in India for a total period of not less than 182 (one hundred and eighty two) days in the previous calendar year.
15. Independent Directors: The CA2013 provides that all listed companies should have at least one-third of the Board as independent directors. Such other class or classes of public companies as may be prescribed by the Central Government shall also be required to appoint independent directors. No independent director shall hold office for more than two consecutive terms of five years.
16. Serving Notice of Board Meeting: The CA2013 requires at least seven days'
notice to call a board meeting. The notice may be sent by electronic means to every director at his address registered with the company. The CA1956 did not prescribe any notice period to call the board meeting of a company.
17. Duties of Director defined: Under the CA1956, a director had fiduciary duties
towards a company. However, the CA2013 has NOW defined the duties of a
director.
18. Liability on Directors and Officers: The CA2013 does not restrict an Indian company from indemnifying its directors and officers like the CA1956.
19. Rotation of Auditors: The CA2013 provides for rotation of auditors and audit
firms in case of publicly traded companies.
20. Auditors performing Non-Audit Services: The CA2013 prohibits Auditors from performing non-audit services to the company where they are auditor to
ensure independence and accountability of auditor.
21. Financial Year: Every company's financial year will be the period ending on
31 March every year.
22. Rehabilitation and Liquidation Process: The entire rehabilitation and liquidation process of the companies in financial crisis has been made time bound under CA2013.


























http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 31
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 10 - SOLUTIONS









































































http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 32
