                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    




Q. No.            Solution        Q. No.            Solution        Q. No.            Solution        Q. No.            Solution
1                  A                 26                A                 51                A                 76                C
2                  A                 27                D                 52                A                 77                D
3                  B                  28                D                 53                B                  78                C
4                  D                 29                C                  54                C                  79                A
5                  B                  30                D                 55                D                 80                D
6                  D                 31                D                 56                C                  81                D
7                  A                 32                D                 57                D                 82                A
8                  A                 33                C                  58                D                 83                B
9                  B                  34                C                  59                A                 84                A
10                D                 35                D                 60                B                  85                A
11                A                 36                D                 61                A                 86                D
12                A                 37                C                  62                D                 87                A
13                A                 38                D                 63                D                 88                D
14                D                 39                D                 64                C                  89                D
15                C                  40                C                  65                B                  90                D
16                C                  41                D                 66                A                 91                A
17                A                 42                D                 67                A                 92                C
18                d                  43                D                 68                B                  93                A
19                D                 44                A                 69                B                  94                D
20                C                  45                A                 70                A                 95                D
21                A                 46                D                 71                D                 96                A
22                D                 47                B                  72                D                 97                B
23                D                 48                A                 73                C                  98                B
24                C                  49                A                 74                A                 99                D
25                D                 50                D                 75                A                 100              C






1.   Solution: a)

The Constitution does not contain any specific procedure for the selection and appointment of the Chief Minister. Article 164 only says that the Chief Minister shall be appointed by the governor. However, this does not imply that the governor is free to appoint any one as the Chief Minister. In accordance with the convections of the parliamentary system of government, the governor has to appoint the leader of the majority party in the state legislative assembly as the Chief Minister.

The same goes for the PM. Governor‘s  appointment and selection too is not  detailed
in the constitution.




2.   Solution: a)



http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 1
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    


A person who is not a member of the state legislature can be appointed as Chief Minister for six months, within which time, he should be elected to the state legislature, failing which he ceases to be the Chief Minister. According to the Constitution, the Chief Minister may be a member of any of the two Houses of a state legislature. Usually Chief Ministers have been selected from the Lower House (legislative assembly), but, on a number of occasions, a member of the Upper House (legislative council) has also been appointed as Chief Minister.

The term of the Chief Minister is not fixed and he holds office during the pleasure of the governor. However, this does not mean that the governor can dismiss him at any time. He cannot be dismissed by the governor as long as he enjoys the majority support in the legislative assembly.6 But, if he loses the confidence of the assembly, he must resign or the governor can dismiss him.




3.   Solution: b)

The Chief Minister enjoys the following powers in relation to the governor:

    He is the principal channel of communication between the governor and the council of ministers. It is the duty of the Chief Minister:
    to communicate to the Governor of the state all decisions of the council of ministers relating to the administration of the affairs of the state and proposals for legislation;
    to furnish such information relating to the administration of the affairs of the state and proposals for legislation as the governor may call for; and
    if the governor so requires, to submit for the consideration of the council of ministers any matter on which a decision has been taken by a minister but which has not been considered by the council.
    He advises the governor with regard to the appointment of important officials like advocate general, chairman and members of the state public service commission, state election commissioner, and so on.




4.   Solution: d)
    He is a member of the Inter-State Council and the National Development
Council, both headed by the prime minister.
    He acts as a vice-chairman of the concerned zonal council by rotation, holding office for a period of one year at a time.
    The CM is the chairman of the State Planning Board.
    He is the chief spokesman of the state government.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 2
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    


    He is the crisis manager-in-chief at the political level during emergencies.
    As a leader of the state, he meets various sections of the people and receives memoranda from them regarding their problems, and so on.
    He is the political head of the services.







5.   Solution: b)

The Akali Movement developed on a purely religious issue but ended up as a powerful episode of India‘s freedom struggle. From  1920 to 1925 more than 30,000 men and women underwent imprisonment, nearly 400 died and over 2,0 00 were wounded. The movement arose with the objective of freeing the Gurdwaras (Sikh temples) from the control of ignorant and corrupt mahants (priests).

To control and manage the Golden Temple, the Akal Takht and other Gurdwaras, a representative assembly of nearly 10,000 reformers met in November 1920 and elected a committee of 175 to be known as the Shiromani Gurdwara Prabhandak Committee (SGPC). At the same time, the need was felt for a central body which would organize the struggle on a more systematic basis. The Shiromani Akali Dal was established in December for this purpose. It was to be the chief organizer of the Akali jathos whose backbone was provided by Jat peasantry while their leadership was in the hands of the nationalist intellectuals. Under the influence of the contemporary Non-Cooperation  Movement — and many of the leaders were common to both the movements — the Akali Dal and the SGPC accepted complete non-violence as their creed.




6.   Solution: d)

Article 164:

    The Chief Minister shall be appointed by the governor and other ministers shall be appointed by the governor on the advise of the Chief Minister;
    The ministers shall hold office during the pleasure of the governor; and
    The council of ministers shall be collectively responsible to the legi slative assembly of the state.

Article 167: It shall be the duty of the Chief Minister:






http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 3
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    


    to communicate to the governor of the state all decisions of the council of ministers relating to the administration of the affairs of the state and proposals for legislation;
    to furnish such information relating to the administration of the affairs of the state and proposals for legislation as the governor may call for ; and
    if the governor so requires, to submit for the consideration of the council of
ministers any matter on which a decision has been taken by a minister but which has not been considered by the council.




7.   Solution: a)

If any  question arises whether a matter falls within the governor‘s discretion or not, the decision of the governor is final and the validity of anything done by him cannot be called in question on the ground that he ought or ought not to have acted in his discretion. Further, the nature of advice tendered by ministers to the governor
cannot be enquired by any court. This provision emphasises the intimate and the
confidential relationship between the governor and the ministers.

In 1971, the Supreme Court ruled that a council of ministers must always exist to advise the governor, even after the dissolution of the state legislative assembly or resignation of a council of ministers.




8.   Solution: a)

Such a specific resolution must be passed by the state assembly by a special majority, that is, a majority of the total membership of the assembly and a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of the assembly present and voting. This Act of Parliament is not to be deemed as an amendment of the Constitution for the
purposes of Article 368 and is passed like an ordinary piece of legisla tion (i.e, by simple majority)




9.   Solution: b)

Like at the Centre, in the states too, the council of ministers consists of three categories of ministers, namely, cabinet ministers, ministers of state, and deputy ministers. The difference between them lies in their respective ranks, emoluments, and political importance. At the top of all these ministers stands the chief minister—
supreme governing authority in the state.



http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 4
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    


The Constitution does not specify the size of the state council of ministers or the ranking of ministers. They are determined by the chief minister according to the exigencies of the time and requirements of the situation.




10. Solution: d)

Unlike the members of the legislative assembly, the members of the legislative council are indirectly elected. The maximum strength of the council is fixed at one - third of the total strength of the assembly and the minimum strength is fixed at 406. It means that the size of the council depends on the size of the assembly of the concerned state. This is done to ensure the predominance of the directly elected House (assembly) in the legislative affairs of the state. Though the Constitution has fixed the maximum and the minimum limits, the actual strength of a Council is fixed by Parliament.




11. Solution: a)

A major victory was  won  by the Akalis in the Keys Affair‘ in October 1921 . The Government made an effort to keep possession of the keys of the Toshakhana of the Golden Temple. The Akalis immediately reacted, and organized massive protest meetings; tens of Akali jathas reached Amritsar immediately. The SGPC advised Sikhs to join the hartal on the day of the arrival of the Prince of Wales in India. The Government retaliated by arresting the prominent, militant nationalist leaders of the SGPC like Baba Kharak Singh and Master Tara Singh. But, instead of dying down, the movement began to spread to the remotest rural areas and the army. The Non- Cooperation Movement was at its height in the rest of the country. The Government once again decided not to confront Sikhs on a religious issue. It released all those arrested in the ‗Keys Affair‘ and surrendered the keys of the Toshakhana to Baba Kharak Singh, head of the SGPC. Mahatma Gandhi immediately sent a telegram to the Baba: ‗First battle for India‘s freedom won. Congratulations.‘







12. Solution: a)

Of the total number of members of a legislative council:

    1/3 are elected by the members of local bodies in the state like municipalities, district boards, etc.,


http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 5
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    


    1/12 are elected by graduates of three years standing and residing within the state,
    1/12 are elected by teachers of three years standing in the state, not lower in standard than secondary school,
    1/3 are elected by the members of the legislative assembly of the state from amongst persons who are not members of the assembly, and
    the remainder are nominated by the gover-nor from amongst persons who have a special knowledge or practical experience of literature, science, art, cooperative movement and social service.

Thus, 5/6 of the total number of members of a legislative council are indirectly elected and 1/6 are nominated by the governor. The members are elected in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of a single transferable vote.




13. Solution: a)

The Chairman is elected by the council itself from amongst its members.

As a presiding officer, the powers and functions of the Chairman in the council are similar to those of the Speaker in the assembly. However, the Speaker has one
special power which is not enjoyed by the Chairman. The Speaker decides whether a bill is a Money Bill or not and his decision on this question is final.




14. Solution: d)

The legislative council, being a permanent house, is not subject to dissolution. Only the legislative assembly is subject to dissolution. Un-like a prorogation, a dissolution ends the very life of the existing House, and a new House is constituted after the general elections are held. The position with respect to lapsing of bills on the dissolution of the assembly is mentioned below:

    A Bill pending in the assembly lapses (whether originating in the assembly or transmitted to it by the council).
    A Bill passed by the assembly but pending in the council lapses.
    A Bill pending in the council but not passed by the assembly does not lapse.
    A Bill passed by the assembly (in a unicameral state) or passed by both the houses (in a bicameral state) but pending assent of the governor or the
President does not lapse.



http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 6
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    


    A Bill passed by the assembly (in a unicameral state) or passed by both the Houses (in a bicameral state) but returned by the president for reconsideration of House (s) does not lapse.




15. Solution: c)

If the council passes the bill without amendments or the assembly accepts the amendments suggested by the council, the bill is deemed to have been passed by both the Houses and the same is sent to the the governor for his assent. On the other hand, if the assembly rejects the amendments suggested by the council or the council rejects the bill altogether or the council does not take any action for three months, then the assembly may pass the bill again and transmit the same to the counci l. If the council rejects the bill again or passes the bill with amendments not acceptable to the assembly or does not pass the bill within one month, then the bill is deemed to have been passed by both the Houses in the form in which it was passed by the assembly for the second time.

Therefore, the ultimate power of passing an ordinary bill is vested in the assembly. At the most, the council can detain or delay the bill for a period of four months — three months in the first instance and one month in the second instance.




16. Solution: c)

Both are correct:

The Kerala Provincial Congress Committee (KPCC) took up the eradication of untouchability as an urgent issue While carrying on a massive propaganda
campaign against untouchability and for the educational and social upliftment of the
Harijans, it was decided to launch an immediate movement to open Hindu temples and all public roads to the avarnas or Harijans. This, it was felt, would give a decisive blow to the notion of untouchability since it was basically reli gious in character and the avarnas‘ exclusion from  the temples was  symbolic of their degradation and oppression. A beginning was made in Vaikom, a village in Travancore. There was a major temple there whose four walls were surrounded by temple roads which could not be used by avarnas like Ezhavas and Pulayas. The KPCC decided to use the recently acquired weapon of Satyagraha to fight unouchability and to make a beginning at Vaikom by defying the unapproachability rule by leading a procession of savarnas (caste Hindus) and avarnas on the temple
roads on 30 March 1924.



http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 7
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    


E.V. Ramaswami Naicker (popularly known as Periyar later) led ajatha from
Madurai and underwent imprisonment




17. Solution: a)

The Constitution lays down a special procedure for the passing of Money Bills in the state legislature.

A Money Bill cannot be introduced in the legislative council. It can be introduced in the legislative assembly only and that too on the recommendation of the governor. Every such bill is considered to be a government bill and can be introduced only by a minister.

After a Money Bill is passed by the legislative assembly, it is transmitted to the legislative council for its consideration. The legislative council has restricted powers with regard to a Money Bill. It cannot reject or amend a Money Bill. It can only make recommendations and must return the bill to the legislative assembly within 14 days. The legislative assembly can either accept or reject all or any of the recommendations of the legislative council.

If the legislative assembly accepts any recommendation, the bill is then deemed to have been passed by both the Houses in the modified form. If the legislative assembly does not accept any recommendation,  the bill is then deemed to have been passed by both the Houses in the form originally passed by the legislative assembly without any change.

Finally, when a Money Bill is presented to the governor, he may either give his assent, withhold his assent or reserve the bill for presidential assent but cannot return the bill for reconsideration of the state legislature. Normally, the governor gives his assent to a money bill as it is introduced in the state legislature with his prior permission.

When a money bill is reserved for consideration of the President, the president ma y either give his assent to the bill or withhold his assent to the bill but cannot return the bill for reconsideration of the state legislature.




18. Solution: d)

In the following matters, the powers and status of the council are broadly equal to
that of the assembly:



http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 8
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    


    Introduction and passage of ordinary bills. However, in case of disagreement between the two Houses, the will of the assembly prevails over that of the council.
    Approval of ordinances issued by the governor.
    Selection of ministers including the chief minister. Under the Constitution the, ministers including the chief minister can be members of either House of the state legislature. However, irrespective of their membership, they are responsible only to the assembly.
    Consideration of the reports of the constitutional bodies like State Finance Commission, state public service commission and Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
    Enlargement of the jurisdiction of the state public service commission.




19. Solution: d)

Every high court (whether exclusive or common) consists of a chief justice and such other judges as the president may from time to time deem necessary to appoint. Thus, the Constitution does not specify the strength of a high court and leaves it to the discretion of the president. Accordingly, the President determines the strength of a high court from time to time depending upon its workload.

The judges of a high court are appointed by the President. The chief justice is appointed by the President after consultation with the chief justice of India and the governor of the state concerned.

A judge of a high court can be removed from his office by an order of the President. The President can issue the removal order only after an address by the Parliament has been presented to him in the same session for such removal.




20. Solution: c)

Expenses are charged on Consolidated fund of the State (not India).

The judges of a high court are provided with the security of tenure. They can be removed from office by the president only in the manner and on the grounds mentioned in the Constitution. This means that they do not hold their office during the pleasure of the president, though they are appointed by him. This is obvious
from the fact that no judge of a high court has been removed (or impeached) so far.





http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 9
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    


The salaries and allowances of the judges, the salaries, allowances and pensions of the staff as well as the administrative expenses of a high court are charged on the consolidated fund of the state. Thus, they are non-votable by the state legislature (though they can be discussed by it). It should be noted here that the pension of a high court judge is charged on the Consolidated Fund of India and not the state.

The Constitution prohibits any discussion in Parliament or in a state legislature with respect to the conduct of the judges of a high court in the discharge of their duties, except when an impeachment motion is under consideration of the Parliament.




21. Solution: a)

Original Jurisdiction - The power of a high court to hear disputes in the first instance, not by way of appeal. It extends to the following:

    Matters of admirality, will, marriage, divorce, company laws and contempt of court.
    Disputes relating to the election of members of Parliament and state legislatures.
    Regarding revenue matter or an act ordered or done in revenue collection.
    Enforcement of fundamental rights of citizens.
    Cases ordered to be transferred from a subordinate court involving the interpretation of the Constitution to its own file.

Article 226 of the Constitution empowers a high court to issue writs including habeas corpus, mandamus, certiorari, prohibition and quo-warrento for the enforcement of the fundamental rights of the citizens and for any other purpose.

A high court has the power of superintendence over all courts and tribunals functioning in its territorial jurisdiction (except military courts or tribunals).




22. Solution: d)

As per Article 129 and 215 of the Constitution, the SC and HCs will be courts of record.

It means that their judgement is basically a legal precedent before other courts. The subordinate courts can cite and use these precedents in their judgements.

Moreover, as a court of record, a HC also has power to punish for contempt.




http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 10
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    


23. Solution: d)

Judicial review is the power of a high court to examine the constitutionality of legislative enactments and executive orders of both the Central and state governments. On examination, if they are found to be violative of the Constitution (ultra-vires), they can be declared as illegal, unconstitutional and invalid (null and void) by the high court. Consequently, they cannot be enforced by the government.

Though the phrase ‗judicial review‘ has no where been  used in the Constitution, the provisions of Articles 13 and 226 explicitly confer the power of judicial review on a high court. The constitutional validity of a legislative enactment or an executive order can be challenged in a high court on the following three grounds:

    it infringes the fundamental rights (Part III),
    it is outside the competence of the authority which has framed it, and
    it is repugnant to the constitutional provisions.




24. Solution: c)

The main weakness of the temple entry movement and the Gandhian or nationalist approach in fighting caste oppression was that even while amusing the people against untouchability they lacked a strategy for ending the caste system itself. The strength of the national movement in this respect was to find expression in the Constitution of independent India which abolished caste inequality, outlawed untouchability and guaranteed social equality to all citizens irrespective of their caste. Its weakness has found expression in the growth of casteism and the continuous existence in practice of oppression and discrimination against the lower castes in post-1947 India.




25. Solution: d)

The state judiciary consists of a high court and a hierarchy of subordinate courts, also known as lower courts. The subordinate courts are so called because of their subordination to the state high court. They function below and under the high court at district and lower levels.

Articles 233 to 237 in Part VI of the Constitution make the following provisions to regulate the organization of subordinate courts and to ensure their independence
from the executive.




http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 11
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    


26. Solution: a)

The appointment, posting and promotion of district judges in a state are made by the governor of the state in consultation with the high court.

A person to be appointed as district judge should have the following qualifications:

    He should not already be in the service of the Central or the state government.
    He should have been an advocate or a pleader for seven years.
    He should be recommended by the high court for appointment.

Appointment of persons (other than district judges) to the judicial service of a state are made by the governor of the state after consultation with the State Public Service Commission and the high court.




27. Solution: d)

Under Article 1 of the Indian Constitution, the State of Jammu and Kashmir (J&K) is a constituent state of Indian Union and its territory forms a part of the territory of India. On the other hand, Article 370 in Part XXI of the Constitution grants a special status to it.

Accordingly, all the provisions of the Constitution of India do not apply to it. It is also the only state in the Indian Union which has its own separate state Constitution—the  Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir.

For details go to Chapter 32 of Laxmikanth – Indian Polity. It will not be possible to list all the provisions.






28. Solution: d)

Explanation:

The post office offers a number of savings plans, including National Savings Certificates, the Public Provident Fund, Recurring Deposit account (RD), savings - bank accounts, monthly-income plans, senior-citizens' savings plans and time-
deposit accounts.







http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 12
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    


29. Solution: c)

Explanation:

National e-Governance Plan (NeGP) was initiated to make all government services available to the citizens of India via electronic media. NeGP has been formulated by the Department of Electronics and Information Technology (DeitY) and Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances (DARPG). The Government approved the National e-Governance Plan, comprising 31 Mission Mode Projects (MMPs) and eight components, on May 18, 2006.




30. Solution: d)

Explanation:

In order to utilise and harness the benefits of Cloud Computing, Government of India has embarked upon a very ambitious and important initiative – ―GI Cloud‖ which has been  coined as ‗Meghraj‘. The focus  of this initiative is to evolve a Strategy and implement various components including governance mechanism to ensure proliferation of Cloud in government. Formulation of the Cloud Policy is one of the primary steps that will facilitate large scale adoption of cloud by government.






31. Solution: d)

Explanation:

The National Optical Fibre Network (NOFN) is a project to provide broadband connectivity to over two lakh Gram panchayats of India at a cost of Rs.20,000 crore. The project provides internet access using existing optical fibre and extending it to the Gram panchayats. The project was intended to enable the government of India to provide e-services and e-applications nationally. A special purpose vehicle Bharat Broadband Network Limited (BBNL) was created as a Public Sector Undertaking (PSU) under the Companies Act of 1956 for the execution of the project. The project will be funded by the Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF).

All the Service Providers like Telecom Service Providers (TSPs), ISPs, Cable TV operators etc. will be given non-discriminatory access to the National Optic Fibre Network and can launch various services in rural areas. NOFN has the potential to
transform many aspects of our lives including video, data, internet, telephone


http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 13
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    


services in areas such as education, business, entertainment, environment, health households and e-governance services.

National Optic Fibre Network uses Gigabit passive optical network (GPON) technology indigenously developed by Centre for Development of Telematics (C- DOT). A passive optical network (PON) brings fiber cabling and signals to the home using a point-to-multipoint  scheme that enables a single optical fiber to serve multiple premises. Encryption maintains data security in this shared environment. The architecture uses passive (unpowered) optical splitters, reducing the cost of equipment compared to point-to-point architectures.






32. Solution: d)

Explanation:

Cyber Appellate Tribunal has been established under the Information Technology Act under the aegis of Controller of Certifying Authorities (C.C.A.). The first and the only Cyber Appellate Tribunal in the country has been established by the Central Government in accordance with the provisions contained under Section 48(1) of the Information Technology Act, 2000.

The Cyber Appellate Tribunal has, for the purposes of discharging its functions under the I.T. Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. However, the procedure laid down by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 applies but at the same time the Tribunal is guided by the principles of natural justice.

The Cyber Appellate Tribunal has powers to regulate its own procedure including the place at which it has its sittings. Every proceeding before the Cyber Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections
193 and 228, and for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code and the
Cyber Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.






33. Solution: c)

Explanation:


http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 14
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    


Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-In) is the Government organization under Ministry of Communications and Information Technology. It is a nodal agency that deals with cyber security threats like hacking and phishing. It strengthens security-related defence of the Indian Internet domain. In March 2014, CERT reported a critical flaw in Android Jelly bean's VPN implementation.




34. Solution: c)

The constitution of J&K provides for Governor‘s Rule. Hence, the governor, with the concurrence of the President of India, can assume to himself all the powers of the state government, except those of the high court. He can dissolve the assembly and dismiss the council of ministers. The Governor‘s Rule can be imposed when the state administration cannot be carried on in accordance with the provisions of the J&K Constitution. It was imposed for the first time in 1977. Notably, in 1964, Article 356
of the Indian Constitution (dealing with the imposition of President‘s Rule in a state)
was extended to the state of J&K.




35. Solution: d)

Article 371-A makes the following special provisions for Nagaland:

    The Acts of Parliament relating to the following matters would not apply to
Nagaland unless the State Legislative Assembly so decides:
    religious or social practices of the Nagas;
    Naga customary law and procedure;
    administration of civil and criminal justice involving decisions according to
Naga customary law; and
    ownership and transfer of land and its resources.

The Governor of Nagaland shall have special responsibility for law and order in the state so long as internal disturbances caused by the hostile Nagas continue. In the discharge of this responsibility, the Governor, after consulting the Council of Ministers, exercises his individual judgement and his decision is final. This special responsibility of the Governor shall cease when the President so directs.




36. Solution: d)

The act gives a constitutional status to the panchayati raj institutions. It has brought
them under the purview of the justiciable part of the Constitution. In other words,

http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 15
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    


the state governments are under constitutional obligation to adopt the new panchayati raj system in accordance with the provisions of the act. Consequently, neither the formation of panchayats nor the holding of elections at regular intervals depend on the will of the state government any more.

The provisions of the act can be grouped into two categories—compulsory and voluntary. The compulsory (mandatory or obligatory) provisions of the act have to be included in the state laws creating the new panchayati raj system. The voluntary provisions, on the other hand, may be included at the discretion of the states. Thus the voluntary provisions of the act ensures the right of the states to take local factors like geographical, politico–administrative and others, into consideration while adopting the new panchayati raj system.

The act is a significant landmark in the evolution of grassroot democratic institutions in the country. It transfers the representative democracy into participatory democracy. It is a revolutionary concept to build democracy at the grassroot level in the country.




37. Solution: c)

The 73rd amendment act provides for a Gram Sabha as the foundation of the panchayati raj system. It is a body consisting of persons registered in the electoral rolls of a village comprised within the area of Panchayat at the village level. Thus, it is a village assembly consisting of all the registered voters in the area of a panchayat. It may exercise such powers and perform such functions at the village level as the legislature of a state determines.

Three-Tier System - The act provides for a three-tier system of panchayati raj in every state, that is, panchayats at the village, intermediate, and district levels. Thus, the act brings about uniformity in the structure of panchayati raj throughout the country. However, a state having a population not exceeding 20 lakh may not constitute panchayats at the intermediate level.




38. Solution: d)

The governor of a state shall, after every five years, constitute a finance commission to review the financial position of the panchayats.

The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls and the conduct of all elections to the panchayats shall be vested in the state election



http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 16
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    


commission. It consists of a state election commissioner to be appointed by the governor. His conditions of service and tenure of office shall also be determined by the governor.

DRDA have been abandoned now. They were not constituted in furtherance of the provisions of these constitutional amendments.






39. Solution: d)

Some of the Subjects under the 11th schedule that can be devolved to the Panchayats are:

    Poverty alleviation programme
    Education, including primary and secondary schools
    Technical training and vocational education
    Adult and non-formal education
    Libraries
    Cultural activities
    Markets and fairs
    Health and sanitation including hospitals, primary health centres and dispensaries
    Family welfare
    Women and child development
    Social welfare, including welfare of the handicapped and mentally ret arded
    Welfare of the weaker sections, and in particular, of the scheduled castes and the scheduled tribes
    Public distribution system
    Maintenance of community assets




40. Solution: c)

These are voluntary provisions:

    Giving representation to members of the Parliament (both the Houses) and the state legislature (both the Houses) in the panchayats at different levels falling within their constituencies.
    Providing reservation of seats (both members and chairpersons) for backward
classes in panchayats at any level.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 17
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    


    Granting powers and authority to the panchayats to enable them to function
as institutions of self-government (in brief, making them autonomous bodies).
    Devolution of powers and responsibilities upon panchayats to prepare plans for economic development and social justice; and to perform some or all of the 29 functions listed in the Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution.
    Granting financial powers to the pachayats, that is, authorizing them to levy, collect and appropriate taxes, duties, tolls and fees.




41. Solution: d)

The objectives of the PESA Act are as follows:

    To extend the provisions of Part IX of the Constitution relating to the panchayats to the scheduled areas with certain modifications
    To provide self-rule for the bulk of the tribal population
    To have village governance with participatory democracy and to make the gram Sabha a nucleus of all activities
    To evolve a suitable administrative framework consistent with traditional practices
    To safeguard and to preserve the traditions and customs of tribal communities
    To empower panchayats at the appropriate levels with specific powers conducive to tribal requirements
    To prevent panchayats at the higher level from assuming the powers and authority of panchayats at the lower level of the gram Sabha






42. Solution: d)

http://pib.nic.in/newsite/PrintRelease.aspx?relid=108320




43. Solution: d)

The system of urban government was constitutionalised through the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act of 1992. At the Central level, the subject of ‗urban local government‘ is dealt with by the following three ministries: Ministry of Urban Development, created as a separate ministry in 1985; Ministry of Defence in the case
of cantonment boards; and Ministry of Home Affairs in the case of Union Territories.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 18
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    




44. Solution: a)

The major events in this context are as follows:

    In 1687-88, the first municipal corporation in India was set up at Madras.
    In 1726, the municipal corporations were set up in Bombay and Calcutta.
    Lord Mayo‘s  Resolution of 1870 on financial decentralisation visualised the
development of local self-government institutions.
    Lord  Ripon‘s Resolution of 1882 has been  hailed as the ‗Magna Carta‘  of local
self-government. He is called as the father of local-self government in India.
    The Royal Commission on decentralisation was appointed in 1907 and it submitted its report in 1909. Its chairman was Hobhouse.
    Under the dyarchical scheme introduced in Provinces by the Government of India Act of 1919, local self-government became a transferred subject under the charge of a responsible Indian minister.
    In 1924, the Cantonments Act was passed by the Central legislature.
    Under the provincial autonomy scheme introduced by the Government of
India Act of 1935, local self-government was declared a provincial subject.







45. Solution: a)

A new line of political activity, which would keep up the spirit of resistance to colonial rule, was now advocated by C.R. Das and Motilal Nehru. They suggested that the nationalists should end the boycott of the legislative councils, enter them, expose them as ‗sham parliaments‘ and as ‗a mask which the bureaucracy has put on,‘ and obstruct ‗every work of the council.‘ This, they  argued, would not  be giving up non-cooperation but continuing it in a more effective form by extending it to the councils themselves. It would be opening a new front in the battle. C.R. Das as the President of the Congress and Motilal as its Secretary put forward this programme
of ‗either mending or ending‘ the councils at the Gaya session of the Congress in
December 1922. Another section of the Congress, headed by Vallabhbhai Patel, Rajendra Prasad and C. Rajagopalachari, opposed the new proposal which was consequently defeated by 1748 to 890 votes. Das and Motilal resigne d from their respective offices in the Congress and on 1 January 1923 announced the formation of the Congress-Khilafat Swaraj Party better known later as the Swaraj Party. Das was
the President and Motilal one of the Secretaries of the new party. The adherents of




http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 19
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    


the councilentry programme came  to be popularly known as ‗pro-changers‘ and those still advocating boycott of the councils as ‗no— changers.‘






46. Solution: d)

All the members of a municipality shall be elected directly by the people of the municipal area. For this purpose, each municipal area shall be divided into territorial constituencies to be known as wards. The state legislature may provide the manner
of election of the chairperson of a municipality. It may also provide for the representation of the following persons in a municipality.

    Persons having special knowledge or experience in municipal administration without the right to vote in the meetings of municipality.
    The members of the Lok Sabha and the state legislative assembly representing constituencies that comprise wholly or partly the municipal area.
    The members of the Rajya Sabha and the state legislative council registered as electors within the municipal area.
    The chairpersons of committees (other than wards committees).







47. Solution: b)

Recently Union Government has appointed 9 Executive Directors (EDs) in Public
Sector Banks (PSBs).

Their appointment was approved by Appointments Committee of the Cabinet on recommendation of selection panel headed by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) Governor Raghuram Rajan.

Some of the Executive Directors (ED) of PSBs appointed are

     K. Sahoo- ED of Allahabad Bank.

     Pawan Kumar Bajaj- ED of Indian Overseas Bank.

     Ravi Shankar Pandey- ED of Syndicate Bank.







http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 20
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    


48. Solution: a)

Delhi High Court in its recent ruling has held that Attorney General of India comes under the ambit of Right to Information (RTI) Act, 2005.

This ruling reversed the previous decision of the Central Information Commission
(CIC) which had held that Attorney General does not come under RTI Act. Delhi High Court held that
     Attorney General is not merely a lawyer for the government, but is a constitutional authority. This is because functions performed by the AG under Article 76 (2) of the Constitution of India are in the nature of public functions.

     So the office of Attorney General is a public authority and comes under the ambit of section 2(h) of the RTI Act.

The decision was given by Delhi High Court bench headed by Justice Vibhu Bakhru while hearing on two separate pleas filed by RTI activists Subhash Chandra Agarwal and RK Jain. In one plea, the petitioners had challenged the CIC ruling and urged
the court to declare AG office answerable to RTI Act.

In 2012, CIC bench had ruled that the Attorney General of India is only a person and cannot be considered an authority under the RTI Act.






49. Solution: a)

Recently, Prime Minister Narendra Modi visited Seychelles as part of three -nation tour for cementing strategic partnership with island courtiers of Seychelles, Maldives and Sri Lanka.

Both nations agreed to set up joint working group to promote ocean based economy i.e. on Blue Economy. In this regard, India committed to provide all help to Seychelles.

Bluechip companies are nationally recognized, well-established and financially sound company. Blue chips generally sell high-quality, widely accepted products and services. Blue chip companies are known to weather downturns and operate profitably in the face of adverse economic conditions, which helps to contribute to
their long record of stable and reliable growth.



http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 21
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    




50. Solution: d)

Lok Sabha has passed The Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement (Amendment) Bill, 2015. The bill was passed by voice vote along with incorporated 9 new amendments moved by Union government.

The amendment bill replaces the ordinance promulgated in this regard and seeks to amend the RFCTLARR Act, 2013.

Key provisions of Amendment Bill

     The Bill creates five special categories of land use. They are 1. Rural infrastructure, 2. Affordable housing, 3. Defence, 4. Industrial corridors, 5. Infrastructure projects including Public Private Partnership (PPP) projects where the Union government owns the land.

     Removes the Consent Clause (CC) of 80 per cent of land owners for private projects and that of 70 per cent of land owners for PPP projects in case of acquiring land for above five categories from parent Act.

     Removes of Social Impact Assessment (SIA) clause for 5 categories from parent Act which is done to identify those affected and from the restrictions on the acquisition of irrigated multi-cropped land.

     The provisions for compensation, rehabilitation, and resettlement under 13 central Acts are in consonance with the LARR Act.




51. Solution: a)

World‘s first solar  powered aircraft on global journey-  Solar Impulse 2 successfully landed in Ahmedabad, Gujarat.

The aircraft was piloted by Swiss pilots Bertrand Piccard and Andre Borschberg from its first halt Muscat, Oman.

Key features of Solar Impulse 2 aircraft

     It is a Swiss long-range solar-powered aircraft project and claimed to be first aircraft to fly day and night without consuming conventional fuel.

     Solely propelled by the solar energy and emits zero Carbon Dioxide (CO2).



http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 22
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    


     Structure: Single-seater aircraft made of carbon fibre. It has a 72 metre wingspan and weighs 2,300 kilo grams.

     Solar cells: 17,248 solar cells inbuilt into its wings. These cells supply renewable energy to propel the electric motors of aircraft.

     These solar cells also recharge 4 lithium polymer batteries mounted on aircraft which allows it fly at night.

The first test flight of the aircraft was conducted in the United States in 2013.







52. Solution: a)

Explanation:  The Department of Commerce formulates, implements and monitors the Foreign Trade Policy which provides the basic framework of policy and strategy to be followed for promoting  for promoting exports and trade.






53. Solution: b)

Explanation:

Who can set up SEZs?

Any private/public/joint  sector or state government or its agencies can set up an
SEZ. Even, a foreign agency can set up SEZs in India.

State wise number of SEZs:






State/Union
Territory
Number of operational Special Economic Zones
(June 2012)
Number of SEZs formally approved (June
2012)


Total
(Operational
+ Approved)



Andhra
Pradesh &Telangana  36                        11                    152




http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 23
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    






State/Union
Territory
Number of operational Special Economic Zones
(June 2012)
Number of SEZs formally approved (June
2012)


Total
(Operational
+ Approved)



Tamil Nadu                  28                        77                    105



Karnataka                     20                        62                    82



Maharashtra                 18                        119                  137



Gujarat                          13                        53                    66



Kerala                            7                          29                    36



Uttar Pradesh              6                          35                    41



West Bengal                 5                          24                    29



Rajasthan                      4                          11                    15



Haryana                        3                          49                    52



Chandigarh                  1                          2                      3



Madhya Pradesh         1                          17                    18



Odisha                           18                        111                  129



Punjab                           0                          8                      8



http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 24
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    






State/Union
Territory
Number of operational Special Economic Zones
(June 2012)
Number of SEZs formally approved (June
2012)


Total
(Operational
+ Approved)



Goa                                0                          7                      7



Chhattisgarh                0                          3                      3



Delhi                              0                          3                      3



Dadra and Nagar
Haveli                            0                          2                      2



Nagaland                      0                          2                      2



Puducherry                  0                          2                      2



Uttarakhand                 0                          2                      2



Jharkhand                     0                          1                      1




For reference:
http://www.sezindia.nic.in/writereaddata/pdf/ListofoperationalSEZs.pdf .







54. Solution: c)

Explanation:





http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 25
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    


Export Promotion Capital Goods (EPCG) scheme allows import of capital goods including spares for pre production, production and post production at zero duty subject to an export obligation of 6 times of duty saved on capital goods imported under EPCG scheme, to be fulfilled in 6 years reckoned from Authorization issuedate.

EPCG scheme covers manufacturer exporters with or without supporting manufacturer(s)/ vendor(s), merchant exporters tied to supporting manufacturer(s) and service providers. The Scheme also covers a service provider who is designated
/ certified as a Common Service Provider (CSP). EPCG authorization holder can export either directly or through third party (s). Export proceeds are to be realized in freely convertible currency except for deemed exports. Import of capital goods imported under the EPCG scheme shall be subject to Actual User condition till
export obligation is completed.

Spares for the existing plant and machinery may also be imported under the EPCG scheme subject to an export obligation equivalent to 8 times of duty saved to be fulfilled over a period of 8 years reckoned from the date of issuance of licence.






55. Solution: d)

Explanation:

The Ministry of Communication and Information Technology contains three departments:

Department of Telecommunications

Department of Electronics and Information Technology

Department of Posts




56. Solution: c)

Explanation:

The postal service is under the Department of Posts, which is part of the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology of the Government of India. The modern postal system in India was established by Lord Clive in the year 1766 and it
was further developed by warren hastings in 1774.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 26
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    


The statute presently governing the postal services in India is the Indian Post Office
Act, 1898.




57. Solution: d)

Maharashtra government has launched Bhagyashree scheme for girls. The scheme
replaces state  government‘s previous Sukanya scheme.

Bhagyashree  scheme was launched by was launched by Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis along with the actress Bhagyashree who is brand ambassador of the scheme.

Under the Sukanya scheme, the state government was to earmark an amount of Rs.
21,200 for each girl child born in a Below the Poverty Line (BPL) family.

While the Bhagyashree scheme aims at providing one lakh rupee on maturity after the girl completes 18 years of a ge.

State government is seeking to link the Bhagyashree scheme with the Union
Government‘s Beti Bachao  Beti Padhao scheme.




58. Solution: d)

North East India‘s first Kisan  Call Centre (KCC) was  opened in Agartala, Tripura. It
was launched by Tripura Chief Minister  Manik Sarkar.

The call centre is financed by Tripura government and will be run by experts of agriculture, fisheries, horticulture and animal husbandry from a private enterprise.

About KCC

     KCC Agartala will work daily from 6 am to 10 pm and provide a real time advisory and immediate solution with expert consultation to farmers from Tripura on various agriculture related issues.

     It includes expert consultation seed procurement, agro-metric, fertilisers, soil health, pesticides usage and marketing of the produces.

     Farmers from neighbouring states of Tripura also will be provided by similar services by Kisan Call Centre.

Tripura also launched farmer‘s portal to issue  advisory to farmers for farm
production under direct supervision of the experts.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 27
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    




59. Solution: a)

Prime Minister Narendra Modi recently launched the first indigenously developed and manufactured Rotavirus vaccine- Rotavac.

The vaccine will boost India‘s efforts to combat infant mortality due to diarrhoea.
This is the third such vaccine available globally against Rotavirus.

Development of the Vaccine

     Rotavac vaccine was developed under the joint collaboration between India and the United States in the area of medical research.

     It was developed under the public-private partnership (PPP) model that involved Union Ministry of Science and Technology, institutions of the US Government and NGOs in India supported by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.

     Union Government had funded the basic research in educational and scientific along with US‘s National Institute of Health. While the Bharat Biotech India Limited (BBIL) and the Gates Foundation had contributed towards vaccine development and testing.

     BBIL was selected for vaccine development by the India-U.S. Vaccine Action
Programme (VAP) in 1997-1998 by the standard government procedures.

     BBIL, the manufacturer of vaccine has given undertaking to keep the cost of the vaccine at US$ 1 per dose, thus making it cheapest vaccine available globally.




60. Solution: b)

NASA‘s  Dawn space probe has completed its orbit around dwarf planet Ceres which is the largest object in the Solar System between Mars and Jupiter.

Dawn has taken 7.5 years to reach the orbit of Ceres. Scientists are hoping to glean information from  the Ceres  which can tell them about the Solar System‘s beginnings after its formation four and a half billion ago.

Earlier during its journey from 2011 to 2012, the spacecraft also had explored and surveyed the giant asteroid Vesta. It had delivered new insights and thousands of
images from the asteroid.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 28
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    


Dawn space probe is the first NASA exploratory mission to use ion propulsion to enter orbits.




61. Solution: a)

The essence of Kashmir is defined by its rich culture and its warm people.  It is equally known for the magnificent ornaments and dresses worn by its people. Ornaments in the valley are not worn for their intrinsic value and beauty alone but for religious reasons as well. The beautiful golden ornament worn by married Kashmiri Pandit women known as Dej-Hor is an important example.


PIB Features




62. Solution: d)

Solid waste dumping sites or landfill sites need more amount of land which is not available in urban areas. Incineration of solid waste pollutes the environment if the incinerators are not designed or operated properly.Thermal Plasma Technology is ideally suited for waste treatment. By plasma technology Hazardous & toxic compounds are broken down to elemental constituents at high temperatures; Inorganic materials are converted to Vitrified Mass; and Organic materials are Pyrolysed or Gasified, Converted to flue gases (H2 & CO) & Lower hydrocarbon gases when operated at low temperature (500 – 600OC).Disposal of carcass is also being thought of using plasma pyrolysis.

PIB Features




63. Solution: d)



http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 29
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    


Role of environmental isotope techniques in the water resources development and management - There are two type of isotopes, stable isotopes and radioactive isotopes. Isotope techniques are used to find out the type of contamination in surface water and ground water, the sources and origin of contamination, polluta nt dispersion in surface water bodies, to assess the groundwater salinity, to assess the changes due to long-term exploitation of groundwater, for hydro-chemical investigation and to carry out geochemical evolution of groundwater.

PIB Features




64. Solution: c)

C.R. Das as the President of the Congress and Motilal as its Secretary put forward this programme of ‗either mending or ending‘ the councils at the Gaya  session of the Congress in December 1922. Another section of the Congress, headed by
Vallabhbhai Patel, Rajendra Prasad and C. Rajagopalachari, opposed the new
proposal.




65. Solution: b)

Rural Human & Resource Development Facility is disseminating BARC
technologies, namely NisargrunaBiogas, Soil Organic Carbon Testing Kit, Seed Bank, Domestic Water Purifier, Weather Forecasting, LLL, RIA, FSD, VTD; under the AKRUTI( Advance Knowledge of Rural Technology Implementation) Program. Activities carried out under the AKRUTI program aresurveys for safe drinking
water, Interaction with the villagers, Entrepreneurship  development for domestic water purifier production and Awareness programs for benefits of use purified water. RHRDF has also launched a scheme for safe drinking water for village under CSR.




66. Solution: a)

The Sewage is the waste water generated from domestic premises and consists mainly of human waste. It typically contains 99.9% water and about 0.1% solid. The solid waste in sewage is typically organic in nature and is broken down in the sewage treatment plants resulting in sewage sludge as a byproduct. In Radiation Hygienization process dry sludge generated at STP‘s is hygienized using radiation
technology using standard Gamma facility at a Dose of 10 kGs. Such radiation plants
are operating in India for sterilizing medical products.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 30
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    


Refuse Derived Fuel (RDF) is a processed form of Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) and it can be a substitute to coal energy. The process of conversion of garbage into fuel pellets involves primarily Drying, Separation of incombustible, Size reduction and Pelletisation. It is being developed by BARC.

PIB Features




67. Solution: a)

http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/who -launches-special-programme-
prevent-infant-deaths




68. Solution: b)

http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/monkey-fever-hits-kerala-health-worker-
fifth-victim-disease




69. Solution: b)

http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/about-two-thirds-world-s-population-
suffers-tooth-decay

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ponmudi#Dental_Tourism




70. Solution: a)

http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/bring-ganga-back-original-course-orders-
patna-high-court




71. Solution: d)

A managed-exchange-rate system is a hybrid or mixture of the fixed and flexible exchange rate systems in which the government of the economy attempts to affect the exchange rate directly by buying or selling foreign currencies or indirectly, through monetary policy6 (i.e., by lowering or raising interest rates on foreign
currency bank accounts, affecting foreign investment, etc.).




http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 31
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    


Today, most of the economies have shifted to this system of exchange rate determination. Almost all countries tend to intervene when the markets become disorderly or the fundamentals of economics are challenged by the exchange rate of the time.




72. Solution: d)

A measurement of a country‘s trade in which the value of goods and services it imports exceeds the value of goods and services it exports. The current account also includes net income, such as interest and dividends, as well as transfers, such as foreign aid, though these components tend to make up a smaller percentage of the current account than exports and imports. The current account is a calculation of a country‘s foreign transactions, and along with the capital account is a component of a country‘s balance of payment.




73. Solution: c)

The BoP of an economy is calculated on the principles of accountancy (double-entry bookkeeping) and looks like the balance sheet of a company—every entry shown either as credit (inflow) or debit (outflow). If there is a positive outcome at the end of the year, the money is automatically transferred to the foreign exchange rese rves of the economy. And if there is any negative outcome, the same foreign exchange is drawn from  the country‘s forex reserves. If the forex  reserves are not  capable of fulfilling the negativity created by the BoP, it is known as a BoP crisis and the economy tries different means to solve the crisis in which going for forex help from the IMF is the last resort.




74. Solution: a)

An economy might allow its currency full or partial convertibility in the current and the capital accounts. If domestic currency is allowed to convert into foreign currency for all current account purposes, it is a case of full current account convertibility. Similarly, in cases of capital outflow, if domestic currency is allowed to convert into foreign currency, it is a case of full capital account convertibility. If the situation is of partial convertibility, then the portion allowed by the government can be converted into foreign currency for current and capital purposes. It should always be kept in mind that the issue of currency convertibility is concerned with foreign currency
outflow only.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 32
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    







75. Solution: a)

http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/2003-01-28/news/27532328_1_real-
exchange-reer-nominal-effective-exchange-rate




76. Solution: c)

The Swarajist activity in the legislatures was spectacular by any standards. It inspired the politicized persons and kept their political interest alive. People were thrilled every time the allpowerful foreign bureaucracy was humbled in the councils. Simultaneously, during 1923-24, Congressmen captured a large number of municipalities and other local bodies. Das became the Mayor of Calcutta (with Subhas Bose as his Chief Executive Officer), and Vithalbhai Patel. the President of Bombay Corporation, Vallabhbhai Patel of Ahmedabad Municipality, Rajendra Prasad of Patna Municipality, and Jawaharlal Nehru of Allahabad Municipality. The no-changers actively joined in these ventures since they believed that local bodies could be used to promote the constructive programme. Its preoccupation with parliamentary politics also started telling on the internal cohesion of the Swaraj
Party. For one, the limits of politics of obstruction were soon reached. Having
repeatedly outvoted the Government and forced it to certify its legislation, there was no way of going further inside the legislatures and escalating the politics of confrontation. This could be done only by a mass movement outside. But the Swarajists lacked any policy of coordinating their militant work in the legislatures with mass political work outside. In fact, they relied almost wholly on newspaper reporting.




77. Solution: d)

It is the international currency in which the highest faith is shown and is needed by every economy.

The strongest currency of the world is one which has a high level of liquidity. Basically, the economy with the highest as well as highly diversified exports that are compulsive imports for other countries (as of high level technology, defence products, life saving medicines and petroleum products) will also create high demand for its currency in the world and become the hard currency. It is always
scarce.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 33
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    


Up to the Second World War, the best hard currency was the Pound Sterling (£) of the UK but soon it was replaced by the US$—at present some experts believe that the Euroland‘s currency (€) might replace it, too. Some of the best hard currencies of the world today are the US dollar, the Euro(€), Japanese Yen (¥) and the UK Sterling Pound (£).




78. Solution: c)

SEZ, or Special Economic Zone, is essentially an industrial cluster meant largely for exports. An SEZ is governed by a special set of rules aimed at attracting direct investment for export-oriented production. SEZs, earlier known as Export Processing Zones or Free Trade Zones, are duty free enclaves which are treated as foreign territory only for trade operations, duties, tariffs and typically marked by the best infrastructure and least red tape. Other salient features of SEZs are:

• Manufacturing or service activities are allowed;

• Full freedom for sub-contracting;

• No routine examination by customs authorities of export/import cargo;

• Units in SEZs have  to become net foreign exchange earners withi n three years; and

• Domestic sales from  them are subject to full customs duty and the import policy in
force.

The SEZ concept recognises the issues related to economic development and provides for developing self-sustaining Industrial Townships so that the increased economic activity does not create pressure on the existing infrastructure.




79. Solution: a)

The objective of the GAAR provisions is to codify the doctrine of ‘substance over form’ where the real intention of the parties and purpose of an arrangement is taken into account for determining the tax consequences, irrespective of the legal structure of the concerned transaction or arrangement. It essentially comes into effect where an arrangement is entered into with the main purpose or one of the main purposes of obtaining a tax benefit and which also satisfies at least one of the following four tests:

    The arrangement creates rights and obligations that  are not at arm‘s  length,
    It results in misuse or abuse of provisions of tax laws,
    Lacks commercial substance or is deemed to lack commercial substance, or

http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 34
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    


    it is not carried out in a bona fide manner.

Thus, if the tax officer believes that the main purpose or one of the main purposes of an arrangement is to obtain a tax benefit and even if one of the above four tests are satisfied, he has powers to declare it as an impermissible avoidance arrangement
and re-characterise the entire transaction in a manner that is more conducive to maximising tax revenues




80. Solution: d)

To some extent CAD is a good indicator for a developing country. For example, if
the industrialists borrow more from outside India to expand their business activities, it leads to a growth in businesses and economic activity which in-turn leads to more revenue from the businesses in the future. In this case a comfortable CAD indicates a nation's intention to grow.

The major contributor to India‘s CAD is imports of Gold and Crude Oil.The high current account deficits stemming from imports which do not contribute to economic growth but only are necessary to meet the demands of domestic consumption coupled with a GDP which is not growing fast enough, has put the
economy on a dangerous footing. Some of the effects of sustained CAD are Currency
depreciation, Inflation, reduction of credit rating of the country affecting foreign investment, Outflow of foreign currency due to fears of value erosion, leading to further economic deterioration. This also aids depreciation of rupee.




81. Solution: d)

Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) is preferred to the foreign portfolio investments (PIS) primarily because FDI is expected to bring modern technology, managerial practices and has a long–term nature of investment. The government has liberalized FDI norms overtime. As a result, only a handful of sensitive sectors now fall in the prohibited zone and FDI is allowed fully or partially in the rest of the sectors.

Despite successive moves to liberalize the FDI regime, India is ranked fourth on the basis of FDI Restrictiveness Index (FRI) compiled by OECD.




82. Solution: d)





http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 35
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    


The International Monetary Fund (IMF) came up in 1944 with the main functions as exchange rate regulation, purchasing short-term foreign currency liabilities of the member nations from around the world, allotting special drawing rights (SDRs) to the member nations and the most important one as the bailor to the member economies in the situation of any BoP crisis.

The main functions of the IMF are as given below:

    to facilitate international monetary cooperation;
    to promote exchange rate stability and orderly exchange arrangements;
    to assist in the establishment of a multilateral system of payments and the elimination of foreign exchange restrictions; and
    to assist member countries by temporarily providing financial resources to correct maladjustment in their balance of payments (BoPs).

The Board of Governors of the IMF consists of one Governor and one Alternate Governor from each member country. For India, Finance Minister is the Ex-officio Governor while the RBI Governor is the Alternate Governor on the Board.




83. Solution: b)

Revolutionary terrorism again became attractive after the abrupt end to the Non – Cooperation movement. It is not accidental that nearly all the major new leaders of the revolutionary terrorist politics, for example, Jogesh Chandra Chatterjea, Su rya Sen, Jatin Das, Chandrashekhar Azad, Bhagat Singh, Sukhdev, Shiv Varma, Bhagwati Charan Vohra and Jaidev Kapur, had been enthusiastic participants in the non-violent Non-Cooperation Movement.




84. Solution: a)

The tax which has incidence and impact at the different points is the indirect tax— the person who is hit does not bleed6 someone else bleeds. As, for example, excise, sales tax, etc which are imposed on either producers or the traders, but it is the general consumers who bear the burden of tax.

http://business.gov.in/taxation/corporate.php









http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 36
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    


85. Solution: a)

The value added tax (VAT) is a method of tax collection as well as name of a state level tax ( at present) in India. A tax collected at every stage of value addition, i.e., either by production or distribution is known as value added tax. The name itself suggests that this tax is collected on the value addition (i.e., production).

Production of goods or services is nothing but stages of value additions where production of goods is done by the industrialists or manufacturers. But these goods require value addition by different service providers/ producers (the agents, the wholesalers and the retailers) before they reach the consumers. From production to the level of sale, there are many points where value is added in all goods. VAT method of tax collection is different from the non-VAT method in the sense that it is imposed and collected at different points of value addition chain, i.e., multi-point tax collection.

That is why there is no chance of imposing tax upon tax which takes place in the non-VAT method —single point tax collection. This is why VAT does not have a
‗cascading effect‘ on the prices of goods it does not  increase inflation—and is therefore highly suitable for an economy like India where due to high level of poverty large number of people lack the market level purchasing capacity. It is a
pro-poor tax system without being anti-rich because rich people do not suffer either.




86. Solution: d)

The Goods and Services Tax (GST) is a proposal18 of tax in India which will emerge after merging many of the state and central level indirect taxes. Important points of the proposed GST are as follows:

    It will be a tax collected on the VAT method—having all the benefits of a VAT
kind of tax.
    It will be imposed all over the country with the uniformity of rate and will replace multiple central and state taxes (a single VAT it will be known). The taxes to be withdrawn or merged into the GST are—

Central Taxes: CENVAT, service tax, sales tax and stamp duty.

State Taxes: State excise, sales tax, entry tax, lease tax, works contract tax, luxury tax, octroi, turnover tax and cess.




87. Solution: a)


http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 37
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    


The Union Budget 2013-14 introduced (basically, reintroduced) the CTT, however, only for non-agricultural commodity futures at the rate of 0.01 per cent (which is equivalent to the rate of equity futures on which a Securities Transaction Tax is imposed in India). Alongwith this, transactions in commodity derivatives have been declared to be made non-speculative; and hence for traders in the commodity derivative segment, any losses arising from such transactions can be set off against income from any other source (similar provisions are also applicable for the
securities market transactions).

Like all financial transaction taxes, CTT aims at discouraging excessive speculation, which is detrimental to the market and to bring parity between securities market and commodities market such that there is no tax/regulatory arbi trage. Futures contracts are financial instruments and provide for price risk management and price discovery of the underlying asset commodity / currency / stocks / interest. It is, therefore, essential that the policy framework governing them is uniform a cross all the
contracts irrespective of the underlying assets to minimize the chances of regulatory arbitrage. The proposal of CTT also appears to have stemmed from the general policy of the government to widen the tax base.




88. Solution: d)

This is a direct tax and applies on the sales of all ‗assets‘ if a profit (gain)  has been made by the owner of the asset – a tax on the ‗gains‘ one gets  by selling assets. The tax has been classified into two –

(i) Short Term Capital Gain (STCG): It applies ‗if the Asset  has been sold within 36 months of owning it‘. In this  case the ‗rate‘ of this  tax is similar to the  normal income tax slab. But the period becomes ‗12 months‘ in cases of shares, mutual funds, units of the UTI and ‗zero coupon bond‘– in this case the ‗rate‘ of this tax is 15 per cent.

(ii) Long Term Capital Gain (LTCG): It applies ‗if the asset  has been  sold after  36 months of owning it‘. In this  case the ‗rate‘ of this  tax is 20 per cent. In cases of shares, mutual funds, units of the UTI and ‗zero coupon b ond‘ there is ‗exemption‘ (zero  tax) from  this tax (provided that  such  transaction is subject to ‗Securities
Transaction Tax‘).












http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 38
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    


89. Solution: d)

Borrowings by the Government include all long-term loans raised by the government inside the country (i.e., internal borrowings) and outside the country (i.e., external borrowings). Internal borrowings might include the borrowings from the RBI, Indian banks, financial institutions, etc. Similarly, external borrowings might include the loans from the World Bank, the IMF, foreign banks, foreign governments, foreign financial institutions, etc.






90. Solution: d)




Explanation:

Apart from the higher capital cost of providing telecom services in rural and remote areas, these areas also generate lower revenue due to lower population density, low income and lack of commercial activity. Thus normal market forces alone would not direct the telecom sector to adequately serve backward and rural areas. Keeping in mind the inadequacy of the market mechanism to serve rural and inaccessible areas on one hand and the importance of providing vital telecom connectivity on the
other, most countries of the world have put in place policies to provide Universal
Access and Universal Service to ICT.

The New Telecom Policy - 1999 (NTP‘99) provided that the resources for meeting the Universal Service  Obligation (USO) would be raised through a ‗Universal Access Levy (UAL)‘, which would be a percentage of the revenue earned by the operators under various licenses. The Universal Service Support Policy came into effect from
01.04.2002. The Indian Telegraph (Amendment) Act, 2003 giving statutory status to
the Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF) was passed by both Houses of Parliament in December 2003. The Rules for administration of the Fund known as Indian Telegraph (Amendment) Rules, 2004 were notified on 26.03.2004. As per the Indian Telegraph Act 1885 (as amended in 2003, 2006 and 2008), the Fund is to be utilized exclusively for meeting the Universal Service Obligation. This fund is non lapsable.




91. Solution: a)

Explanation:


http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 39
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    


The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) was established with effect from
20th February 1997 by an Act of Parliament, called the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997, to regulate telecom services, including fixation/revision of tariffs for telecom services which were earlier vested in the Central Government. TRAI is administered through a Secretariat headed by a secretary.












92. Solution: c)

Explanation:

An exclusive economic zone (EEZ) is a sea zone prescribed by the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea over which a state has special rights regarding the exploration and use of marine resources, including energy production from water and wind.  It stretches from the baseline out to 200 nautical miles (nmi) from its coast.






93. Solution: a)

Explanation:

One-rank one-pension scheme

This is a scheme which will ensure that soldiers of the same rank and the same length of service receive the same pension, irrespective of their retirement date. In simple words, it demands equal pensions for those who have retired in one particular year, as those who retire in another year at the same position, and for the same duration of services rendered.

    The difference in the pension of present and past pensioners in the same rank occurs on account of the number of increments earned by the defence personnel in that rank.
    So far, there was no such rule. While every pay commission bumps the
salaries of government servants, pensions of ex-servicemen remain the same.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 40
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    


    Supreme Court in a ruling had stated that  ―Pension is not a bounty nor a matter of grace depending upon the sweet will of the employer. It is not an ex-gratia payment, but  a payment for past  services rendered‖. The significance of OROP is therefore justified.
    The implementation of one rank, one pension is also expected to push up the Centre‘s defence pension payments by a record 40 per cent, posing fresh challenges to keep  the Centre‘s fiscal deficit within the budgetary target of 4.1 per cent of the Gross Domestic Product.






94. Solution d)

Explanation:

Nirbhay is an all-weather low-cost long-range cruise missile with stealth and high accuracy. The missile has a range of more than 1000 km. It weighs about one tonne and has a length of 6 metres. Its relatively slow flight speed, just 1,000 km per hour, allows it to navigate its way precisely to the target.

The Nirbhay cruise missile is an Indian version of the American Tomahawk, which became an icon of high-tech warfare in the 1991 Gulf War through televised CNN footage of Tomahawks flying through the streets of Baghdad and precisely entering target buildings through open windows.

It carries a ring laser gyroscope for high-accuracy navigation and a radio altimeter
for the height determination. It is capable of being launched from multiple platforms on land, sea and air and shall be inducted into Indian Navy, Army, and Air Force. In particular, Nirbhay is being adapted for the Indo/Russian Su-30MKI. The missile is capable of carrying nuclear warheads.

The two-stage missile Nirbhay is able to pick out a target and attack it among multiple targets. The missile has a loitering capability, i.e., it can go round a target and perform several manoeuvres and then re-engage it. Flying at treetop level and navigating its way through heavily defended enemy airspace where a manned fighter would be quickly shot down by anti-aircraft missiles and guns, the Nirbhay is better equipped to survive the flight to its target.

The missile is capable of flying at different altitudes ranging from 500 m t o 4 km above the ground and can also fly at low altitudes to avoid detection by enemy radar.



http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 41
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    







95. Solution: d)

Explanation:

Agni-V has a strike range of over 5000 kms and can carry a nuclear warhead of over one tonne, off Odisha coast recently. It is a three stage, solid propellant ―missile. It will extend India‘s reach all over  Asia, parts of Africa  and parts of Europe.

Agni V can be configured to launch small satellites. It can also be used to shoot
down enemy satellites in orbits. Once fired, it cannot be stopped. It can, however, be launched only after a decision by the Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS).




96. Solution: a)

All the areas which get capital from the government are part of the capital expenditure. It includes so many heads in India —

Loan Disbursals by the Government
    The loans forwarded by the government might be internal (i.e., to the states, UTs, PSUs, FIs, etc.) or external (i.e., to foreign countries, foreign banks, purchase of foreign Bonds, loans to IMF and WB, etc.).
Loan Repayments by the Government of the Borrowings Made in the Past
    Again loan payments might be internal as well as external. This consists of only the capital part of the loan repayment as the element of interest on loans are shown as a part of the revenue expenditure.
Plan Expenditure of the Government
    This consists of all the expenditures incurred by the government to finance the planned development of India as well as the central government financial supports to the states for their plan requirements.
Capital Expenditures on Defence by the Government
    This consists of all kinds of capital expenses to maintain the defence forces, the equipment purchased for them as well as the modernisation expenditures. It should be kept in mind that defence is a non-plan expenditure which has capital as well as revenue expenditures element in its maintenance. The revenue part of expenditure in the defence is counted in the revenue
expenditures by the government.





http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 42
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    




97. Solution: b)

The fiscal deficit excluding the interest liabilities for a year is t he primary deficit, a term India started using since the fiscal 1997–98.

The part of the fiscal deficit which was provided by the RBI to the government in a particular year is Monetised Deficit, this is a new term adopted since 1997 –98 in India. This is shown in both the forms—in quantitative as well as a percentage of the GDP for that particular financial year.

It is an innovation in the fiscal management which brings in more transparency in the government‘s expenditure behaviour and also in its capabiliti es concerning its dependence on market borrowings by the RBI.




98. Solution: b)

Once deficit financing became an established part of public finance around the world, the means of going for it were also evolved by that time. These means, basically are the ways in which the government may utilise the amount of money created as the deficit to sustain its budget for developmental or political needs.

Essentially the best mode of deficit financing should cause least inflation possible. Refer to the section on means of deficit financing for details in Ramesh Singh – Chap
18 – Public Finance.









99. Solution: d)

This old trilemma asserts that a country cannot maintain, simultaneously, all three policy goals of – (a) free capital flows, (b) a fixed exchange rate, and (c) an independent monetary policy. The impossible trinity, has seen enough waters flowing down the time since it was articulated almost five decades ago which has a strong theoretical foundation in the Mundell-Fleming Model developed in the 1960s.

Dani Rodrik argued that if a country wants more of globalisation, it must either give up some democracy or some national sovereignty. Niall Ferguson highlighted the




http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 43
                    Insights Mock Test –  2015: Test –  17 Solutions                    


trilemma of a choice between commitment to globalisation, to social order and to a small state (meaning limited state intervention).









100.           Solution: c)

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comparative_Rating_Index_of_Sovereigns

http://www.thehindu.com/business/cris-is-indias-new-rating-
index/article2848509.ece


















































http://www.insightsonindia.com                   INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 44
