INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS





1.    Solution: c)

Economic reforms initiated since 1991 have put the Indian economy on a higher growth trajectory. Annual growth rate in the total Gross Domestic Product (GDP) has accelerated from below 6 per cent during the initial years of reforms to more than 8 per cent in recent years. The Planning Commission in its approach paper to the Eleventh Five-Year-plan has stated that 9 per cent growth rate in GDP would be feasible during the Eleventh Plan period. However, Agriculture, that accounted for more than 30 per cent of total GDP at the beginning of reforms, failed to maintain its pre-reform growth. On the contrary, it witnessed a sharp deceleration in growth after the mid-1990s. This happened despite the fact that agricultural productivity in most of the states was quite low as it were, and the potential for the growth of agriculture was high.

The GDP of agriculture increased annually at more than 3 per cent during the 1980s. Since the Ninth Five-Year Plan (1996 to 2001-02), India has been targeting a growth rate of more than 4 per cent in agriculture, but the actual achievement has been much below the target. More than 50 per cent of the workforce of the country still depends upon agriculture for it‟s livelihood. Slow growth in Agriculture and  allied sectors can lead to acute stress in the economy because the population dependent upon this sector is still very large. A major cause behind the slow growth in agriculture is the consistent decrease in investments in the sector by the state governments. While public and private investments are increasing manifold in sectors   such   as   infrastructure,   similar   investments   are   not   forthcoming   in Agriculture and allied  sectors,  leading  to  distress in the  community  of farmers, especially that of the small and marginal segment. Hence the need for incentivising states that increase their investments in the Agriculture and allied sectors has been felt.

Concerned by the slow growth in the Agriculture and allied sectors, the National Development Council (NDC), in its meeting held on 29th May, 2007 resolved that a special Additional Central Assistance Scheme (RKVY) be launched. The NDC resolved that agricultural development strategies must be reoriented to meet the needs of farmers and called upon the Central and State governments to evolve a strategy to rejuvenate agriculture. The NDC reaffirmed its commitment to achieve 4 per cent annual growth in the agricultural sector during the 11th plan.



Growth of agriculture during 11th plan was 3.6%. (http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/2013-02-
28/news/37352166_1_agricultural-exports-agricultural-growth-farm-research)


RKVY has been continued in 12th plan with an outlay of Rs 63,246 Crores


http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 1
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS





2.   Solution: d)

They were very tolerant towards the Hindus and made alliances with many Hundu kings and princes. They abolished jizyah and also pilgrimage taxes at many places.






3.   Solution: c)


4.   Solution: c)

India and Sri Lanka signed the Free Trade Agreement on 28th December 1998 and further discussions were held between India and Sri Lanka on 2nd February 2000 in New Delhi. The Agreement provides duty free market access to both the countries on a preferential basis in a phased manner. India has also agreed to permit limited quantities of imports of tea and garments from Sri Lanka. Tea quota will be 15 million kilogram per annum and garments 8 million pieces.




5.   Solution: a) All are correct
Page 93, Old NCERT Modern India class 12th




6.   Solution: b)


The Lalit Kala Akademi was inaugurated in New Delhi on August 5th, 1954, by the then Minister for Education, Maulana Abul Kalam Azad. The youngest of the three Akademies founded by the Government of India, the Lalit Kala Akademi was established in pursuance of the dream of the first Prime Minister of independent India, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru for a cultural and national identity. Thus the Lalit
Kala Akademi as one among three such national organizations, that emerged. The




http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 2
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS


LKA was the principal establishment to direct its focus on activities in the field of visual arts.

http://lalitkala.gov.in/history/objectives.html


http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/all-is-not-well-at-lalit-kala- akademi/article5856386.ece

7.   Solution: c)


8.   Solution: c)

Pages 70-71, Old NCERT Modern History class 12th




9.   Solution: c)


Refer page 161, India-2014


10. Solution: b)


11. Solution: c)

Page 49, Old NCERT Modern India class 12th

For more information:


http://www.indianetzone.com/47/dual_government_bengal.htm




12. Solution: b)


With the revival of demand in advanced economies, the US has re-emerged as

India's top exports destination. India's exports to the US during April-Dec 2013 stood at $29.3 billion followed by the UAE at $22.3 billion and China at $10.8 billion. In the
2012-13 fiscal, UAE was India's top exports destination followed by the US and

Singapore, the study pointed out.





13. Solution: a)

http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 3
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS


NFSM was launched in 2007-08 with an outlay of Rs. 4,882.48 crore for 11th Plan and succeeded in meeting its objective of increasing foodgrains production by 20
million tonnes by 2011-12.  The average annual production of about 202.5

million tonnes of foodgrains during the 10th Plan rose to the level of about 237.5 million tonnes during the 11th Plan.

The National Development Council (NDC)in its 53rd meeting held on 29th May,

2007 adopted a resolution to launch a Food Security Mission comprising rice, wheat and pulses to increase the production of rice by 10 million tons, wheat by 8 million tons and pulses by 2 million tons by the end of the Eleventh Plan (2011-12).

The basic strategy is to promote improved technologies, i.e., adoption of quality seeds, enhancing farm efficiency through improved agronomic practices like line sowing, SRI, direct seeding, soil amendments, integrated nutrient management, integrated pest management, water use efficiency and resource conservation technologies. Proven crop production technologies developed by the National Agricultural Research System would be made available to the farmers through a series of planned interventions and financial incentives.

It is a fully centrally sponsored scheme.


14. Solution: c)


15. Solution: c)


Refer Page no. 84 (India – 2014)


16. Solution: d)


17. Solution: c)


The Centre for Cultural Resources and Training (CCRT) is one of the premier institutions working in the field of linking education with culture. Established in 1979, pioneered by Smt. Kamaladevi Chattopadhyay and Dr. Kapila Vatsyayan, it functions as an autonomous organization under the aegis of Ministry of Culture, Government of India. At the philosophical core of the CCRT lies a commitment to holistic education, encompassing the cognitive,


http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 4
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS



emotional and spiritual development of children. To this end the CCRT conducts education grounded in cultural knowledge and understanding as conducive to clarity, creativity, independence of thought, tolerance and compassion.

CCRT has been contributing to the strengthening of the foundation of the nation by making education culture based and meaningful. The CCRT has its headquarters in New Delhi and three Regional Centres at Udaipur in the west, Hyderabad in the south and Guwahati in the north-east to facilitate the widespread dissemination of Indian art and culture. The CCRT revitalizes the education system by creating an understanding and awareness among teachers, students and educational administrators about the plurality of the regional cultures of India and integrating this knowledge with education.

CCRT‟s main  thrust is to make  variety of training programmes for in-service teachers, teacher educators, educational administrators and students throughout the country. It also organizes special training programmes for the physically and mentally challenged children. The training programmes provide an understanding and appreciation of the philosophy, aesthetics and beauty inherent in Indian art and culture and focus on formulating methodologies   for   incorporating   a   cultural   component   in   curriculum teaching. The role of culture in science and technology, housing, agriculture, sports i.e. in all aspects of development and growth is emphasised.

The importance of in-service teachers training was also stressed. Change in educational  system  can  only  be  brought  about  if  the  teachers  have  been trained and prepared to understand and recognise the need for a changes in the methodologies of teaching. Since the teacher training is limited to nine months, it cannot possibly produce teachers well-versed in crafts. Therefore trained craftsmen though not fully educated in the formal way, should be associated with the trained teachers in the teaching of crafts to the pupils. Educational visits to museums, monuments and historical sites are arranged to expose students to the rich Indian cultural heritage.




Kapila Vatsyayan (born 25 December 1928) is a leading Indian scholar of classical Indian dance, Indian art and Indian architectureand art historian. She was the founder director of the Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts, Delhi, and continues as is chairperson.

In 1970, she was awarded the Sangeet Natak Akademi Fellowship, the highest honour conferred by the Sangeet Natak Akademi, India's National Academy for Music, Dance and Drama. In 2011, she was the Padma Vibhushan, India's second highest civilian honour, by the Government of India




http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 5
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS


18. Solution: b)


India was one of the first in Asia to recognize the effectiveness of the Export Processing Zone (EPZ) model in promoting exports, with Asia's first EPZ set up in Kandla in 1965. With a view to overcome the shortcomings experienced on account of the multiplicity of controls and clearances; absence of world-class infrastructure,
and an unstable fiscal regime and with a view to attract larger foreign investments in
India, the Special Economic Zones (SEZs) Policy was announced in April 2000.

This policy intended to make SEZs an engine for economic growth supported by quality infrastructure complemented by an attractive fiscal package, both at the Centre and the State level, with the minimum possible regulations. SEZs in India functioned from 1.11.2000 to 09.02.2006 under the provisions of the Foreign Trade Policy and fiscal incentives were made effective through the provisions of relevant statutes.

To instill confidence in investors and signal the Government's commitment to a stable SEZ policy regime and with a view to impart stability to the SEZ regime thereby generating greater economic activity and employment through the establishment of SEZs, a comprehensive draft SEZ Bill prepared after extensive discussions with the stakeholders. A number of meetings were held in various parts of the country both by the Minister for Commerce and Industry as well as senior officials for this purpose. The Special Economic Zones Act, 2005, was passed by Parliament in May, 2005 which received Presidential assent on the 23rd of June, 2005. The draft SEZ Rules were widely discussed and put on the website of the
Department of Commerce offering suggestions/comments. Around 800 suggestions
were received on the draft rules. After extensive consultations, the SEZ Act, 2005, supported by SEZ Rules, came into effect on 10th February, 2006, providing for drastic simplification of procedures and for single window clearance on matters relating to central as well as state governments. The main objectives of the SEZ Act are:
(a) generation of additional economic activity
(b) promotion of exports of goods and services;
(c) promotion of investment from domestic and foreign sources; (d) creation of employment opportunities;
(e) development of infrastructure facilities;



19. Solution: d)


20. Solution: b)


The Bringing Green Revolution in Eastern India programme launched in 2010-11 as a
Prime Minster's initiative based on the Inter Ministerial Task Force has resulted in impressive increase in production of food grains with the eastern region now


http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 6
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS


turning a food surplus region. The BGREI is a subscheme of the Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojna (RKVYJ ) with an outlay of Rs. 400 crores in the eastern region including Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Odisha, Eastern Uttar Pradesh & West Bengal.


The programme gained momentum in 2011-12 with the focus on rice and wheat only and strategic interventions relating to crop production, water harvesting and recycling, asset building and site specific activities needed for improving the agronomy-adopting cluster approach aimed at enhancing the productivity per unit area and the income of the farmers.


Eastern region hitherto known as food deficit region, has with the help of the programme, turned food surplus region. The rice production from the region is estimated at 562.6 lakh tons an increase of 19.8% over last year against an all India increase of 7%. And the foodgrain production from the region is estimated at 1032 tons an increase of 11.9% against an all India increase of 2.2%.


The increased productivity/ production was optimized due to resource allocation and utilization. The significant increase in production of food grains in the region not only offset the decline in production in central and peninsular India but also contributed significantly to the highest ever production of food grains. The growth
in food grains i.e. rice and wheat provides an opportunity to procure and create food

grain reserves locally reducing the pressure on Punjab and Haryana, and cutting costs on transport and other logistics.


The focus will now be to consolidate the gains with continued emphasis during the
12th Plan. Further steps will be taken to improve the infrastructure for procurement and storage of the produce and to ensure a reasonable price for the farmers.









http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 7
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS


21. Solution: c)


It was set up by the Indian education ministry in 31 May 1952 and became functional the following year, with the appointment of its first chairman, Dr. P. V.
Rajamannar. Dr Rajendra Prasad, the first President of India, inaugurated it on 28

January 1953 in a special function held in the Parliament House. The academy's Fellowship and Award are considered very prestigious.

The academy functions as the apex body of the performing arts in the country to preserve and promote the vast cultural heritage of India expressed in music, dance and drama. It also works with governments and art academies in states and territories of the country.

SNA established several institutions over the years:

1.    Manipur Dance Academy, Imphal[
2.    Sattriya Centre
3.    Kathak Kendra (National Institute of Kathak Dance), New Delhi in 1964
4.    Ravindra Rangshala



National School of Drama (NSD) is a theatre training institute situated at New

Delhi, India. It is an autonomous organization under Ministry of

Culture, Government of India. It was set up in 1959 by the Sangeet Natak Akademi, and became an independent school in 1975.




22. Solution: a)

Page 99, Old NCERT class 12th, Modern India




23. Solution: b)


Ta Prohm is the modern name of the temple at Angkor, Siem Reap

Province, Cambodia, built in the Bayon style largely in the late 12th and early 13th centuries and originally called Rajavihara. Located approximately one kilometre east
of Angkor Thom and on the southern edge of the East Baray, it was founded by



http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 8
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS


the Khmer King Jayavarman VII as a Mahayana Buddhist monastery and university. Unlike most Angkorian temples, Ta Prohm has been left in much the same condition in which it was found: the photogenic and atmospheric combination of trees
growing out of the ruins and the jungle surroundings have made it one of Angkor's

most popular temples with visitors. UNESCO inscribed Ta Prohm on the World Heritage List in 1992. Today,  it is one of the most visited complexes in Cambodia‟s Angkor region. The conservation and restoration of Ta Prohm is a partnership project of the Archaeological Survey of India and the APSARA (Authority for the Protection and Management of Angkor and the Region of Siem Reap)




24. Solution: b)




25. Solution: c)




26. Solution: c)


http://nfsm.gov.in/Pulses/A3Pguidelines.pdf





27. Solution: c)

Page 98, Old NCERT Modern India class 12th




28. Solution: b)

Information needs of farmers have been traditionally catered to through schemes implemented by States / UT governments. The Government of India has been supporting the States by initiating and funding quite a few programmes. All these schemes have a component about information dissemination. There are a number of current IT initiatives/ schemes undertaken or implemented by Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, Ministry of Agriculture, which are aimed at providing information to  the farmers on various activities in the Agricultural  value  chain. However,  these  initiatives are  not  integrated  and the  information exists in silos because  of  which  the  farmer  is  unable  to  make  proper  and  timely  use  of  the

http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 9
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS


information available. The existing IT applications have been built on disparate IT platforms and the databases are not integrated leading to non-usage/ inefficient usage of existing applications. Moreover, there is little awareness among the farmers about current initiatives.

NeGP-A aims to provide an integrated and seamless interface to the farmers for making informed decisions. Additionally, under the proposed scheme, information is proposed to be delivered using multiple delivery channels such as the internet, government offices, touch screens, Krishi Vigyan Kendras, electronic media, Kisan Call Centres, Agri-Clinics, Common Service Centres and mobile phones (broadcast, Interactive Voice Response System, interactive messaging using Unstructured Supplementary Service Data and Voice Recognition), which will enable easy access to  information for the  farmer. It would also  help in effective monitoring of the targeted beneficiaries which will help in efficient utilisation of funds in achieving intended goals of various schemes of DAC.




29. Solution: b)


THE RAMAKRISHNA MISSION INSTITUTE OF CULTURE, a branch of the Ramakrishna Mission, started functioning in 1938. The Institute has grown over the years, and the fact that it is now housed at its present magnificent building (completed in 1960) in south Calcutta is a testimony to its popularity.

Since 1962, Indian and WB governments are financing some of its activities.





30. Solution: a)

The ryotwari system is associated with the name of Sir Thomas Munro, who was appointed Governor of Madras in May 1820. Subsequently, the ryotwari system was extended to the Mumbai area.[3] Munro gradually reduced the rate of taxation from one half to one third of the gross produce, even then an excessive tax. The levy was not based on actual revenues from the produce of the land, but instead on an estimate of the potential of the soil; in some cases more than 50% of the gross revenue was demanded.

In Northern India, Sir Edward Colebrooke and successive Governor-Generals had implored the Court of Directors of the British East India Company, in vain, to redeem the pledge given by the British Government, and to permanently settle the land-tax, so as to make it possible for the people to accumulate wealth and improve their own condition.


http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 10
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS


Payment of the land tax in cash, rather than in kind, was instituted in the late 18th century when the British East India Company wanted to establish an exclusive monopoly in the market as buyers of Indian goods. Critics asserted that in practice the requirement of cash payments was ruinous to the cultivator, exposing him to the demands of moneylenders as an alternative to the loss of his land and starvation when crops failed. They also asserted that lean years resulted in regional famines, as the cultivators could not accumulate capital or invest in the productive development of their landholdings.



31. Solution: d)


In order for the smooth functioning, the Department of Commerce is divided into eight divisions:

     Administrative and General Division
     Finance Division
     Economic Division
     Trade Policy Division
     Foreign Trade Territorial Division
     State Trading & Infrastructure Division
     Supply Division
     Plantation Division http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coffee_production_in_India

32. Solution: c)




33. Solution: b)

Page No. 91, Old NCERT Modern India class 12th

Wood‟s Despatch is a long document of 100 paragraphs and deals with the various aspects of great educational importance. Now we will discuss the recommendations in one by one.
Aims and Objectives of Educational Policy: The Despatch first throws light on the
aims and objectives of educational policy of the Company in India. It gave
highest priority to the responsibility of Indian Education overall other responsibilities of the Company. The Despatch had the following objectives in view:

a) To impart Western knowledge, information about the western culture to the


http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 11
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS


Indians.
b) To educate the natives of India so that a class of public servants could be
created.
c) To promote intellectual development and also raise the moral character of the young generation.
d) To develop practical and vocational skills of the Indians people so that more
and more articles could be produced and also to create a good market for consumption of those goods.
Department of Education: The Wood‟s Despatch, for the first time, recommended
the creation of a Department of Public Instruction in each of the five provinces of
Bengal, Bombay, Madras, the Punjab and the North Western provinces. The head of the Department would be called the Director and he was to be assisted by a number of inspectors. The D.P.T. had to submit an annual report to the government about the educational progress in his province.
Expansion of Mass Education: - Another major recommendation of the Despatch
was expansion of mass education. It was observed that the common people were deprived of educational opportunities and therefore much emphasis was given
on the increase of setting up primary, middle and high schools. The Dowaward Feltration Theory as proposed earlier was discarded and in its place importance to primary education was given. Elementary education was considered to be the foundation of the education system.
Establishment of Universities: - The Despatch recommended the establishment of universities in the three Presidency towns of Calcutta, Bombay and Madras. The universities were to be modeled after the London University and these were to have a senate comprising of a Chancellor, a Vice-Chancellor, and fellows who were nominated by the Government. The Universities would confer degrees to the successful candidates after passing the examinations, (of Science or Arts Streams) conducted by the Senate. The universities were to organize departments not only of English but also of Arabic, Sanskrit and Persian, as well as law and civil engineering.
Grant - in-aid system: - The Wood‟s Despatch recommended the sanction of a
grant-in-aid system in the Indian educational system. To educate the large
number of people of India was a difficult task and so the grant-in-aid system was adopted by the government. Grants were given to those schools and colleges which satisfied the conditions given below :-


a) The schools must provide secular education.
b) The school management should run the school well.
c) The school should agree to state inspection from time to time.
d) The schools should follow any rule prescribed by the government for the
regulation of the grant.
e) The school must charge fees from the students.

Grants were given to the schools for increasing the salaries teachers, construction of school buildings, granting scholarships to students, improving conditions of literaries, opening of science department etc.


http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 12
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS


Teaching of Language: - The Wood‟s Despatch gave importance to teaching of English, but at the same time, it also stressed on the teaching of Indian languages. The Despatch realised that any acquaintance of European knowledge could be communicated to the common people and that could be conveyed to them only through learning their own mother tongue. Therefore the Despatch clearly stated that Indian languages as well as English should be used as media of instruction. Education of Women: - The Despatch recommended that the government should always support education for women. The wood‟s Despatch stated, “The importance of female education in India cannot be over rated; and we have observed with pleasure the evidence which is now afforded of an increased
desire on the part of many of the natives of India to give a good education to
their daughters. By this means a far greater proportional impulse is imparted to
the educational and moral  tone of the people than  by the education of men”.  The Despatch also encouraged the private enterprises to promote women education.The schools for girls were to be included among those to which grants- in-aid would be given.
Training of Teachers: - The Wood‟s Despatch recommended the establishment of
teacher training schools in each of the provinces. There should be training schools for teachers of engineering, medicine and law. The qualified teachers should be given better pay scales. The Despatch further emphasized on the provision of scholarships to the teachers during their training period. Professional Education: - The Wood‟s Despatch encouraged professional education. It recommended the establishment of medical, engineering law and other institutes of professional education. The Despatch stated that in order to develop vocational efficiency of people and also to make people realise that the
British rule was progressive. Another reason for the encouragement of vocational education was to control the problem of unemployment.
Introduction of network of Graded Schools all over India: - The Wood‟s Despath
recommended the establishment of a network of graded schools all over the country. At one end were the universities and the colleges, then the high schools followed by the middle schools and the bottom of the middle schools and at the bottom of the network were the primary schools, both government and indigenous. Both the Anglo-vernacular and vernacular schools were to be included in the same class. This system was recommended in order to enable an individual to receive higher education after completing the different levels of schools education.



34. Solution: b)

More detailed explanation:

http://edu.holisticthought.com/india-under-the-british-lord-william-bentinck/







http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 13
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS


35. Solution: a)


Rahim Fahimuddin Dagar (2 February 1927 – 27 July 2011) was an exponent of
Dagar vani Dhrupad of Indian classical music. He represented the 19th generation of Dagar Tradition. He and his brothers Nasir Moinuddin Dagar and Nasir Aminuddin Dagar were known as the Senior Dagar Brothers. Similarly, Nasir Zahiruddin and Nasir Faiyazuddin Dagar were known as the Junior Dagar Brothers. His other brothers were Zia Mohiuddin Dagar, Fariduddin Dagar, and Hussain Sayeeduddin Dagar.

He was awarded the Padma Bhushan in 2008, the third highest civilian honour given by Government of India,[3] followed by the 2010 Sangeet Natak Akademi Fellowship, the highest honour in the performing arts conferred by the Sangeet Natak Akademi, India's National Academy for Music, Dance and Drama.



36. Solution: d)




37. Solution: b)


National Mission for Protein Supplement:  To increase the supply of the protein supplements, government had launched a National Mission for Protein supplements in 2011-12 with allocation of Rs.300 crore. It is a sub-scheme of RKVY.  The Mission has taken up activities to promote animal based protein production through
livestock development, dairy farming and fisheries in selected blocks.





38. Solution: c)

Page 52, Old NCERT Modern India class 12th

The doctrine of subsidiary alliance was introduced by Lord Wellesley,
British Governor-General in India from 1798 to 1805. Early in his governorship Wellesley adopted a policy of non-intervention in the princely states, but he later adopted the policy of forming subsidiary alliances. This policy was to play a major role in British expansion in India. According to the term of this alliance, Indian rulers were not allowed to have their independent armed force . They were to be protected by the company, but had to pay for the 'subsidiary forces' that the company was supposed to maintain for the purpose of this protection. If the Indian rulers failed to make the payment, then part of their territory was taken away as penalty. By the late


http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 14
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS


18th century, the power of the Maratha Empire had weakened in the Indian subcontinent, and India was left with a great number of states, most small and weak. Many rulers accepted the offer of protection by Lord Wellesley, as it gave them security against attack by their neighbors.

The main principles of a subsidiary alliance were:

1.  An Indian ruler entering into a subsidiary alliance with the British had to accept British forces within his territory and also agreed to pay for their maintenance.
2.  The ruler would accept a British Resident in his state.
3.  An Indian ruler who entered into a subsidiary alliance would not enter into any further alliance with any other power, nor would he declare war against any power without the permission of the British.
4.  The ruler would not employ any Europeans other than the British, and if he were already doing so, he would dismiss them.
5.  In case of a conflict with any other state, he would agree the resolution decided upon by the British.
6.  The ruler would acknowledge the East India Company as the paramount power in India.
7.  In return for the ruler accepting its conditions, the Company undertook to protect the state from external dangers and internal disorders.
8.  If the Indian rulers failed to make the payments required by the alliance, then part of their territory was to be taken away as a penalty.

Under this doctrine, Indian rulers under British protection surrendered the control of their foreign affairs to the British. Most disbanded their native armies, instead maintaining British troops within their states to protect them from attack. As British power grew, in most parts of India this became increasingly unlikely.

The Nizam of Hyderabad was the first to enter into such an alliance. Tipu
Sultan of Mysore refused to do so, but after the British victory in the Fourth Anglo- Mysore War, Mysore was forced to become a subsidiary state. The Nawab of Awadh was the next to accept the Subsidiary Alliance, in 1801. After the Third Anglo- Maratha War, the Maratha ruler Baji Rao II also accepted a subsidiary alliance.



39. Solution: c)




40. Solution: c)


A Kisan Credit Card is a credit card to provide affordable credit for farmers in India. It was started by the Government of India, Reserve Bank of India (RBI), and National


http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 15
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS


Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) in 1998-99 to help farmers access timely and adequate credit.

The Kisan Credit Card allows farmers to have cash credit facilities without going through time-consuming bank credit screening processes repeatedly. Repayment can be rescheduled if there is a bad crop season, and extensions are offered for up to four years. The card is valid for three years and subject to annual renewals. Withdrawals are made using slips, cards, and a passbook




All farmers, owner cultivators, tenant cultivators, share croppers and individual farmers having agreement with institution are eligible for the card. Most banks in India that offer agricultural finance offer the Kisan Credit Card. Under the scheme, Branches may issue Kisan Credit Cards to the farmers who are otherwise eligible for sanction of short term credit for crop production, allied activities and other non-farm activities.

The card is valid for five years, of which crop loan and working capital components have to be renewed annually. I Limit of kisan credit card depend upon scale of finance, which is decided by lead district bank and it varies from place to place.




41. Solution: a)


Kutiyattam, Sanskrit theatre, which is practised in the province of Kerala, is one of India‟s oldest  living theatrical traditions. Originating more than  2,000 years ago, Kutiyattam represents a synthesis of Sanskrit classicism and reflects the local traditions of Kerala. In its stylized and codified theatrical language, neta abhinaya (eye expression) and hasta abhinaya (the language of gestures) are prominent. They focus on the thoughts and feelings of the main character. Actors undergo ten to fifteen years of rigorous training to become fully-fledged performers with sophisticated breathing control and subtle muscle shifts of the face and body. The actor‟s art lies in elaborating a situation or episode in all its detail. Therefore, a single
act may take days to perform and a complete performance may last up to 40 days.





http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 16
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS


Kutiyattam is traditionally performed in theatres called Kuttampalams, which are located in Hindu temples. Access to performances was originally restricted owing to their sacred nature, but the plays have progressively opened up to larger audiences. Yet the actor‟s role retains a sacred  dimension, as attested by purification rituals and the placing of an oil lamp on stage during the performance symbolizing a divine presence. The male actors hand down to their trainees detailed performance manuals, which, until recent times, remained the exclusive and secret property of selected families.

With the collapse of patronage along with the feudal order in the nineteenth century, the families who held the secrets to the acting techniques experienced serious difficulties. After a revival in the early twentieth century, Kutiyattam is once again facing a lack of funding, leading to a severe crisis in the profession. In the face of this situation, the different bodies responsible for handing down the tradition have come together to join efforts in order to ensure the continuity of this Sanskrit theatre.

For more information:


http://www.hindu.com/2001/07/01/stories/09010331.htm




42. Solution: d)

The word Mahalwari (               ) is derived from the Hindi word Mahal (         ), which means house, district, neighborhood or quarter.[1] This system consisted
of landlords orZamindars claiming to represent entire villages or even groups of
villages. Along with the village communities, the landlords were jointly responsible for the payment of the revenues. But, individual responsibility was always there. The land included under this system consisted of all land of the villages, even the forestland, pastures etc.

This system was prevalent in the parts of Uttar Pradesh, the North Western province, parts of Central India and Punjab

The government of William Bentinck made a thorough revision of the act of 1822, and thus the Mahalwari System was introduced. They realized that that the result of the Regulation of 1822 was nothing other than widespread misery.

After a prolonged consultation, the Government finally passed a new regulation in
1833. This played a huge part in making the system more flexible. The process of

http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 17
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS


preparing estimates of produce and rents was simplified too. It also introduced the fixation of the average rents for different classes of soil. This scheme functioned under Mettins Bird. The processes of measuring land, examining soil quality was improved further. The State demand was fixed at 66% of the rental value and the Settlement was made for 30 years.

The Mahalwari system of land revenue worked under the scheme of 1833 was completed under the administration of James Thompson. The 66% rental demanded proved very harsh, too. In the Saharanpur Rules of 1855, it was revised to 50%
by Lord Dalhousie. However, the British officers hardly cared of these rules. This
created widespread discontent among the Indians



43. Solution:  b)


Chhau dance is a genre of Indian tribal martial dance which is popular in

the Indian states of Odisha,Jharkhand and West Bengal. There are three subgenres of the dance, based on its places of origin and development, Seraikella Chhau, Mayurbhanj Chhau and Purulia Chhau.

The Chhau dance is mainly performed during regional festivals, especially the spring festival of Chaitra Parva which lasts for thirteen days and in which the whole community participates. The Chhau blends within it forms of both dance and
martial practices employing mock combat techniques (called khel), stylized gaits of
birds and animals (called chalis and topkas) and movements based on the chores of village housewives (calleduflis). The dance is performed by male dancers from families of traditional artists or from local communities and is performed at night in an open space, called akhada or asar, to traditional and folk music, played on the reed pipes mohuri and shehnai. A variety of drums accompany the music ensemble including the dhol (a cylindrical drum), dhumsa (a large kettle drum)
and kharka or chad-chadi. The themes for these dances include local legends, folklore
and episodes from the Ramayana and Mahabharata and other abstract themes.[3]

The Chhau dance is mainly performed by the Munda, Mahato,
Kalindi, Pattnaik, Samal, Daroga, Mohanty, Acharya, Bhol, Kar, Dubey,
and Sahoocommunities. The musical accompaniment for the dance is provided by people of communities known as Mukhis, Kalindis, Ghadheis and Dhadas who are also involved in the making of the instruments. Masks form an integral part of Chhau Dance in Purulia and Seraikella where the craft of mask-making is undertaken by communities of traditional painters known as
Maharanas, Mohapatras and Sutradhars. The knowledge of dance, music and mask-
making is transmitted orally.




http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 18
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS







44. Solution: d)




45. Solution: d)


To increase production of oilseeds including soyabean in the country, the Government is implementing a Centrally Sponsored Integrated Scheme of Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil Palm and Maize (ISOPOM) in 14 major oilseeds growing States.  Under this scheme, financial assistance is provided to farmers for purchase of breeder seed, production of foundation seed, production and distribution of certified seed, distribution of seed mini kits, distribution of plant protection chemicals, plant protection equipments, weedicides, supply of micro nutrients & improved agriculture implements, supply of rhizobium culture/ phosphate solubilising bacteria, distribution of gypsum/pyrite/liming/dolomite, distribution of sprinkler sets and water carrying pipes, training, publicity, etc. including free distribution of seed minikits of oilseeds and maize to encourage all types of farmers including small and marginal farmes to grow these crops.




46. Solution: d)

Page no. 90, old NCERT Modern India, Class 12th. Both the statements are correct.



47. Solution: a)


Foreign Trade Policy has two variants under this scheme, namely, Zero Duty EPCG for few sectors and 3% Duty EPCG for all sectors. During the last announcement on 5th June, 2012, a new Post Export EPCG Scheme was also announced which was notified on 18 February, 2013 by the CBEC. Based on the request of all stakeholders, Government has decided to harmonize Zero Duty EPCG and 3% EPCG Scheme into one scheme which will be a Zero Duty EPCG Scheme covering all sectors.


http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 19
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS


2.2 Following are the salient features of the Zero Duty EPCG Scheme:-

(i) Authorization holders will have export obligation of 6 times the duty saved amount. The export obligation has to be completed in a period of 6 years.

(ii) The period for import under the Scheme would be 18 months.

(iii) Export obligation discharge by export of alternate products as well as accounting of exports of group companies will not be allowed.

(iv)  The  exporters  who  have  availed  benefits  under  Technology  Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS) administered by Ministry of Textiles, can also avail the benefit of Zero duty EPCG Scheme.

(v) The import of motor cars, SUVs, all purpose vehicles for hotels, travel agents, or tour transport operators and companies owning/operating golf resorts will not allowed under the new Zero Duty EPCG Scheme.




48. Solution: d)


The National Horticulture Mission envisages a holistic growth of the horticulture sector by adopting an area specific cluster approach, to deal with issues relating to production and productivity improvement, post-harvest management, processing and marketing. During the Eleventh  Plan production in this sector increased from
192 million tons in 2006-07 to over 250 million tons in 2011-12, an increase of over

30%.


India is the 2nd largest producer in the world.




49. Solution: d)


50. Solution: d)

Kathak is among the six major classical dances of India and one of the most dynamic theater arts in the world. The word Kathak is derived from katha, meaning "the art of storytelling." It is also synonymous with the community of artists known as Kathakas whose hereditary profession it was to narrate history while entertaining. With dance, music and mime these storytellers of
ancient India would bring to life the great scriptures and epic so ancient


http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 20
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS


times, especially the great Indian epics - the Mahabharata and the Ramayana - and the Puranas of Sanskrit literature.


From its early form as a devotional expression dedicated to the Hindu gods, Kathak gradually moved out of the temples and into the courts of the rulers; the Hindumaharajas and the Muslim nawabs (kings). With these rulers' cultural wealth and preoccupation with lavish entertainment, a class of dancing girls and courtesans emerged to entertain the palaces. Much later, during the mid-
1800's, Kathak enjoyed a renaissance and gained prominence among the kings

and zamindars(feudal overlords) not only as a form of entertainment, but as a classical art form. In the Hindu courts of the vast semi-desert of the principality of Rajasthan, kathak developed in the Jaipur gharana (school), a regional style emphasizing the technical mastery of pure dance. To the east in the court of Wajid Ali Shah, the last nawab of Oudh and himself a student of Kathak, the dance emphasized dramatic and sensuous expression and developed into the style characteristic of the Lucknow gharana. This gharana is said to have originated with Wajid Ali Shah's court dancer Thakur Prasadji.


The lineage of Kathak dance can be traced from generation to generation, father to son, guru to disciple. Thakur Prasadji's nephews, Binda Din Maharaj and Kalka Prasad, excelled in the study of Kathak. Binda Din's three nephews, Achhan, Lacchu and Shambhu Maharaj, helped carry the Kathak tradition
into the twentieth century. Achhan Maharaj, and upon his death, Shambhu Maharaj, had among his many disciples Ram Narayan Misra and Prohlad Das, respectively guru and father of Chitresh Das.




51. Solution: a)

It is demand driven and can be taken up by individuals, farmers, SHG, local bodies etc in the entire country.



http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 21
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS


http://agmarknet.nic.in/ruralhead.htm





52. Solution: c)



53. Solution: d)


The National Mission for Manuscripts (NAMAMI) is an autonomous organisation under Ministry of Culture, Government of India, established to survey, locate and conserve Indian manuscripts, with an aim to create national resource base for manuscripts, for enhancing their access, awareness and use for educational purposes. The Mission was initiated in February 2003, by the Ministry of Tourism and Culture, Government of India and Indira Gandhi National Centre for the
Arts (IGNCA) is the nodal agency for the execution of this project. It creates

bibliographic databases of Indian manuscripts and is involved in the conservation and preservation of the manuscripts.

http://ibnlive.in.com/news/18m-ancient-manuscripts-go-online/top/33510-3.html





54. Solution: d)


India and SACU are yet to sign the treaty. http://www.sacu.int/main.php?id=170



55. Solution: c) http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Balshastri_Jambhekar Page 101, Old NCERT Modern India class 12th



56. Solution: d)




http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 22
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS





57. Solution: a)

Page no. 74, Old NCERT Modern History class 12th




58. Solution: c) http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/250 http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/247
The serial site, situated in the state of Rajastahan, includes six majestic forts in Chittorgarh; Kumbhalgarh; Sawai Madhopur; Jhalawar; Jaipur, and Jaisalmer. The ecclectic architecture of the forts, some up to 20 kilometres in circumference, bears testimony to the power of the Rajput princely states that flourished in the region from the 8th to the 18th centuries. Enclosed within defensive walls are major urban centres, palaces, trading centres and other buildings including temples that often predate the fortifications within which developed an elaborate courtly culture that supported learning, music and the arts. Some of the urban centres enclosed in the fortifications have survived, as have many of the site's temples and other sacred buildings. The forts use the natural defenses offered by the landscape: hills, deserts, rivers, and dense forests. They also feature extensive water harvesting structures, largely still in use today.





59. Solution: a) Details of the Scheme:
1.   The Indian Agriculture is on the threshold of a second revolution. It is becoming increasingly clear that the next leap will come from the information and the knowledge intensity transfer to the agriculture sector, together with the other traditional inputs and interventions. The real challenge before the policy makers is to overcome the information asymmetry between farmer and farmer, village and village, region and region and the country as a whole


http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 23
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS


versus other countries. Fortunately, the developments in the field of communication and information technology in India make it possible to attempt this task.


2.   The country today has an impressive telecom network both in the private and Government sector. Over 5 lakh villages have a public telephone in the country. It has been felt for long that this impressive telecom network could
be put to effective use for delivering knowledge and information to the farming community. With the decrease in the number of extension workers, there is a need to use the latest technologies for delivering extension services. Towards this, the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation has been working on schemes to use both Mass-Media and telecom network for the delivery of extension services.


3.   One of the draw-backs experienced in the current human resource based extension service has been that the monitoring authorities are not able to get a clear feed back on the quality of extension services being delivered in the villages. Further, the extension services delivered is knowledge and information based on felt needs and what has been given to them by the higher authorities. On the other hand a call centre based extension service will be delivering knowledge and information exactly as per the requirements of the farming community. This system would also help keep a record of what is being delivered to the farmers in terms of knowledge and information.


4.   The objective of the scheme has been to make agriculture knowledge available at free of cost to the farmers as and when desired.


5.   This scheme has an in-built system of monitoring and continuous evaluation for modifications and improvements. The services are also of a foundational nature. Many more exciting tiers will be built on this infrastructure.


6.   The Kisan Call Centre scheme is available over the complete country. At present the Call Centre services are available at a common toll free telephone number which can be dialed from anywhere in the country. The location is immaterial as the calls can originate from any village to land at a specific call centre and a specific seat which would be answered by an agriculture graduate knowing the local language and having an understanding of the




http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 24
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS


local agricultural issues.


7.   The call centres as operational today have been selected on the basis of a tender document which was floated by TCIL, a Govt. of India Company which was appointed by Department of Agriculture & Cooperation as the consultant.


8.   The Kisan Call Centre scheme has been functioning from 21.1.04. The Call Centres can be accessed by farmers all over the country on common Toll Free Number 1551.


9.   The calls are received at 13 Call Centres wherein 116 Agriculture Graduates attend to answer the query of the farmer in the local language. 123 experts located in different parts of the country at State Agriculture Universities, ICAR institutes, State Department of Agriculture, Horticulture and other developments are answering the calls at Level –II.

NEW INITIATIVES:


Since 10th June, 2004 the Call Centres service has been made available right from 6 A.M. to 10 P.M. except on Sundays and gazetted holidays, beyond these hours the calls are attended in the IVRS mode.




60. Solution: b)

Page 81, Old NCERT class 12th, Modern India




61. Solution: a)


As a facilitative measure to attract more foreign tourists to India,  Government launched the “Visa on Arrival” (VoA) Scheme in January 2010 for citizens  of five countries, viz. Finland, Japan, Luxembourg, New Zealand and Singapore, visiting India for tourism purposes. The Scheme was extended to the citizens of six more countries, namely Cambodia, Indonesia, Vietnam, the Philippines, Laos and
Myanmar in January 2011.



http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 25
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS


The number of Foreign Tourist Arrivals (FTAs) in India during January–July,
2012 registered a growth of 6.6% over the corresponding period of 2011.




The number of FTAs in India during 2010, 2011 and January –July, 2012 were
5.78 million, 6.29 million and 3.76 million, respectively.




62. Solution: a)

The Directorate General of Foreign  Trade‟s electronic Bank Realization Certificate (e- BRC) project has won the 2013 eASIA Award under Trade Facilitation category as announced by Asia Pacific Council for Trade Facilitation and Electronic Business (AFACT) in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam on November 29, 2013.

This project is a significant step in this direction and will contribute considerably in reducing the transaction cost of our exporters.


e-BRC project launched on June 5, 2012 created an integrated platform for receipt, processing and subsequent use of all Bank Realization related information by exporters, banks, central and state government departments. It was made mandatory with effect from August 17, 2012.

Bank Realization Certificate is required for discharge of export obligation and to claim incentives under Foreign Trade Policy. Earlier this certificate was issued by banks manually. BRC is also used by state government departments for refund of VAT.

e-BRC project enables banks to upload Foreign Exchange realisation information relating to merchandise goods exports on to the DGFT server under a secured protocol. So far 89 banks operating in India, including foreign banks and cooperative banks have uploaded more than 64 lakh e-BRCs on to the DGFT server. This
initiative has reduced the cost of transaction for exporters by eliminating their
interface with bank (for issuance of BRC purposes) and enhanced the productivity of banks and DGFT. At the state level, Commercial Tax Departments of Maharashtra,
Delhi, Odisha, Andhra Pradesh and Chhattisgarh have signed MoU with DGFT for receiving e-BRC data for VAT refund purposes. Many other states are in the process of signing MOUs. e-BRC project is a success story involving multiple stake holders, each with a different technology platform. This project is a live example of power of Business Process Reengineering (BPR) to improve service delivery.




63. Solution: b)




http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 26
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS


In 1786 the East India Company Court of Directors first proposed a permanent settlement for Bengal, changing the policy then being followed by Calcutta, which was attempting to increase taxation of zamindars. Between 1786 and 1790, the new Governor-General Lord Cornwallis and Sir John Shore (later Governor-General) entered a heated debate over whether or not to introduce a permanent settlement with the zamindars. Shore argued that the native zamindars would not trust the permanent settlement to be permanent, and that it would take time before they realised it was genuine. Cornwallis believed that they would immediately accept it and begin investing in improving their land. In 1790 the Court of Directors issued a ten-year (Decennial) settlement to the zamindars, which was made permanent in
1800. By the Permanent Settlement Act of 1793, the Zamindars power of keeping the armed forces were taken back and they remained just the tax collectors of the land. The power of Zamindars were considerably weakened as they were not allowed to hold any court as it was brought under the supervision of Collector appointed by the company.British officials believed that investing in the land to improve the
economy. They did not want to take direct control of local administration in villages
because of several reasons.They did not want to annoy those people who had traditionally enjoyed power and prestige in the village. In order to keep powerful people happy and to collect better revenue, Lord Cornwallis introduced the Permanent Settlement. As per permanent system, rajas and taluqdars were recognized as zamindars. The zamindars were supposed to collect the land revenue from the peasants. As per the permanent settlement:

    The rate of revenue was not to be increased ever in the future.
    The company officials believed that this would give some motivations to zamindars to invest in the land.
    Zamindars would be assured of long-term returns of continuous flow of
revenue.
    It also created a new social class of land-lords who were loyal to the British.



64. Solution: a)

Reference for more information:

http://edu.holisticthought.com/india-under-the-british-lord-cornwallis/







65. Solution: d)

http://www.thehindubusinessline.com/opinion/farm-mechanisation-indian- style/article4921271.ece


http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 27
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS







66. Solution: c)


67. Solution: b)

THE East India Company Act 1813, also known as the Charter Act of 1813, was
an Act of the Parliament of the United Kingdomwhich renewed the charter issued to the British East India Company, and continued the Company's rule in India. However, the Company's commercial monopoly was ended, except for the tea trade and the trade with China. Reflecting the growth of British power in India,

1. The Act expressly asserted the Crown's sovereignty over British India.

2. It alloted Rs 100,000 to promote education in India.

3. Christian missionaries were allowed to come to British India and preach their religion.

The power of the provincial governments and courts in India over European British subjects was also strengthened by the Act.[2]Financial provision was also made to encourage a revival in Indian literature and for the promotion of science.[3]

The Company's charter had previously been renewed by the Charter Act of 1793, and was next renewed by the Government of India Act 1833.



68. Solution: b)


Dr. Anand Coomaraswamy Fellowship


Sahitya Akademi in 1996, instituted a Fellowship in the name of the great scholar and aesthete Dr. Ananda Coomaraswamy to be offered to scholars from Asian countries to pursue literary projects of their choice.

Sahitya Akademi had announced the conferment of the first Fellowships in 1996 on three scholars namely, Dr. Azad N. Shamatov, Head of South Asian Languages Department, Tashkent State Institute of Oriental Studies, Tashkent, Prof. Senake Bandaranayake, Director, Post-Graduate Institute of Archeology, Colombo, Sri Lanka and Prof. Chie Nakane, a noted scholar from Japan. Of the three, Dr. Shamatov and Prof. Bandaranayake availed the fellowship and spent several weeks
in India doing useful research.


http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 28
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS


The scheme which was discontinued in view of practical difficulties was revived in

2005 after revising the terms and conditions which are given below:


1.   One Fellowship may be offered to a person of eminence in the field of Asian art, culture, literature and language studies every year under this scheme.

2.   The period of Fellowship should be from one month to three months depending on the convenience and availability of the writer/scholar.

3.   Actual cost of international air journey may be borne by the Sahitya Akademi, as also train or air journey within India.

4.   Arrangements for boarding and lodging would be made by the Sahitya

Akademi.


5.   An amount of Rs. 12,000 per month might be given to the scholar for meeting incidental expenses.

6.   The visiting Fellow may be requested to deliver lectures on the topic of his/her specialization in institutions/departments dealing in the discipline.

7.   A database of writers and scholars might be created to identify the Fellows.

Names of writers and scholars might be invited from the Indian Missions abroad, members of the Executive Board of the Sahitya Akademi, senior writers and scholars and from select cultural and literary institutions and universities.

8.   The visiting Fellow will be expected to submit a comprehensive report of his visit which will be placed before the Executive Board.
For more information:  http://sahitya-akademi.gov.in/sahitya- akademi/fellows/sahitya_akademi_fellowship.jsp











http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 29
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS





69. Solution: b)


The Ashok Group is a chain of hotels owned and operated as Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) of the India Tourism Development Corporation (ITDC) in India. The Group is headquartered in New Delhi.

Clean India Campaign has been initiated by the Ministry of Tourism with the objective to increase tourist arrivals to the country and to improve quality of services and provide a hygienic environment in and around tourist destinations across the country in sync with the 12th Five Year Plan of the Government of India. In the first phase of the campaign, 36 such monuments have been identified by the Ministry of Tourism and Archaeological Survey of India (ASI).


Clean India Campaign is a multi pronged action and comprehensive strategy to ensure an acceptable level of cleanliness and hygiene practices at tourist destinations for an inclusive and sustainable development of tourism through ownership and involvement of private and public sector stakeholders. This initiative aims to create a collective mindset that promotes cleanliness and hygiene by a balance of persuasion, education, sensitization, training, demonstration, regulation and involvement of every individual.


India Tourism Development Corporation (ITDC), the public sector undertaking under the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India was entrusted with the partnership of the Pilot Project of the prestigious campaign at Qutab Minar. ITDC has been networking with various stakeholders including Municipal Corporation of Delhi, ASI, Delhi Jal Board , Delhi Development Authority, Traffic Department and the Shop Owners and Trade Association around the Qutab Complex to make the project a success.




70. Solution: a)


http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 30
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS


Punjab has highest area under irrigation in the country.

http://www.thehindubusinessline.com/industry-and-economy/agri-biz/nearly-50- agricultural-land-in-rainfed-areas/article3904083.ece









71. Solution: c) All are correct. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MMTC_Ltd

72. Solution: b)


Benin, Burkina Faso, Chad  and Mali are collectively known as the „cotton 4‟ because they are cotton producing countries in West Africa and have been trying to the get the US to reduce their cotton subsidies for almost a decade.




73. Solution: a) Buxar is located in Bihar.
Battle of Buxar,  (Oct. 22, 1764), conflict between forces of the Britis hEast India
Company, commanded by Major Hector Munro, and those of the Mughal
emperor, Shah ʿAlam; the Mughal governor of Oudh (Ayodhya), Shujāʿ al-Dawlah; and the dispossessed governor of Bengal, Mīr Qāsim.  This decisive battle confirmed the British in the control of Bengal and Bihar after their initial success at Plassey in
1757.
The battle marked the end of the attempt to rule Bengal through a puppet nawab; thenceforth the company took control. In 1765 it was granted the power to collect revenues in Bengal, and the British soldier and administrator Robert Clive began his second governorship, which continued until 1767.



74. Solution: b)





http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 31
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS


75. Solution: c)


All re correct

Organic         farming         is         a         holistic         production         management system which  promotes and  enhances  health  of  agro-ecosystem  related  to  bio- diversity,  nutrient  bio-cycle  and  soil  biological  and  microbial  activities.  It  is normally defined as a system of farming without use of chemical inputs (fertilizers/insecticides etc.) and is primarily based on principal of use of natural on farm organic inputs (like farm yard manure, green manure, oil cakes, press mud etc.) and also natural biological pest control and plant protection measures to promote agro-economic system and soil biological activity.

Growing Area
Organic farming in India started receiving focused attention from 2004-05 when National Project on Organic Farming (NPOF) was launched.  In 2004-05, area under organic farming was 42,000 hectares.  By March 2010 area  under farming  had increased to 1.08 million hectares.  In addition, 3.40 million hectares is wild forest harvest collection area.  Thus total area under organic certification process by March,
2010    was    4.48    million    hectares    which    is    25    fold    increase    in    last    6
years.  In  cultivated organic land 7.56 lakh hectares is certified while 3.2 lakh hectare is under conversion.
The  States  doing  well  in  organic  farming  are  Madhya Pradesh(4.40lakh hectares),  Maharashtra  (1.50 lakh hectares)  and  Orissa  (95,000  hectares),  having
largest   area   under   organic.  Among   crops   cotton   is   the single  largest crop accounting for nearly 40 percent  of total area followed by rice, pulses, oilseeds and spices. India is the largest organic cotton grower in world, and accounts for 50 percent share of total world organic cotton production.
Nearly       6.00 lakh  farmers       under       920       grower       groups       produce
18.00 lakh tonnes of different  organic   commodities   valued at   Rs.   56-40 crores at farm  gate  price.  Out of 18 lakh  tonnes organic produce,  54000 tonnes of produce
valued at Rs. 561crores was exported. Export of organic products has also grown steadily over the years.  Value of exports which was Rs. 301crores in 2006-07 has increased to 525.5 crores in 2009-10.



States Adopting Organic Farming
Nine  States  have  drafted  organic  farming  policies.  Out  of  these,  four States viz; Uttarakhand,    Nagaland,    Sikkim    and    Mizoram have  declared  their intention to go 100 percent organic.  Sikkim has already converted nearly 40 percent of its total cultivated area under organic and has set target to convert entire State to organic by  2015.  Other        States        have        also        defined        schemes        to promote organic  farming.  Recently Bihar  has sanctioned    a    scheme    worth    Rs.
256 crores for  promotion  of  organic  farming  for  period  2010-11  to  2014-15.  This
scheme is 100 percent State Plan Scheme and entire funds shall be borne by State



http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 32
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS


Government.  The Scheme funded by  the Central Government will be in addition  to this scheme.




76. Solution: c)







77. Solution: c)

The Regulating Act of 1773 was an Act of the Parliament of Great Britain intended to overhaul the management of the East India Company's rule in India.[1] The Act did not prove to be a long-term solution to concerns over the Company's affairs; Pitt's India Actwas therefore subsequently enacted in 1784 as a more radical reform.

Provisions of the Regulating Act


     The Act limited Company dividends to 6% until it repaid a GB£1.5M loan (passed by an accompanying act, 13 Geo. 3 c. 64) and restricted the Court of Directors to four-year terms.[4]

     It prohibited the servants of company from engaging in any private trade or accepting presents or bribes from the natives.

     The Act elevated Governor of Bengal, Warren Hastings to Governor-General of Bengal and subsumed the presidencies of Madras and Bombay under Bengal's control.[4]

     The Act named four additional men to serve with the Governor-General on
the Calcutta Council: Lt-Gen John Clavering, George Monson, Richard Barwell, and Philip Francis. Barwell was the only one with previous experience in India. These councillors were commonly known as the "Council of Four".[4]
     A supreme court was established at Fort William at Calcutta. British judges were to be sent to India to administer the British legal system that was used there.



78. Solution: a) All are correct.
Reference: http://agmarknet.nic.in/amrscheme/amr1.htm


http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 33
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS


AGMARK is a certification mark employed on agricultural products in India, assuring that they conform to a set of standards approved by the Directorate of Marketing and Inspection, an agency of the Government of India. The AGMARK is legally enforced in India by the Agricultural Produce (Grading and Marking) Act of 1937 (and amended in 1986). The present AGMARK standards cover quality guidelines for
205 different commodities spanning a variety of Pulses, Cereals, Essential

Oils, Vegetable Oils, Fruits & Vegetables, and semi-processed products like Vermicelli.

The term agmark was coined by joining the words 'Ag' to mean agriculture and
'mark' for a certification mark. This term was introduced originally in the bill presented in the parliament of India for the Agricultural Produce (Grading and Marking) Act.[7]

The entire system of Agmark, including the name, was created by Archibald Macdonald Livingstone, Agricultural and Marketing Advisor to the Government of India, from 1934 to 1941. He was supported by a staff of several hundred. The system was designed to benefit local growers throughout India who were, in the absence of a certification as to quality, exposed to receiving less for their produce from dealers than its true worth



79. Solution: d)


80. Solution: b)

Along with this reason, they were also on the verge of defeat in the colonies of
America.




81. Solution: b)


82. Solution: b)
At present 3% subvention is given. https://www.nabard.org/english/int_sub_scheme.aspx







http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 34
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS


http://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/economy/agriculture/budget-2013- govt-continues-with-3-interest-subvention-scheme-for- farmers/articleshow/18727380.cms




83. Solution: b)


Ministry of Tourism‟s new film “Find  What You Seek” received first prize  at the 11th Golden City Gate Tourism Media Awards Ceremony held in Berlin today to coincide with ITB Berlin 2013. The Golden City Gate is an international film, print and media contest for the tourism industry. The Awards ceremony is held every year at ITB Berlin, the world‟s leading travel  trade show.

http://pib.nic.in/newsite/erelease.aspx?relid=88966








84. Solution: b)


85. Solution: c)




86. Solution: a)


The total trade of goods and services stands at over US $ 1trillion which is 56% of GDP. This was achieved through robust policy announcements, which provided crucial support to struggling enterprises, especially labour intensive industry to ensure their global competitiveness.


The Foreign Trade Policy focused on arresting and reversing the decline in exports. A multi-pronged strategy was adopted: to provide stability of policy and giving additional support, especially in employment intensive sectors. A market diversification strategy underpinned our approach to reach out to non-traditional
destinations in Africa, Latin America and Asia since our traditional markets.


http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 35
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS




Exports from Special Economic Zones (SEZs) have also scaled a new height reaching US$ 87.55 billion in the year 2012-13. In the last four years, exports from SEZs have grown four-fold. SEZs at present are providing direct employment to approximately
11,50,000 persons.








87. Solution: d)

The Doctrine of Lapse was an annexation policy purportedly devised by Lord Dalhousie, who was the Governor General for the East India Company in India between 1848 and 1856. According to the Doctrine, any princely state or territory under the direct influence (paramountcy) of the British East India
Company (the dominant imperial power in the subcontinent), as a vassal state under the British Subsidiary System, would automatically be annexed if the ruler was
either "manifestly incompetent or died without a direct heir".[1] The latter supplanted the long-established right of an Indian sovereign without an heir to choose a successor. In addition, the British decided whether potential rulers were competent enough. The doctrine and its application were widely regarded by many Indians as illegitimate.









88. Solution: d)




89. Solution: b)


The Government of India (GoI), Ministry of Textiles (MoT), introduced Technology Upgradation Fund Scheme (TUFS) for Textile and Jute Industries on April 1, 1999, for a period of 5 years, subsequently extended by 3 years to cover sanctions up to March 31, 2007. The Scheme has been modified w.e.f. April 1, 2007, for a period of 5
years i.e. to last till FY 2011-12. However, the Scheme was discontinued from June


http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 36
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS


29, 2010 till April 27, 2011 and loans sanctioned during the said period to the textile units were not covered under the Scheme. The Scheme was re-launched w.e.f. April
28, 2011 as Restructured-TUFS (i.e. R-TUFS) initially for the period upto March 31,

2012, which was further, continued till March 31, 2013. R-TUFS is introduced with an overall subsidy cap of Rs.1972 crore, with sectoral allocation of 26% for spinning,
13% for weaving, 21% for processing, 8% for garmenting and 32% for others. R-TUFS

was expected to leverage an investment of Rs.46, 900 crore.




90. Solution: c)


In both the cases, negotiations are still going on.




91. Solution: a)


In the budget for 2013-14 presented by the Finance Minister Sh. P. Chidambaram in Lok Sabha, the agricultural credit target has been increased to Rs. 7 lakh crores from the earlier Rs. 5.75 lakh crores. The short-term crop loan scheme (Interest Subvention Scheme) has been extended to the crop loans borrowed from private sector
scheduled commercial banks in respect of loans given in the service area of the

branch concerned. Earlier the scheme was applicable to loans extended by the Public

Sector Banks, Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) and Co-operative Banks. Banks can give General credit cards upto Rs 25000 Only, not Rs 2.5 lakhs



92. Solution: c)


Growth in India‟s agricultural exports has exceeded the rise in exports of other products. Through the past few years, these products have consistently seen a rise in their share in the export basket, primarily due to the huge stocks resulting from
bumper output, as well as favourable government policies.





http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 37
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS


According to data from the commerce ministry, in 2010-11, agricultural exports stood at $17.35 billion, in 2011-12 $27.43 billion, in 2012-13 $31.86 billion and in the first 11 months of 2013-14, it stood at $29.3 billion.


During this four-year period, overall exports recorded 93 per cent growth. The share of agricultural commodities in India‟s overall  export basked rose to 10.66 per cent in
2012-13 from 7.06 per cent in 2009-10. For more information:
http://www.business-standard.com/article/markets/agri-exports-outpace-other-

commodities-114040300941_1.html


http://www.apeda.gov.in/apedawebsite/HelpNews/Exports_Products.htm




93. Solution: c)


94. Solution: c)

Bethune College is a women's college in India. It was founded as a school in 1849 by John Elliot Drinkwater Bethune, and in 1879 developed into the first women's college in India, after whom it is named as Bethune College. It is located in Kolkata, and is affiliated to the University of Calcutta.




95. Solution: a)


Government of India (ministry of commerce)  has introduced "Served from India Scheme" to facilitate exporter of various type of services. The objective of this scheme is to accelerate growth in export of services so as to create a powerful and unique
'Served From India' brand, instantly recognized and respected world over.

Under this scheme, Service Providers of more than 100 services like Professional Services, Computer Related services, Hotels, Restaurants, Educational Services, Research and Development services, Communication Services, Construction and Related Engineering Services, Distribution Service, Environmental related Services, Tourism and Transport related Services, Health Related Social Service, Recreational, Cultural and Sporting Services etc.



http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 38
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS





96. Solution: c)

http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/2013-01-11/news/36279723_1_wto- talks-wto-members-doha-round


http://ictsd.org/i/news/bridges/69217/











97. Solution: d)


98. Solution: d)

Pages 95 – 97, Old NCERT Modern India class 12th

The religious reforms of Roy contained beliefs of the Brahmo Samaj as expounded by Rajnarayan Basu[15] are: Brahmos believe that the fundamental doctrines
of Brahmoism are at the basis of every religion followed by man; Brahmos believe in the existence of One Supreme God, and worship him alone. Brahmos believe that worship of Him needs no fixed place or time.
Social reforms of Raja Ram Mohan Roy

Roy demanded property inheritance rights for women and, in 1828, set up
the Brahmo Sabha, which was a movement of reformist Bengali's formed to fight against social evils.

Roy's political background influenced his social and religious approach to reforms of Hinduism. He wrote: "The present system of Hindus [sic] is not well calculated to promote their political interests.... It is necessary that some change should take place in their religion, at least for the sake of their political advantage and social comfort."[16]

Rammohan Roy's experience working with the British government taught him that
Hindu traditions were often not respected or considered to be credible by
Western standards; this affected his religious reforms. He wanted
to legitimize Hindu traditions to his European acquaintances by proving that the "superstitious practices which deform the Hindu [sic]religion have nothing to do with the pure spirit of its dictates! [sic]"[17] The "superstitious practices" to which Rammohan Roy objected included sati, caste rigidity, polygamy andchild


http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 39
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS


marriages.[18] These practices were often the reasons British officials
claimed moral superiority over the Indian nation. Ram Mohan Roy's ideas of religion sought to create a fair and just society by implementing humanitarian practices similar to Christian ideals and thus legitimize Hinduism in the modern world.

Ram Mohan is remembered bringing about for women reform laws, especially law banning Sati practice. He was stirred by loss of his sister-in-law, who became Sati.[19] When in 1818, some Hindus objected to guideline restricting Sati, Ram Mohan Roy, produced a counter-petition requesting Government to pass a law
banning sati practice.[19] He was at loggerhead with Raja Radha Kanta Deb, who was
against government interference in religious practice.[20] Roy risked his personal life and started a campaign against Sati practice, in which he was later supported
by Debendra Nath Tagore.[19][20] He appealed to William Bentick to pass a law
banning Sati practice in British India and his persuation bore fruit and practice was banned by a law passed in 1829 in Bengal Presidency, which was later extended in
1830 to Madras and Bombay Presidency.[20][21]

Educationist

Roy believed education to be a means of creating social reform and was advocate of introduction of English schools in India. In 1817, in collaboration with David Hare, he set up the Hindu College at Calcutta. In 1822, Roy founded the Anglo-
Hindu school, followed four years later by the Vedanta College, where he insisted that his teachings of monotheistic doctrines be incorporated with "modern, western curriculum"; Vedanta College offered courses as a synthesis of Western and Indian learning. In 1830, he helped Alexander Duff in establishing the General Assembly's Institution, by providing him the venue vacated by Brahma Sabha and getting the first batch of students. Roy supported the incorporation of western learning into Indian education. He advocated the study of English, science,
western medicine and technology. He spent his money on a college to promote these
studies. Journalist
Roy was an ardent supported of freedom and speech and press.[21] Roy published magazines in English, Hindi, Persian, and Bengali to spread modern knowledge and politically educate the readers. He published the Brahmonical Magazine in English in 1821. Another notable magazine of his was the Sambad Kaumudi, also published in 1821. In 1822, Ram Mohan published Mirat-ul-Akbar in the Persian language.

Brahmonical Magazine ceased to exist after publication of a few issues. But Sambad Kaumudi, a news weekly, covered topics such as freedom of the press, the induction of Indians into high ranks of service and separation of the executive and judiciary. Sambad Kaumudi became bi-weekly in January 1830 and continued to be published for 33 years.




http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 40
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 8 SOLUTIONS


He published a newspaper to register his protest against the introduction of Press Ordinance of 1823. The ordinance stated that a license from the Governor General in council would be required to publish any newspaper. When the English Company censored the press, Rammohan composed two memorials against this in 1829 and
1830 respectively. As an activist, he steadily opposed social issues like Sati and child
marriage.



99. Solution: d)


India is member country of all the three trade blocks.


100.     Solution: d)


















































http://insightsonindia.com                         INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 41
