INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 15 SOLUTIONS





1.  Solution: d)


Over India, a subtropical westerly jet develops in the winter season which is replaced by the tropical easterly jet in the summer season. The high temperature over the Tibetan Plateau, as well as over Central Asia in general, during the summer is believed to be the critical factor leading to the formation of the tropical easterly jet over India in summer. The mechanism affecting monsoon is that the westerly jet causes high pressure over northern parts of the subcontinent during the winter. This results in the north to south flow of the winds in the form of the NE Monsoon. With the northwards shift of the vertical sun, this jet shifts northwards too. The intense heat over the Tibetan Plateau, coupled with associated terrain features of high altitude of the plateau, etc. generate
the tropical easterly jet over central India. This jet creates a low pressure zone over
the northern Indian plains influencing the wind flow towards these plains, assisting the establishment of the SW Monsoon.


http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/science/the-tibetan-plateau-and-the-indian- monsoon/article4651084.ece



2.  Solution: c)


It is important to note that the table of Precedence is not mentioned in the constitution
of India. It was issued in a notification in the year 1959 by the Central Government. This
table of precedence has no official standing. It is only used in sitting arrangements and honorary protocols during official ceremonies, functions etc.
Therefore, it would not be incorrect to compare his or any other constitutional
authorities‟ status with that of other  high authorities.


3.  Solution: b)

The Aravalli range are the oldest fold mountains in India.The northern end of the range continues as isolated hills and rocky ridges into Haryana state, ending in Delhi. The famous Delhi Ridge is the last leg of the Aravalli Range, which traverses through South Delhi and terminates into Central Delhi where Raisina hill is its last extension. It is one
of the world's oldest mountain ranges.






http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                               Page 1
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 15 SOLUTIONS


4.  Solution: a)

NMEW aims to provide a single window clearance mechanism for various women related schemes under the aegis of several Ministries.
It focuses on these key areas:
    Access to health, drinking water, sanitation, hygiene etc.
    Higher and professional education
    Micro credit, vocational training, Skill Development, SHG development etc.
    Preventing crime against women
    Coverage of all girls specially in the schools in the age group of primary to class
12th
    Generating awareness on legal rights and entitlements

Some of the important women targeted schemes are covered in this programme like
SABLA, ICDS, SSA, JSY, NRLM, NRHM etc.



5.  Solution: d)


The Constitution empowers the Parliament under Article 149 to prescribe the powers and duties of the CAG. Accordingly the CAG‟s (Duties,  powers and Conditions of service) act, 1971 was enacted. Thus, the Parliament can reduce the powers of the CAG just by amending the provisions of the bill by a simple majority.



6.  Solution: d)


The CAG is not responsible to the Central government. He is instead responsible to the
Parliament.
Commenting on the government expenditure is a discretionary duty of the CAG.

7.  Solution: a)
As per the „Employment Situation in 2010-11 quarterly survey report, only 15.6% of the workforce has regular employment. 33.5% was casual labour and 51% was self- employed.




8.  Solution: a)
RBSK is a recent intervention. In this, the children will be screened for early signs of development delays, disability etc. It would thus help to counter any health issues at the very outset. It has been made a part of NRHM.


http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                               Page 2
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 15 SOLUTIONS



Rogi Kalyan Samiti is a committee which is chaired by the District Collector with other members being the hospital superintendents, Local MPs, other health experts etc. The committee is empowered to raise funds just like a voluntary agency does. It will be used for improving the existing infrastructure of the hospitals, introducing new services etc.
It helps in decentralized decision making. It thus takes into account local needs and
concerns. It is important to note that decentralization of the health delivery system is a major plank of National Rural Health Mission (NRHM)




9.   Solution: a)


He can also be fit for appointment if he is an eminent jurist in the opinion of the
President. He need not have been a judge or an advocate.
He conventionally resigns with the coming of the new government, other than the one
which appointed him.

10. Solution: d)

Only the office of the AG is created by the constitution. Looking after the legal matters is the responsibility of the law ministry.



11. Solution: d)
Only a few Central ministers are part-time members of the body like the Finance and planning minister. The Chairman of the PC is not a member of the cabinet but is invited to attend all its meetings.



12. Solution: b)


There are a number of extra-constitutional bodies which have executive responsibilities. Take for example the Directorate of National Rural Health Mission, not created under the constitution of India.
On the other hand, there are a number of constitutional bodies which do not have
executive responsibility. Take for example the Finance Commission which is only a quasi-judicial body.
Therefore, the reasoning that merely being a non-constitutional authority automatically deprives a body of executive powers is wrong.





http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                               Page 3
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 15 SOLUTIONS


13.Solution: a)

The NDC is listed as a advisory body to the PC. Hence its recommendations are not binding.
However, it is the second highest body, below the Parliament, responsible for policy matters with regard to planning for social and economic development.
But, first the plans are forwarded to the cabinet and then to NDC and then the
Parliament.




14. Solution: c)
The NDC consists of the PM, all Union cabinet ministers and Chief Ministers and Chief
Administrators of the states, and the members of the Planning Commission.



15. Solution: b)


NHRC works independently of the Government. IT was established under a legislation enacted by the Parliament, namely, the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993. The Act was amended in 2006.


16.Solution: d)

Page- 2.42: Majid Husain – Geography of India




17. Solution: d)


Refer to the section on Composition of NHRC in Laxmikanth. The NCW as well other
National Commissions for SCs, STs and minorities are represented in the NHRC.



18. Solution: b)


The Composition of the six-member Committee is as follows:
The PM; Speaker of Lok Sabha; Deputy Chairman (not chairman of RS who is the Vice-
President) of Rajya Sabha; Leaders of opposition of both the houses; and the Central
Home Minister.






http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                               Page 4
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 15 SOLUTIONS


19.Solution: b)

Sharavati is a river which originates and flows entirely within the state
of Karnataka in India. It is one of the few westward flowing rivers of India and a major part of the river basin lies in the Western Ghats. The famous Jog Falls are formed by this river.


20.Solution: a)


The DMIC is best explained in the Chapter – 2 – Demographic Dividend in the Economic Survey 2012-13. It is a solution to some of the most pressing problems of Indian economy to date. It would lead to creation of much needed industrial infrastructure like roads, power, freight corridors etc. This would resolve the issue of infrastructural bottlenecks to a great extent thereby promoting industrial growth and generating gainful employment.
It is based on not just government funding but also on foreign investments. Japan and
United Kingdom are some of the names in the list. After the basic infrastructure is built, the government will possibly invite many more projects based on the PPP model.



21. Solution: a)
For removing the members of the SHRC or the NHRC, only an enquiry by the Supreme Court is required. The removal does not require a special majority in the Parliament as is the case for high court judges.

Giving the lure of employment in any of the governments can hurt the independence of the commission. Hence, it protects their independence.


22.  Solution: c)


Refer to the functions of the commission in detail in Laxmikanth. It is important for this year Prelims as many cases of human right violations have come to the fore in national discourse.



23. Solution: d)

It does not have powers of a regular court but only that of a civil court. The basic point to note is that it can only enquire and recommend prosecution, not actually punish the offenders.




http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                               Page 5
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 15 SOLUTIONS


24. Solution: c)

CRPF is a para-military force. It is included in the definition of „armed forces‟ under the Protection of Human Rights Act. The NHRC has limited jurisdiction in human rights violations by the armed forces.


25. Solution: b)


It does not exercise general superintendence over the CBI. It only superintends the cases involving corruption by the officers under its jurisdiction.



26. Solution: d)


The CIC should be a person of eminence in public life with wide knowledge and experience in law, science and technology etc. He need not necessarily be a public servant.



27.Solution: c)
Spending on social services is about 25% of the yearly budget. Spending on education is about 46% (7.7% of GDP) of the total budget expenditure.
These are important figures and should be remembered.
The corresponding figure for health is nearly 20% of the budget.
In fact, the private expenditure on health was nearly double to that of public
expenditure in the ear 2010.



28. Solution: d)


Refer to the powers and functions of the CIC in Laxmikanth. The RTI Act mentions the powers and functions of the CIC.

29.Solution: b)

The Deccan Traps formed between 60 and 68 million years ago,[2] at the end of the Cretaceous period. The bulk of the volcanic eruption occurred at the Western Ghats (near Mumbai) some 66 million years ago. This series of eruptions may have
lasted less than 30,000 years in total.






http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                               Page 6
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 15 SOLUTIONS


The Deccan Traps are a large igneous province located on the Deccan Plateau of west- central India (between 17°–24°N, 73°–74°E) and one of the largest volcanic features on Earth.

30.Solution: b)

The Precambrian rocks of India have been classified into two systems, namely the
Dharwar system and the Archaean system.





























The Dharwar System

The rocks of the Dharwar system are mainly sedimentary in origin, and occur in narrow elongated synclines resting on the gneisses found in Bellary district, Mysore and
the Aravalis of Rajputana. These rocks are enriched in manganese and iron ore which represents a significant resource of these metals. They are also extensively mineralised
with gold most notably the Kolar gold mineslocated in Kolar.



31.Solution: a)

Statements 1 and 2 are self-explanatory. Statement 3 can possibly explain why the total production in the industry is not growing proportionately with the working age population.


http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                               Page 7
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 15 SOLUTIONS


32.Solution: a)

http://www.geologydata.info/coal_02.htm

The Gondwana Supergroup forms a unique sequence of fluviatile rocks deposited
in Permo-Carboniferous time. Damodar and Sone river valley and Rajmahal hills in the eastern India are depository of the Gondwana rocks.

33.Solution: c)

The state of Meghalaya (the abode of clouds) is geographically known as the "Meghalaya Plateau" or the "Shillong Plateau". The area is made of the oldest rock- formations. Meghalaya consists of the Garo, Khasi and Jaintia hills along with their outliers formed by the Assam ranges. It is the detached north-eastern extension of the Peninsular India. Part of it lies buried under the alluvium deposited by the Ganga- Brahmaputra system of rivers. This gap is known as Malda gap (between Raj Mahal hills/Chhota Nagpur and the Shillong Plateau)

34.Solution: a)

The Barakar River is the main tributary of the Damodar River in eastern India. Originating near Padma in Hazaribagh district ofJharkhand it flows for 225 kilometers (140 mi) across the northern part of the Chota Nagpur Plateau

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barakar_River#mediaviewer/File:Damodar_Map.jpg

Tilayia

DVC‟s first dam,  Tilaiya Dam, was across the Barakar at Tilaiya, in Hazaribagh district of Bihar, now in Koderma district of Jharkhand. It was inaugurated on 21
February 1953. The dam is 366 meters (1,201 ft) long and is 30.18 meters (99.0 ft) high from the river bed level. Tilaiya hydel power station is located on the left bank of the river Barakar. The structure is entirely of reinforced concrete. It has two generating units of 2 MW each with a provision for a third future unit of the same capacity.[4]
Maithon

DVC‟s second  dam  was across the Konar River, a tributary of the Damodar, in Hazaribagh district, and the third was across the Barakar at Maithon in Dhanbad district of Bihar, now Jharkhand. The river forms the boundary between West
Bengal and Jharkhand in that area. The dam was inaugurated on 27 September 1957.




http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                               Page 8
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 15 SOLUTIONS


35.Solution: d)

The Himalaya are among the youngest mountain ranges on the planet and consist mostly of uplifted sedimentary and metamorphic rock. According to the modern theory of plate tectonics, their formation is a result of a continental collision or orogeny along the convergent boundary between the Indo-Australian Plate and the Eurasian Plate.
The Arakan Yoma highlands in Myanmar and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands in the Bay of Bengal were also formed as a result of this collision.

During the Upper Cretaceous, about 70 million years ago, the north-moving Indo- Australian Plate was moving at about 15 cm per year. About 50 million years ago, this fast moving Indo-Australian plate had completely closed the Tethys Ocean, the
existence of which has been determined by sedimentary rocks settled on the ocean floor,
and the volcanoes that fringed its edges. Since both plates were composed of low density continental crust, they were thrust faulted and folded into mountain ranges rather than subducting into the mantlealong an oceanic trench. An often-cited fact used to illustrate this process is that the summit of Mount Everest is made of marine limestone from this ancient ocean.



36.Solution: a)

Jelep La (also spelled Jelepla) (el. 4,267 m or 13,999 ft) is a high mountain
pass between India and Tibet in East Sikkim District of Sikkim. The famous Menmecho
Lake lies below the Jelep La Pass.

Bomdila Pass (8000 feet) straddles the strategically important route between Tezpur in
Assam and Tawang in Arunachal Pradesh.

Banihal Pass is a pass across the Pir Panjal Range at 2,832 m (9,291 ft) maximum elevation. This mountain range separates the Kashmir valley in the Indian state Jammu
and Kashmir from the outer Himalaya and plains to the south

Bara-lacha la  is a high mountain pass inZanskar range,  connecting Lahaul district
in Himachal Pradesh to Ladakh in Jammu and Kashmir, situated along the Leh-Manali highway.

37.Solution: b)

Khadir or Khadar plains are those that are low-lying next to a river. Khadir areas are prone to flooding and sometimes include portions of former river-beds that became

http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                               Page 9
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 15 SOLUTIONS


available for agriculture when a river changed course. Khadir soil consists of new alluvial deposits and is often very fertile. Bangar plains are more upland, and consist of older alluvial soil. Bangar areas are less prone to flooding but are usually more sandy and less fertile as well.

38.Solution: a)

Terai is a belt of marshy grasslands, savannas, and forests located south of the outer foothills of theHimalaya, the Siwalik Hills, and north of the Indo-Gangetic Plain of the Ganges, Brahmaputra and their tributaries. The Terai belongs to the Terai-Duar
savanna and grasslands ecoregion. In northern India, the Terai spreads eastward from the Yamuna River acrossHimachal Pradesh, Haryana, Uttarakhand, Uttar
Pradesh and Bihar.

The region is famous for rice and sugarcane cultivation.

39.Solution: c)

Page 2.34, Majid Hussain.

The Luni is a river of western Rajasthan state, india. It originates in the Pushkar valley of the Aravalli Range, near Ajmer and ends in the marshy lands of Rann of
Kutch in Gujarat, after travelling a distance of 495 km.

40.Solution: d)

The Great Rann of Kutch, along with the Little Rann of Kutch and the Banni
grasslands on its southern edge, is situated in the district of Kutch and comprises some
30,000 square kilometres (10,000 sq mi) between the Gulf of Kutch and the mouth of the Indus River in southern Pakistan. The area was a vast shallow of the Arabian Sea until continuing geological uplift closed off the connection with the sea, creating a vast lake that was still navigable during the time of Alexander the Great. This area has been
inhabited by the Kutchi people.



41.Solution: c)
Chilka lake is a lagoon located on the East Coast. Page 2.40: Majid Hussain





http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                             Page 10
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 15 SOLUTIONS


42.Solution: b)

Bengali is the dominant language and most spoken language in the Andaman-Nicobar Islands with 25.71% of the population speaking Bengali, the other major languages spoken in the Andaman-Nicobar Islands
are Hindi (18.23%), Tamil (17.68%), Telugu (12.81%), Malayalam (8.11%)
and Nicobarese (8.04%) according to 2001 Census of India.[3] Other minor spoken languages are Kurukh/Oraon, Munda and Kharia. Andaman Creole Hindi is widely used as a trade language in the Andamans. Presently there remain only approximately
400–450 indigenous Andamanese in the Andaman islands,
the Jarawa and Sentinelese in particular maintaining a steadfast independence and refusing most attempts at contact. In the Nicobar islands, the indigenous people are the Nicobarese, or Nicobari, living throughout many of the islands; and the Shompen, restricted to the hinterland of Great Nicobar. More than 2,000 people belonging to
the Karen tribe live in the Mayabunder tehsil of North Andaman district, almost all of whom are Christians. Despite their tribal origins, the Karen of Andamans have Other Backward Class (OBC) status in the Andamans. The majority of schools and educational institutions are available inBengali language on the islands, Tamil and Telugu
languages are also used in few institutions. Hindi is never used despite its being one of
the official languages of the islands, with English.



43.Solution: d)


Refer to the list of PC officials in the section on composition of Planning Commission in
Laxmikanth.
The Planning Commission does discuss matters with the CMs, MPs and State Planning boards, but they are in no way represented in the Planning Commission.



44.Solution: b)

Lakshadweep is an archipelago of twelve atolls, three reefs and five submerged banks, with a total of about thirty-nine islands and islets. The reefs are in fact also atolls, although mostly submerged, with only small unvegetated sand cays above the high- water mark. The submerged banks are sunken atolls.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lakshadweep







http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                             Page 11
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 15 SOLUTIONS


45.Solution: c)




































http://www.imd.gov.in/section/seismo/static/seismo-zone.htm

http://www.imd.gov.in/section/seismo/static/faqsfinal.pdf



46.Solution: b)

Barren and Narcondam islands in Andaman and Nicobar are still active.



47.Solution: d)

What is a River Basin?

A river basin is the portion of land drained by a river and its tributaries. It encompasses all of the land surface dissected and drained by many streams and creeks that flow downhill into one another, and eventually into the Main river.





http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                             Page 12
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 15 SOLUTIONS


As an artery connects the parts of a body to one another, so a river threads together the creeks and streams, valleys and hills, lakes and underground springs that share a common assembly of water. Whatever happens to surface or groundwater in one part of the river basin will find its way to other parts. If water is diverted out of its
downward course in one section, other parts will come to "know" of its absence. A river
basin comes closer than any other defined area of land, with the exception of an isolated
island, to meeting the definition of an ecosystem in which all things, living and non- living, are connected and interdependent.

What is a Watershed?

A watershed is simply the area of land that catches rain and snow and drains or seeps into a marsh, stream, river, lake or groundwater.



What is the difference between a River Basin and a Watershed?

Both river basins and watersheds are areas of land that drain to a particular water body, such as a lake, stream, river or estuary. In a river basin, all the water drains to a large river. The term watershed is used to describe a smaller area of land that drains to a smaller stream, lake or wetland. There are many smaller watersheds within a river
basin.

http://water.usgs.gov/edu/watershed.html



48.Solution: a)

Dendritic drainage systems are the most common form of drainage system. In a dendritic system, there are many contributing streams (analogous to the twigs of a tree), which are then joined together into the tributaries of the main river (the branches and the trunk of the tree, respectively). They develop where the river channel follows the slope of the terrain. Dendritic systems form in V-shaped valleys; as a result, the rock types must be impervious and non-porous.

In a radial drainage system, the streams radiate outwards from a central high
point. Volcanoesusually display excellent radial drainage. Other geological features on which radial drainage commonly develops are domes and laccoliths. On these features
the drainage may exhibit a combination of radial patterns.



http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Drainage_system_(geomorphology)#Drainage_patterns




http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                             Page 13
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 15 SOLUTIONS




49.Solution: d)


Refer to the section on Rights and limitations in the chapter on AG of India.
It is important to note that he is not a full time government employee. He can pursue private practice.

50.Solution: b)
While Drinking water is covered under Bharat Nirmaan, sanitation comes under the
Total sanitation campaign.
Education is supported by separate schemes like SSA, PURA etc.



51.Solution: c)

Page No: 3.12 and 3.13: Majid Hussain



52.Solution: a)

The Ghaggar is an intermittent river in India, flowing during the monsoon rains. It originates in the Shivalik Hills of Himachal Pradesh and flows
through Punjab and Haryana states into Rajasthan;[7] just southwest ofSirsa,
Haryana and by the side of Talwara Lake in Rajasthan. This seasonal river feeds two irrigation canals that extend into Rajasthan.



53.Solution: d)

The name Ganges is used for the river between the confluence of the Bhagirathi and Alaknanda rivers, in the Himalayas, and the India-Bangladesh border, near the Farakka Barrage and the first bifurcation of the river. The length of the Ganges is frequently said to be slightly over 2,500 km (1,600 mi) long, about 2,505 km (1,557 mi),[ to 2,525 km (1,569 mi),or perhaps 2,550 km (1,580 mi). In these cases the river's source is usually assumed to be the source of the Bhagirathi River, Gangotri Glacier at Gomukh, and its
mouth being the mouth of the Meghna River on the Bay of Bengal.



54.Solution: c)

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pulicat_Lake

Page No: 3.31: Majid Hussain

http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                             Page 14
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 15 SOLUTIONS






55.Solution: b)

Wular Lake (also spelt Wullar), One of the largest fresh water lake in Asia, is
in Bandipora district in the Indian state of Jammu and Kashmir. The lake basin was formed as a result of tectonic activity and is fed by the Jhelum River. The lake's size varies seasonally from 12 to 100 square miles (30 to 260 square kilometers). Boating, water sports and water ski have recently been launched by the Government of India Tourism in collaboration with Kerala Tourism and J&K Tourism. The contract for the
operation of the site was awarded in September 2011.



56.Solution: a)

The Indus Waters Treaty is a water-sharing treaty between Pakistan and India, brokered by the World Bank (then the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development).[1]The treaty was signed in Karachi on September 19, 1960 by Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru and President of Pakistan Ayub Khan (President of Pakistan). The treaty was a result of Pakistani fear that since the source rivers of the Indus basin were in India, it could potentially create droughts and famines in Pakistan, especially at times of war. However, India did not revoke the treaty during any of three
later Indo-Pakistani Wars.



57.Solution: d)


He is both appointed and removed by the Governor of the state.
There is nothing like higher or lower constitutional status. Even the Table of Precedence is not about constitutional status or importance of that particular office.

58.Solution: a)


During summer, low pressure develops over NW India and low pressure at Indian
Ocean region. This creates pressure gradient towards the Indian sub-continent.

59.Solution: d)

The Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ), known by sailors as the doldrums, is the area encircling the earth near the equator where the northeast and southeast trade winds come together.

http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                             Page 15
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 15 SOLUTIONS


The ITCZ appears as a band of clouds, usually thunderstorms, that circle the globe near the equator. In the Northern Hemisphere, the trade winds move in a southwestern direction from the northeast, while in the Southern Hemisphere, they move northwestward from the southeast. When the ITCZ is positioned north or south of the equator, these directions change according to the Coriolis effect imparted by the rotation of the earth. For instance, when the ITCZ is situated north of the equator, the
southeast trade wind changes to a southwest wind as it crosses the equator. The ITCZ is formed by vertical motion largely appearing as convective activity
of thunderstorms driven by solar heating, which effectively draw air in; these are the trade winds.[2] The ITCZ is effectively a tracer of the ascending branch of the Hadley cell, and is wet. The dry descending branch is the horse latitudes.

http://geography.about.com/od/climate/a/itcz.htm

60.Solution: c)

Around September, with the sun fast retreating south, the northern land mass of
the Indian subcontinent begins to cool off rapidly. With this air pressure begins to build over northern India, the Indian Ocean and its surrounding atmosphere still holds its heat. This causes cold wind to sweep down from the Himalayas and Indo-Gangetic Plain towards the vast spans of the Indian Ocean south of the Deccan peninsula. This is known as the Northeast Monsoon or Retreating Monsoon.

While travelling towards the Indian Ocean, the dry cold wind picks up some moisture from the Bay of Bengal and pours it over peninsular India and parts of Sri Lanka. Cities like Chennai, which get less rain from the Southwest Monsoon, receives rain from this Monsoon. About 50% to 60% of the rain received by the state of Tamil Nadu is from the Northeast Monsoon. In Southern Asia, the northeastern monsoons take place from December to early March when the surface high-pressure system is strongest The jet stream in this region splits into the southern subtropical jet and the polar jet. The subtropical flow directs northeasterly winds to blow across southern Asia, creating
dry air streams which produce clear skies over India. Meanwhile, a low pressure system develops over South-East Asia and Australasia and winds are directed toward
Australia known as a monsoon trough.



61.Solution: c)

Page No. 4.28: Majid Husain





http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                             Page 16
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 15 SOLUTIONS


62.Solution: a)

Page No: 4.30: Majid Hussain



63.Solution: a)

The definition of drought remained inexact and based on inference for over 5000 years of human history until the means of quantifying it became available in the late 19th century when reliable observation of rainfall began.

Drought may be broadly classified into the following three types:

(1)Meteorological drought: It is a situation when there is significant (more than 25 per cent) decrease from normal precipitation over an area.
(2)Hydrological drought: meteorological drought, if prolonged, results in hydrological Drought marked depletion of surface water and consequent drying of reservoirs, lakes, Steams, and rivers, cessation of spring flows and fall in ground water levels.
Hydrological drought may be reflected in depleted snowmelt due to poor snow-fall in an Earlier season and this may result in curtailment of power generation and affect industry As well as agriculture.

(3) Agricultural drought: It occurs when soil moisture and rainfall are inadequate during growing season to support healthy crop maturity and cause extreme crop growth to maturity and cause extreme crop stress and wilt.

(4) Economic drought: When deficit precipitation affects the normal economic growth of the country it results into economic drought.

http://shodhganga.inflibnet.ac.in:8080/jspui/bitstream/10603/4402/11/11_chapter%2
02.pdf



64.Solution: a)

Arunachal Pradesh has highest area under forests as proportion of its total geographical area.

http://www.earth-policy.org/indicators/C56/forests_2012



65.Solution: d)



http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                             Page 17
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 15 SOLUTIONS


http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biosphere_reserves_of_India



66.Solution: b)

For the success of any targeted approach, the identification of the real beneficiaries is of paramount importance. In line with this approach the Dr. N. C. Saxena Committee was constituted to advise on the methodology for a BPL census in rural areas. Since June
2011, for the first time through a comprehensive door-to-door enumeration in both rural and urban India, authentic information is being made available on the socio-economic condition and educational status of various castes and sections through the SECC. This exercise will help better target government schemes to the right beneficiaries and
ensure that all eligible beneficiaries are covered, while all ineligible beneficiaries are
excluded. Households identified as highly deprived will have the highest inclusion priority under government welfare schemes. Use of the Aadhar number in various
beneficiary-oriented social sector programmes will also check duplications. The households which have assets like irrigated lands, motorcycle etc. will be automatically excluded. Whereas household with any of the following will be included automatically:

1.   Households without shelter
2.   Destitute/ living on alms
3.   Manual scavengers
4.   Legally released bonded labourers
5.   Primitive tribal groups



67.Solution: b)

The Indian government has established 18 Biosphere Reserves in India,[2] (categories roughly corresponding to IUCN Category VProtected areas), which protect larger areas of natural habitat (than a National Park or Animal Sanctuary), and often include one or more National Parks and/or preserves, along buffer zones that are open to some economic uses. Protection is granted not only to the flora and fauna of the protected region, but also to the human communities who inhabit these regions, and their ways of life. Animals are protected and saved here.

http://envfor.nic.in/legis/wildlife/wildlife1c4.pdf

http://ces.iisc.ernet.in/envis/sdev/np.htm






http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                             Page 18
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 15 SOLUTIONS




68.Solution: c)

Soil structure is the arrangement of soil particles into groupings. These groupings are called peds or aggregates, which often form distinctive shapes typically found within certain soil horizons. For example, granular soil particles are characteristic of the surface horizon.

Soil texture is the relative proportions of sand, silt, or clay in a soil. The soil textural class is a grouping of soils based upon these relative proportions. Soils with the finest texture are called clay soils, while soils with the coarsest texture are called sands.

http://www.ctahr.hawaii.edu/mauisoil/a_factor_ts.aspx



69.Solution: b)

Page 6.6: Majid Hussain



70.Solution: d)

Page-6.7: Majid Husain



71.Solution: d)

Laterites are soil types rich in iron and aluminium, formed in hot and wet tropical areas. Nearly all laterites are rusty-red because of iron oxides. They develop by intensive and long-lasting weathering of the underlying parent rock. Tropical weathering (laterization) is a prolonged process of chemical weathering which produces a wide variety in the thickness, grade, chemistry and ore mineralogy of the resulting soils. The majority of the land area containing laterites is between the tropics of Cancer and Capricorn.



72.Solution: a)

Page-6.6: Majid Hussain

Kankar (kunkur) is a sedimentological term derived from Hindi occasionally applied in India and the United States to detrital or residual rolled, often nodular calcium carbonate formed in soils of semi-arid regions.



http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                             Page 19
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 15 SOLUTIONS


It forms sheets across alluvial plains and can occur as discontinuous lines of nodular kankar or as indurated layers in stratigraphic profiles more commonly referred to
as calcrete, hardpan or duricrust.



73.Solution: d)


A soil horizon makes up a distinct layer of soil. The horizon runs roughly parallel to the soil surface and has different properties and characteristics than the adjacent layers above and below. The soil profile is a vertical section of the soil that depicts all of its
horizons. The soil profile extends from the soil surface to the parent rock material.


The regolith includes all of the weathered material within the profile. The regolith has two components: the solum and the saprolite. The solum includes the upper horizons with the most weathered portion of the profile. The saprolite is the least weathered
portion that lies directly above the solid, consolidated bedrock but beneath the regolith.

M ast er Ho r izo ns


There are 5 master horizons in the soil profile. Not all soil profiles contain all 5 horizons;
and so, soil profiles differ from one location to another. The 5 master horizons are represented by the letters: O, A, E, B, and C.


O: The O horizon is a surface horizon that is comprised of organic material at various stages of decomposition. It is most prominent in forested areas where there is the
accumulation of debris fallen from trees.


A: The A horizon is a surface horizon that largely consists of minerals (sand, silt, and clay) and with appreciable amounts of organic matter. This horizon is predominantly
the surface layer of many soils in grasslands and agricultural lands.


E: The E horizon is a subsurface horizon that has been heavily leached. Leaching is the process in which soluble nutrients are lost from the soil due to precipitation or irrigation. The horizon is typically light in color. It is generally found beneath the O
horizon.



http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                             Page 20
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 15 SOLUTIONS


B: The B horizon is a subsurface horizon that has accumulated from the layer(s) above.
It is a site of deposition of certain minerals that have leached from the layer(s) above.


C: The C horizon is a subsurface horizon. It is the least weathered horizon. Also known
as the saprolite, it is unconsolidated, loose parent material.


The master horizons may be followed by a subscript to make further distinctions
between differences within one master horizon.


































Figure 7. A portrayal of the horizons within the profile of a typical forest soil. Forests soils tend to have 5 layers, including a surface layer of decomposing plant debris, as
well of a zone of leaching.












http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                             Page 21
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 15 SOLUTIONS


74.Solution: b)


It is important to note that India has been witnessing jobless growth since 1991. Most of the jobs have been created in the unorganized sector. And the jobs in the organized sector have actually shrinked.
The Policymakers are trying to reverse this trend for the following reasons.
One, the unorganized sector does not offer regular income and other social security
benefits that a usual worker in the organized sector gets. This is because the jobs are mainly contractual in nature. The quantum of work and compensation therefore vary with seasons.
Two, the productivity in the unorganized sector is much lower than that of the
organized sector. The economy can reap the demographic dividend only if the skill levels of the labour in India increase. This will lead to increased productivity consequently leading to higher economic growth.



75. Solution: d)

The dependency ratio is measured by the share of the young and the elderly (non- working population) as a fraction of the population.



76.Solution: c)


The low growth states in India presently have more dependency ratio. In the near future, they are expected to grow significantly. But, it will be important to tap this demographic transition to make it a demographic dividend. This would require generation of a high quality employment on a large scale. The same holds true for India as a whole.


77.Solution: d)

The Godavari is part of peninsular river system whereas the Tista is part of the
Brahmaputra river system.




78.Solution: a)


Generally with the rise of the LFPR and ER, a nation‟s economic growth increases. It is assumed here that the per capita labour productivity either remains constant or increases.


http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                             Page 22
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 15 SOLUTIONS


Refer to the section „Sources of Growth‟ in the chapter Preparing for the Demographic
Dividend in Ramesh Singh.



79. Solution: c)


As per the economic survey 2012-13, the Micro industries employ as much as 69% of the total working population amongst the MSMEs. Within the MSMEs there are 94% micro industries.
Together the MSMEs employ 8.1 crore people in India which is a very high number
when the same is looked at in the large scale industries.
MSMEs can be one of the keys to reap our demographic dividend.




80.Solution: d)

Page No: 3.24: Majid Hussain

Seasonal variation in discharge defines river regime. Three broad classes of regime can be distinguished for perennial streams. In the megathermal class, related to hot equatorial and tropical climates, two main variants occur; discharge is powerfully sustained throughout the year, usually with a double maximum (two peak values), but in some areas with a strong single maximum. In themesothermal class some regimes resemble those of tropical and equatorial areas, with single or double summer maxima corresponding to heavy seasonal rainfall, while others include sustained flow with slight warm-season minima. Where midlatitude climates include dry summers, streamflow decreases markedly and may cease altogether in the warm half of the year.

http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/504801/river/29068/Principles- governing-distribution-and-flow#toc29069



81.Solution: a)
Digitization of records would facilitate easy acquisition and transfer of land which is much-needed to start industries. It would also lower the cost of land transactions. Ambiguity in land records and consequent delays in acquiring land has been one of the biggest reasons behind falling investment ratio in India in past decades.
Creating a land market would ensure that the government need not interfere everytime
to acquire land on behalf of the industries. The Industries will also be able to make an
informed choice on setting up plants in particular locations.




http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                             Page 23
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 15 SOLUTIONS


82.Solution: a)


Heavy growth in business may instead make the company hire more skilled workers formally. Informal labour is generally hired when the firm does not have adequate resources or when they do not want to face the legal consequences of firing labour on mass scale.



83. Solution: d)

In 2004-05 the unorganized sector contributed roughly half of India‟s GDP implying a significant expansion of the tax base if informal sector were to join the formal economy. Official reports also establish a clear link between informality in labour and poverty in India.
All of this would make sense because the economic policies will affect much larger working population thus affecting the dynamics of supply and demand more effectively.




84.Solution: a)

Page No: 5.11: Majid Husain




85. Solution: d)


The NSDP is supposed to skill 80 million Indians within the next 5 years. The NSDC will be joint venture of the public and private sector. Majority of the shares will be held by the private sector. NSDP will also partner NGOs.
The Private entities will bring proposals for setting up (for-profit/non-profit) vocational
training institutions and will receive support accordingly. The support will be both financial and facilitative.
Either a loan or a grant can be given based on the proposal.
Curriculum setting, quality, and other standards will be setup by NSDC.

86.Solution: d)


The chairperson and members of the CVC are appointed by the President on the recommendation of a three-member committee consisting of the PM, Union Home Minister and the Leader of Opposition of Lok Sabha.
Its jurisdiction extends to only some selected Central government employees and the
all-India services.

http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                             Page 24
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 15 SOLUTIONS




87.Solution: b)


http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/national-water-policy-2012-silent-priorities


http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Water_Policy#National_Water_Policy_2012



88. Solution: a)

Bangladesh and Pakistan are the only South Asian nations that have lower HDI than that of India in the year 2013.




89.Solution: d)

The river rises in the Bara Bhangal, District Kangra in Himachal Pradesh, India. The river drains a total catchment area of 14,442 square kilometres (5,576 sq mi) in India after flowing for a length of 720 kilometres (450 mi). Flowing westward, it is hemmed by the Pir Panjal andDhauladhar ranges, forming a triangular zone.

Page No. 3.12: Majid Hussain




90. Solution: d)
Refer to the section „Poverty Alleviation and Employment Generation programmes‟ in
the chapter Human Development in India in Ramesh Singh – Indian economy.



91. Solution: d)


Refer to the scheme in the chapter on Human development in India – Ramesh Singh.



92. Solution: d)
Refer to the two schemes in Ramesh Singh.
Read RSBY also from the point of view of the performance of the PPP model deployed
in it. It forms a part  of the syllabus “Management of social services like Health,
Education etc.” in Mains Paper-III.





http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                             Page 25
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 15 SOLUTIONS





93. Solution: d)

Aside these alternatives, post offices, grocery stores, banking correspondents, micro
ATMs etc. will also be used.



94.Solution: d)


The local community especially parents are supposed to check the attendance of the principals and teachers in the schools. This is ensured by forming a committee of all the parents, local body chairperson and the school staff.






95. Solution: d)


Child marriage is as common as almost 50% of all marriages in India. The mothers in
their adolescence are poorly nourished. This has a bearing on the child‟s health.
After that, irregular or no vaccination coupled with low calorie and protein intake in children cause malnourishment.


96.Solution: a)

See Table Page no. 3.6, Majid Husain

Large river basin = 20,000 sq km

Medium river basin = 2000 t0 20,000 sq km

Minor river basin = less than 2000 sq km




97. Solution: d)


Refer to the description of the scheme in Ramesh Singh – Indian economy.

98.Solution: d)

Refer to the introduction section of the Central Information Commission in Laxmikanth.



http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                             Page 26
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 15 SOLUTIONS



99.Solution: c)


Both the houses need to approve it by a special majority.
He can be removed in the exact same manner and on the same grounds as that of a SC
judge.




100.        Solution: b)

http://www.currentscience.ac.in/Volumes/100/06/0805.pdf

















































http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                             Page 27
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 15 SOLUTIONS



































































http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                             Page 28
