
INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK PRELIMINARY EXAM - 2014


INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST - 10

GENERAL STUDIES

PAPER-I

Time Allowed: Two Hours                                                                                  Maximum Marks: 200


INSTRUCTIONS
1.   IMMEDITELY AFTER THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE EXAMINATION, YOU SHOULD
CHECK  THAT  THIS  TEST  BOOKLET  DOES  NOT  HAVE  ANY  UNPRINTED  OR  TORN  OR MISSING PAGES OR ITEMS, ETC. IF SO, GET IT REPLACED BY A COMPLETE TEST BOOKLET.
2.  You have to enter your Roll Number on the Test I
Booklet in the Box provided alongside. DO NOT
write anything else on the Test Booklet.

4.  This Test Booklet contains 100 items (questions). Each item is  printed only in  English. Each item comprises four responses (answers). You will select the response which you want to mark on the Answer Sheet. In case you feel that there is more than one correct response, mark the response which you consider the best. In any case, choose ONLY ONE response for each item.
5.  You have to mark all your responses ONLY on the separate Answer Sheet provided. See directions in the
Answer Sheet.
6.  All items carry equal marks.

7.  Before you proceed to mark in the Answer Sheet the response to various items in the Test Booklet, you have to fill in some particulars in the Answer Sheet as per instructions sent to you with your Admission Certificate.
8.  After you have completed filling in all your responses on the Answer Sheet and the examination has concluded, you should hand over to the Invigilator only the Answer Sheet. You are permitted to take away with you the Test Booklet.

9.  Sheets for rough work are appended in the Test Booklet at the end.
10.  Penalty for wrong answers :
THERE WILL BE PENALTY FOR WRONG ANSWERS MARKED BY A CANDIDATE IN THE OBJECTIVE TYPE QUESTION PAPERS.
(i)   There are four alternatives for the answer to every question. For each question for which a wrong answer has been given by the candidate, one-third of the marks assigned to that question will be deducted as penalty.
(ii)   If a candidate gives more than one answer, it will be treated as a wrong answer even if one of the given answers happens to be correct and there will be same penalty as above to that question.
(iii)    If a question is left blank, i.e., no answer is given by the candidate, there will be no penalty for that question.


http://insightsonindia.com


INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST SERIES FOR CIVIL SERVICES PRELIMINARY EXAM 2014





http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                        Page 1
1.   Which of the following protocols and conventions are not related to the depletion of Ozone layer?
1.   Montreal Protocol
2.   Vienna Convention
3.   Nagoya Protocol
4.   Cartagena Protocol
5.   Kyoto Protocol

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a.   3 and 4 b.  4 and 5
c.   3,4 and 5
d.  2,3,4 and 5

2.   With     reference     to     Sowa-Rigpa , consider the following statements
1.   Also known as „Amchi‟, it is one of the oldest surviving system of medicine in the world, popular in the Himalayan region of India
2.   In India this system is practiced in
Sikkim,       Arunachal       Pradesh,
Darjeeling (West Bengal), Lahoul and Spiti (Himachal Pradesh) and Ladakh region of Jammu & Kashmir.
3.   It is not yet legally accepted as part
of Indian medical system

Which of the above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.   1 and 3 Only d.  All



3. With reference to Monocrotophos, consider the following statements

1.  It     is    an    organophosphorus pesticide considered highly hazardous by FAO and World Health Organisation (WHO)
2.   It was responsible for the death of
23 children at Chapra in Bihar after
eating school meal in 2013

3.   It is banned in India

Which of the above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 b.   1 and 3 c.    2 and 3 d.   All
4.   Consolidated Fund of India is divided into three main divisions. Which of the following is/are not one of them?
1.    A  Revenue  Section  with  the  two
sub-divisions     to     account     for
Revenue Receipts (Tax and Non- Tax) and Revenue Expenditure
2.        Public   Debt   and   Loans   and
Advances etc
3.   Remittances
4.   Small Savings, Provident Funds etc


Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a.   2 and 3 Only
b.  2,3  and 4  Only c.    4 Only
d.  3 and 4 Only




5.    Consider the following statements:
1.   The constitution of India does not define backward classes.
2.   Providing  for  quotas  to  socially, economically    and    educationally
backward classes is mentioned in the DPSP outside of Part IV of the constitution.

Which of these is/are true?
a)  Only 1 b)  Only 2

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 2
c)  Both d)  None




6.   With reference to  Effluent Treatment Plants (ETPs), consider  the  following statements
1.    Anaerobic digestion is   a common
method      for      treating      sludge
produced    at    sewage    treatment plants
2.   This   process   produces   methane, which   can   be   used   to   produce
electricity

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.   Both
d.  None

7.   Doug  Engelbart,  who  died  last  year, was famous for?

a.   Inventing email system

b.   Inventing computer Mouse

c.    Inventing first operating system for computers

d.   None of the above




8.   Trichoderma viride (Tv) is a

a.   Biofungicide

b.   Biomanure

c.    Human pathogen

d.   None of the above
9.   With reference to Carbon Dioxide and its relation with marine life, consider the following statements

1. The oceans absorb more than a quarter of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, which dissolves in the water to form carbonic acid.

2. Climate change leads to ocean acidification which in turn affects corals and other marine life

Which of the above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.   2 Only c.    Both
d.   None

10. With  reference  to  "Antyodaya  Anna Yojana" (AAY), consider the following statements
1.   It includes all the BPL families
2.   The States/UTs are required to bear the distribution cost, including margin to dealers and retailers as well as the transportation cost
3.   Recently    Annapurna    scheme was merged into AAY

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 Only
c.   2 and 3 Only d.  All



11. We experience more mosquito bites at night. Why?

1.     Mosquitoes are crepuscular, most active during dawn and dusk.




http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 3
2. Being   ectothermic,   they   seek warmth but are actually quite vulnerable to hot, dry conditions, and can easily overheat and dessicate in direct sunlight.

3.   The odour receptors  of mosquitoes can detect their target victim if the intended victim had a pint of beer.

Which of the above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.   2 and 3 Only c.    1 and 3 Only d.   All
12. With        reference        to        National
Biodiversity        Authority        (NBA), consider the following statements
1.   It was set up under the Biological
Diversity Act 2002
2. NBA is the nodal authority in preserving and managing all biosphere reserves of India
3.   NBA‟s approval is required before seeking any Intellectual property Rights (IPR) based on biological material and associated knowledge obtained from India.
4.   The NBA also has power to oppose grant of IPRs in any other country on      biological       resources      or
associated  knowledge  obtained  or derived from India

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1,2 and 3 Only b.  1,3 and 4 Only c.   2,3 and 4 Only d.  All

13. With      reference      to      The      State Biodiversity  Boards  (SBBs),  consider the following statements
1.   These are constituted by the State Governments and deal with all matters  relating  to  access  by Indians for commercial purposes
2.   SBBs  are  required  to  consult  the
concerned                       Biodiversity
Management Committees (BMCs) on matters relating to use of biological resources and associated knowledge within their respective jurisdictions.
3. Biodiversity                Management Committees are set up by the state governments  in  association  with
local  NGOs  to  preserve biodiversity

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.   1 and 2 Only d.  All


14. The   purpose   of   the   inclusion   of Directive Principles of State Policy in the Indian constitution is to establish
a)  Political democracy
b)  Social democracy
c)  Gandhian democracy
d)  Social and economic democracy









15. With reference to Total Fertility Rate, consider the following statements
1.   Total  Fertility  Rate  (TFR)  is  the
average number of children expected to be born per woman during her entire span of reproductive period.
2.   In India the Total Fertility Rate is
2.4

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 4
3. Among the bigger States, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal has the lowest TFR of 1.7 and the highest TFR recorded is 3.6 for Bihar
4.   TFR  is  considered  to  be  a  useful
indicator      for      analysing      the
prospects          for          population stabilization.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.    1,2 and 3 Only
b.   1 and 4 Only
c.    1,2 and 4 Only
d.   All



16. Consider the following statements:
1.   After   the   Second   World   War, almost all the newly independent countries   adopted   the   route   of
planned development.
2.   Indian planning had a heavy bias towards imperative planning in the early years post-world war II and
was normative in nature. Which of these is/are true?
a)  Only 1
b)  Only 2 c)  Both
d)  None



17. Which   of   the   following   is/are implicitly/explicitly both a fundamental Right and a Directive principle of state policy (DPSP)?
1. Protecting children from forcible abuse.
2.   The  right  to  adequate  means  to
livelihood.
3.   Early childhood care

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below


a)  All of the above b)  Only 1
c)  1 and 2 d)  2 and 3




18. With    reference    to    the    Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety, consider the following statements
1.   It     is     the     first     international
regulatory   framework   to   ensure
safety in the transfer, handling and use  of  GMOs  resulting  from modern biotechnology.
2.   It has been adopted under the aegis
of    the   Convention    on    Biological
Diversity
3.   The Biosafety Clearing-House is an international mechanism that exchanges information about the movement  of genetically  modified organisms, established under the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety.


Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.   All
d.  1 and 3 Only


19. The  DPSP  provides  for  securing  a living wage to all workers. What is the correct ascending hierarchy of the following wages that are given in the country?
1.   Living wage
2.   Minimum wage
3.   Fair wage

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below


a)  3, 2, 1 b)  1, 2, 3 c)  2, 1, 3 d)  2, 3, 1

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 5


20. Consider   the   following   statements about the scheme Member of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme (MPLADS):
1.   The   concerned   MP   recommends
the works under the scheme to the
District Magistrate.
2.   The  local  bodies  implement  the works specified by the MP.

Which of these is/are true?
a)  Only 1 b)  Only 2
c)  Both
d)  None of the above




21. With     reference    to     „Wetlands     of International Importance‟ commonly known as „Ramsar  Sites‟, consider the following statements
1.   The    Convention    on    Wetlands,
signed in Ramsar, Iran, in 1971, is
an intergovernmental treaty which provides  the  framework  for national action and international cooperation for the conservation and wise use of wetlands and their resources.
2.   2nd   February   of   each   year   is
observed as World Wetlands Day
(WWD)
3.   Indo-Gangetic    wetlands    are the largest  wetland  system  in  India,
extending from the river Indus in the  west  to  Brahmaputra  in  the east.
4.   Fens     are     not     considered     as
wetlands

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  1 and 3 Only c.   All
d.  1,2 and 3 Only
22. With  reference   to   Eco-Development Forces, consider the following statements
1.   This scheme is being implemented by  the  Ministry  of  Environment and Forests in collaboration with Rural Development ministry
2.   This   scheme   aims   at   Ecological
restoration   of   terrains   rendered difficult    either    due    to    severe
degradation or remote location or difficult law and order situation.

Which of the statements given above is/are incorrect?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.   Both
d.  None

23. Which  of  the  following  Acts  is  not related to Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) in any way
1.   The Environment (Protection) Act,
1986
2.   Air   (Prevention   and   Control   of
Pollution) Act, 1981
3.   Water  (Prevention and Control of
Pollution) Act, 1974
4.   Biological Diversity Act, 2002

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a.   1 and 4 b.  1 Only c.   4 Only d.  None




24. Which      of      the      following Ozone Depleting Substances India does not produce domestically?
1.   Halon-1301
2.   Carbontetrachloride (CTC)
3.    Methyl chloroform
4.   Methyl bromide



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 6
Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a.   1 Only b.  4 Only
c.   1 and 4 Only
d.  None of the above



25. Which   of   the   following   is   not   a department in the Ministry of Finance, Government of India?
1.   Department of Expenditure
2.   Department of Revenue
3.   Department of Banking Services
4.   Department of Disinvestment
5.   Department of Economic Affairs
6.   Department of Annual Budgets

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a.   3,5 and 6 b.  3 and 6
c.   3 Only
d.  6 Only

26. With  reference  to  The  Contingency Fund of India, consider the following statements
1.   It is set by the Government of India under  Article  267  of  the Constitution of India.
2.   The corpus of this fund is Rs. 50 crores.
3.   It  is held on behalf of President by
the Secretary to the Government of
India,      Ministry      of      Finance,
Department of Economic Affairs

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.   1 and 2 Only d.  All
27. Consider the following soci0-economic targets  set  under  the  12th   Five  Year Plan:
1.   Mean years of Schooling to increase by seven years.
2.   Reducing IMR to 25 and MMR to
100.
3.   Providing      electricity      to      all households.

Which  of  the  following  is  supposed  to  be achieved at the end of the 12th Five year plan?
a)  1 and 2 b)  1 and 3 c)  Only 1
d)  None of the above



28. Which   of   the   following   measures, among others, was a part of the package of economic reforms in India following 1991?
1.   Simplifying environmental laws.
2.   Announcing  full  current  account convertibility
3.   Disinvestment measures in some of the PSUs
4.   Decentralizing       the       economic planning process in India.
5.   Fiscal consolidation

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below


a)  1 and 2
b)  2, 3, 4 and 5
c)  1 and 3
d)  1, 2, 3 and 5




29. Consider   the   following   statements about silicon nanotubes
1.   They  can  be  used  as  anodes  in
Lithium Ion batteries
2.   According to recent research, they can  be  produced  from   rice  husk,
an abundant agricultural waste


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 7
3.   Also called nano silicons, these are entirely different from carbon nanotubes in both structure and properties

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  1 and 3 Only c.   2 and 3 Only d.   1 Only


30. Consider   the   following   statements about Fundamental duties:
1.   Similar  to  DPSP,  the  courts  also
take  the  Fundamental  duties  into account while reviewing a law.
2. They do not extend to foreigners staying in India.

Which of these is/are true?
a)  Only 1 b)  Only 2 c)  Both
d)  None



31. With   reference   to   trends   in   social sector expenditure by the government in  last  few  years,  consider  the following statements
1.   The expenditure as a proportion of
the     GDP     on     education     has
remained constant since 2007-08
2.   The expenditure on health sector as a proportion of the GDP has increased substantially since 2007-
08

Which of the statements given above is/are incorrect?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.   Both
d.  None
32. Consider   the   following   statements about the report of the expert committee chaired by Prof Suresh D Tendulkar, and set up by the Planning Commission (PC) for estimation of poverty:
Assertion  (A):  It  suggested  moving away from the calorie based intake norm.
Reason (R): It acknowledged the multi- dimensional nature of poverty.

In the context of the above two statements, which one of the following is correct?


a)  Both A and R are true and R is the correct explanation of A.
b)  Both A and R are true but R is not a correct explanation of A.
c)  A is true, but R is false.
d)  A is false, but R is true.




33. With    reference    to    FDI    in    India, consider the following statements
1.   Under automatic route no approval from either the government or RBI is required
2.   Under          government          route,
approvals for FDI are received by
the     Department     of     Financial
Services, the Ministry of Finance.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.   Both
d.  None

34. With reference to The Financial Sector Legislative Reforms Commission, consider the following statements
1. The FSLRC was set-up by the Ministry  of  Finance,  Government of India to review and rewrite the

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 8
legal-institutional   architecture   of the Indian financial sector.
2. This Commission is chaired by a retired Governor of Reserve Bank of India
3. Recently in a report it called for radical reforms in the financial sector with a total overhaul of the system by way of merging the oversight functions of all regulators of market, commodity, insurance and pension sectors.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.   1 and 3 Only d.  All

35. Of the following organizations which are part of the World Bank, of which is India not a member country?
a.   International                Development
Association (IDA)
b.  International                          Finance
Corporation (IFC)
c.   Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Agency (MIGA)
d.  International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID)

36. With    reference    to    the    National Housing Bank, consider the following statements
1.   It  is an autonomous body  owned by the Government of India under the ministry of Finance
2.   It   was   set   up   by   an   act   of
Parliament
3. Its objective is to operate as a principal     agency     to     promote
housing finance institutions both at local and regional levels

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
a.   1 and 3 Only b.  1 and 2 Only c.   2 and 3 Only d.  All

37. With    reference    to    the    National Investment Fund (NIF) , consider the following statements
1.   Ever since its formation in 2005, all
the proceeds from disinvestment of
Central  Public  Sector  Enterprises have been channelled into this fund
2.   The     corpus    of    the     National
Investment   Fund   will   be   of   a
permanent nature
3.   The fund from it are used for the purpose of debt repayment

Which of the statements given above is/are incorrect?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  1 and 3 Only c.   2 and 3 Only d.  None


38. Given below are two statements, one labeled as Assertion (A) and the other labeled as Reason (R):


Assertion (A): The reservation of 33% of seats for women in Parliament and Parliament does not require constitutional amendment.

Reason (R): Political parties contesting elections can allocate 33% of seats they contest to women candidates without any constitutional amendment.

In the context of the above two statements, which one of the following is correct?

a)  Both A and R are true and R is the correct explanation of A.
b)  Both A and R are true but R is not a correct explanation of A.
c)  A is true, but R is false.


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 9
d)  A is false, but R is true.



39. With reference to sugar production in the country, consider the following statements
1.   In last few years, Uttar Pradesh has
produced      more      sugar      than
Maharashtra
2.   In South India, Tamil Nadu is the leading producer of sugar

Which of the above is/are incorrect?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.   Both
d.  None

40. With  reference  to  the  Rajiv Gandhi National Quality Award, consider the following statements
1.   The awards are given annually by
the Ministry of Consumer Affairs,
Food and Public Distribution
2.   These awards are given to leaders
who bring about quality movement in    manufacturing    and    services
sectors

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.    1 Only b.   2 Only c.    Both
d.   None

41. With reference to PRISM (Surveillance Program), consider the following statements
1.   It         is         a         mass electronic
surveillance data   mining program launched  in  2007  by  the National
Security Agency (NSA)
2.   The Prism program collects stored Internet communications based on demands      made      to      Internet
companies         such         as Google
Inc. under an American act.
3.   The US government is not directly
involved  in  the  operation  of  this program
4.   A   technology   called   Real   Time
Regional  Gateway helped  NSA  to go ahead with the PRISM program

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1,2 and 4 Only b.  1,3 and 4 Only c.   1,2 and 3 Only d.  All

42. The   following   are   some   cases   of constitutional amendment. Which of these is/are correctly matched with respect to its requirement?
1. Change in the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court – Special majority and Consent of states.
2. Sixth schedule (administration of tribal areas) – Special majority
3. Election of the Vice- President - Special majority and Consent of states
4. Citizenship     (acquisition     and termination) – Special majority


Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below


a)  1 and 3 only b)  Only 1
c)  1, 2 and 4
d)  None of the above

43. Which   of   the   following   is   not   an initiative under National Rural Health Mission
a.    Janani  Shishu  Suraksha
Karyakram
b.   Accredited Social Health
Activist (ASHA)
c.    Formation       of       Rogi
Kalyan Samities.

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 10
d.   None of the above

44. With reference to the National Urban Health Mission (NUHM), consider the following statements
1.   The    Ministry    of    Health    &
Family Welfare has formulated National Urban Health Mission (NUHM)  as  a  Sub-Mission under an over-arching National Health Mission (NHM)
2. The  scheme  will  focus  on primary health care needs of the urban poor
3.   It will cover all the towns and cities   with   population   more than 50000

Which of the statements given above is/are incorrect?

a.   3 Only b.  1 Only
c.   1 and 3 Only
d.  None

45. With        reference        to        National Afforestation Programme (NAP, consider the following statements
1. It is a flagship programme of National Afforestation & Eco- development Board (NAEB)
2.   This scheme provides support both
in physical and capacity building terms, to the Forest Development Agencies (FDAs)
3.   The FDA has been conceived and
installed as a federation of Joint Forest Management Committees (JFMCs) at the Forest Division level to undertake holistic development in the  forestry sector  with  people‟s participation.

Which of the statements given above is/are incorrect?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only
c.   3 Only d.  None



46. Consider   the   following   statements about the procedure to amend the Indian constitution:
1.   A  constitutional  amendment  bill
requires the prior permission of the
President.
2.   It can only be introduced in the Lok sabha first as it is the house of the
people from which the constitution derives its authority.

Which of these is/are true?
a)  Only 1 b)  Only 2 c)  Both
d)  None




47. Consider the following statements
1. Prerna   is   a   Scheme   where Jansankhya Sthirata Kosh, invites private sector gynecologists and vasectomy surgeons to conduct operations in Public Private Partnership mode.
2. Santusht  is a scheme where the strategy   recognizes   and   awards
couples who have broken the stereotype of early marriage and early childbirth and helped change mindsets

Which of the above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.   Both
d.  None


48. Consider   the   following   statements about DPSP:

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 11
1.   The  inheritance  of  DPSP  in  the Indian constitution is British colonial legacy.
2.   Legislations  or  rules  are  always required for implementing DPSP.
Which of these is/are true?
a)  Only 1 b)  Only 2 c)  Both
d)  None




49. According   to   WHO,   which   of   the following is the main casue of Child Mortality in the age group of 0-5 years in India?
a.   Neonatal causes
b.  Pneumonia
c.   Diarrhoeal Diseases d.  Measles

50. With reference to the District Mental Health Program (DMHP), consider the following statements
1. It is based on Bellary model developed by National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences (NIMHANS)
2.   In   the   12th     plan   it   has   been
extended to all the districts of the country
3.   It      is      a      community      based
programme

Which of the above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.   1 and 3 Only d.  All

51. With    reference    to    the    National Programme for Prevention & Control of Fluorosis, consider the following statements
1.   Common     causes     of     fluorosis
include    inhalation    of    fluoride
dusts/fumes by workers in industry, use of coal as an indoor fuel  source,  consumption  of fluoride from drinking water etc
2.   It   is   being   implemented   in   all
North Eastern districts

Which of the above is/are incorrect?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.   Both
d.  None



52. Consider   the   following   statements about Indian planning post- independence:
1.   It  laid  more  emphasis  on  heavy
industry than consumer goods.
2.   It  was  inspired  from  the  Soviet
model of central planning.
3.   France, US and China were also the nations     which     went     for     a
centralized  planning  in  the  early
1930s and 1940s.
Which of these is/are true?
a)  Only 2
b)  1 and 2
c)  All of the above d)  1 and 3




53. Consider the following statements:
1.   No    nation    follows    imperative
planning  in  the  21st    century  till date.
2. In Indicative planning numerical targets are not set unlike in imperative planning.
3.   Indicative    planning    may    even
discourage    the    participation    of
private       sector       instead       of encouraging it.
Which of these is/are true?
a)  Only 1
b)  1 and 3


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 12
c)  Only 3
d)  All of the above




54. Consider the following statements
1. The    Institute    of    Himalayan Bioresource Technology (IHBT) is a CSIR lab located in Himachal Pradesh to work towards developing technologies for sustainable  utilization  of Himalayan bioresources
2.   „Himalayan Wonder‟ is a variety of
thornless  rose  developed  by  the
IHBT

Which of the above statements is incorrect?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.   Both
d.  None


55. The      Economic      Survey      2010-12 advocates the need for a systems approach to planning. Consider the following assertion and reason in reference to it:
Assertion (A): It will increase the social acceptability of planning in India.
Reason (R): The local customs, traditions etc. will find a greater place systems approach to planning.

In the context of the above two statements, which one of the following is correct?
1.
a)  Both A and R are true and R is the correct explanation of A.
b)  Both A and R are true but R is not a correct explanation of A.
c)  A is true, but R is false. d)  A is false, but R is true.



56. Which of the following were the points of  contention  between  the  Gandhian
way  of  economic  planning  and  the view of the National Planning Committee (NPC) post-independence?
1. Emphasis on heavy and large industries.
2. Decentralisation of the economic structure in India.

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a)  Only 1 b)  Only 2 c)  Both
d)  None of the above

57. Which of the following have been the major objectives of Central Planning in India?
1.   Employment generation
2.   Controlling economic inequality
3.   Boosting International trade

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a)  1 and 2 b)  2 and 3 c)  Only 1
d)  All of the above



58. With   reference   to   National   Green tribunal, consider the following statements
1.   The Tribunal has been established
for the effective and expeditious disposal of cases relating to environmental protection and conservation of forests
2.   The  Tribunal has the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
3.    The   environmental   disputes   of
criminal in nature will also be adjudicated by the Tribunal. This has been enabled by a special provision in the act.

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 13
4. No    civil    court    shall    have jurisdiction to entertain any appeal in respect of any matter which the Tribunal  is  empowered  to determine under its appellate jurisdiction
5.   At present only Delhi and Bhopal are the places of sitting for the Tribunal


Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1,2 and 5 Only b.  1,2 and 4 Only
c.   1,2, 4 and 5 Only
d.  All







59. Consider   the   following   statements about the functions of the Planning Commission:
1.   It makes an overall assessment of
the resources of the country.
2. It determines the nature of the machinery required for implementing the plan.
3.   To monitor the implementation of
the plan.
4. To  give  directions  to  specific ministries for implementing the programmes under the plan.
Which of the following is/are true?
a)  1 and 3
b)  1, 2 and 3
c)  1, 3 and 4
d)  2 and 4 only



60. Which of the following fall under the functions of National Development Council (NDC)?
1. To approve the five year plans prepared by the Planning Commission.
2.   To review the working of the five year plans.
3.   To recommend measures to ensure fullest development of backward regions in India.

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below


a)  Only 2 b)  2 and 3
c)  All of the above
d)  1 and 3



61. Which   of   the   following   is   not   a function         to         be         performed by  Accredited Social Health Activist (ASHA) under NRHM?
a.    To  provide  primary  medical  care
for minor ailments such as diarrhoea, fever, and first aid for minor injuries
b.   To    escort/accompany    pregnant
women & children requiring treatment  /  admission  to  the nearest  pre-identified  health facility and to carry on    child deliveries in case of emergency situation
c.    To   assist   the   Village   health   &
sanitation  committee of the  Gram panchayat to develop a comprehensive village health plan.
d.   To act as a depot older for essential
provisions being made available to all  habitations  like  Oral Rehydration Therapy (ORS), Iron Folic  Acid  Tablet(IFA), chloroquine, Disposable Delivery Kits (DDK), Oral Pills & Condoms, etc.


62. With  reference  to   foreign  currency convertible bonds (FCCB), consider the following statements

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 14
1. FCCBs are issued in currencies different from the issuing company's domestic currency.
2. Corporates issue FCCBs to raise money in foreign currencies
3.   A   convertible   bond   is   a   mix between a debt and equity instrument.
4.   In    India,    rules    applicable    to
External   Commercial   Borrowings
apply to FCCBs too

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1,2 and 3 Only b.  1,2 and 4 Only c.   2 and 3 Only
d.  All




63. Consider the following statements:
1.   Governance  was  considered  as  a
factor  of  development  only  from
Tenth plan onwards.
2.   Fiscal  Consolidation  also  became
one of the top priorities only from
the Tenth plan onwards. Which of these is/are true?
a)  Only 1 b)  Only 2
c)  Both
d)  None of the above



64. Which   of   the   following   areas   are stressed under the Twenty Point Programme (TPP)?
1.   Protection of the environment
2.   Family Welfare
3. Employment generation in rural areas

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a)  Only 3 b)  1 and 3
c)  1 and 2
d)  All of the above



65. Which          of          the          following bodies/schemes/programmes  show the decentralization of socio-economic planning in India?
1.   National Development Council
2.   MPLADS
3.   MGNREGA

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below
a)  Only 1
b)  All of the above c)  1 and 3
d)  2 and 3



66. Which  of  the  following  can  be  the consequences of „Protectionism‟ coupled with „Import Substitution‟?
1.   Blocking      large      MNCs      from
entering into domestic markets
2.   Revival of domestic employment
3.   Reduction in foreign investment

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a)  1 and 3 b)  2 and 3 c)  1 and 2
d)  All of the above



67. With     reference     to     The Financial Stability    Board (FSB),   consider    the following statements
1.   It is   an   international   body   that monitors and makes recommendations about the global financial system.
2.   India is yet to become its member.
At   present   only   EU   and   G-8 countries are its members

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 15
3.   It has been called as a fourth pillar of the architecture of global economic governance

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.  1 and 2 Only c.   2 and 3 Only d.  All




68. Which of the following measures can be termed as one towards privatization?
1.   De-nationalization
2.   De-licensing
3.   Disinvestment
4.   Opening  up  security  markets  for
private foreign qualified investors.

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a)  1,3 and 4 b)  1 and 3
c)  2 and 4 d)  1,2 and 3



69. What are the HeLa cells?

a.     It is a cell type in an immortal cell line used in scientific research

b.   It is a cell line derived from genetic engineering

c.  It  is  a  type  of  monoclonal antibodies

d.   None of the above



70. Agriculture has been chosen as the prime moving force of the Indian economy  since  2002.  Which  of  the
following  is/are  the  key  reforms  in agriculture in this direction?
1.   Eliminating  inter-state  barriers  of trade and commerce
2.   Encouraging contract farming
3.   Permitting  „Future  trading‟  in  all
commodities.

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a)  1 and 2 b)  2 and 3 c)  1 and 3
d)  All of the above



71. Which  of  the  following  Governance related matters are considered to be reforms by the Planning Commission that  need  to  be  introduced  in successive five year plans?

1.   Increased   involvement   of   Civil
Society and NGOs.
2.   Use of IT for „Good Governance‟.
3.   Improved   people‟s    participation
through the PRIs.
4.   Reforming   the   Criminal   Justice
System.

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below



a)  1, 2 and 3 b)  2, 3 and 4 c)  1, 2 and 4
d)  All of the above



72. Consider the following statements:
1.   Fundamental           rights           are fundamental to the governance of
the nation as they embody the idea of a political democracy.
2.   A Panchayat samiti is also morally supposed     to     implement     the

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 16
Directive Principles of State Policy
(DPSP).
Which of these is/are true?
a)  Only 1 b)  Only 2 c)  Both
d)  None



73.  Consider the following statements:
1.  Any law or rule that violates the fundamental right under Article 19 (Right to freedom) will be termed void by the Supreme Court.
2.   The judiciary can not question the laws that are made for the welfare of people of India.

Which of these is/are true?
a)  Only 1 b)  Only 2
c)  Both d)  None



74. Which of these Directive Principles of State Policy ( DPSP) have socialistic essence?
1.   Providing     for     self-government
under the local bodies.
2. To protect the environment from degradation.
3.   To provide for free legal aid to the
poor.

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below
a)  1 and 3
b)  1 and 2 c)  Only 3 d)  2 and 3



75. Consider the following statements
1. “Intensification        of        Forest Management Scheme”  (IFMS) aims to  minimize  fire  hazards  and control forest fires
2.   It is a state Sponsored Scheme

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only c.   Both
d.  None


76. Which of the following DPSP were not found in the unamended constitution post-independence?
1.   To   secure   the   participation   of
workers   in   the   management   of industries.
2.   To protect the environment and to safeguard forests and wildlife.
3.   To secure for all citizens a uniform civil code throughout the country.
4. To promote equal justice and to provide for free legal aid to the poor.

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below


a)  1 and 3
b)  All of the above c)  1, 2 and 4
d)  2 and 3



77. With reference to Jansankhya Sthirata Kosh, (JSK) consider the following statements
1.    It is   an autonomous body of the
Ministry   of   Health   and   Family
Welfare, Govt. of India
2.    The main aim of JSK is to bring the need  for  population  stabilisation
into focus.

Which of the statements given above is/are incorrect?

a.   1 Only b.  2 Only

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 17
c.   Both d.  None



78. Consider the following statements:
1.   DPSP     is     subordinate     to     the
Fundamental  rights except  Article
14 and 19 (Right to freedom).
2. The subordination of DPSP to fundamental rights is mentioned in
the constitution of India. Which of these is/are true?
a)  Only 1 b)  Only 2 c)  Both
d)  None

79. With reference to Hepatitis-B and its vaccine, consider the following statements
1. This vaccine has not yet been universalized in India
2.   Hepatitis B is a liver disease. It is caused by the hepatitis B virus. It is
spread through contact with the blood, or other body fluids, of an infected person.
3.   Monovalent Hepatitis-B vaccine is given  as  intra-muscular  injections to   infants  along  with  DPT  and Polio vaccines

Which of the above is/are incorrect?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.  1 Only
c.   3 Only d.  None



80. Consider   the   following   statements about the Planning Commission:
1.   It has not been accorded statutory status till date.
2.   It   has  executive  powers  despite being an advisory body.
3.   It   is   accountable   to   the   Indian
Parliament.
Which of these is/are correct?
a)  All of the above
b)  1 and 2 only
c)  Only 1 d)  Only 3



81. Which of the following DPSP has been implemented all over India?
1.   Free legal aid to the poor.
2.   Prohibit the slaughter of cows.
3. Separation of judiciary from the executive in the public services of the state.

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a)  Only 3 b)  1 and 3
c)  1, 2 and 3 d)  Only 2

82. Which of the following fundamental duties are mentioned implicitly/explicitly under the constitution of India?
1.   To strive towards excellence in all
spheres of individual and collective
activity.
2.   To safeguard public property.
3.   To pay taxes.
4.   Not  to  entertain  superstition  and
superstitious beliefs.

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a)  1 and 2 b)  1 and 3 c)  2 and 4
d)  1, 2 and 4



83. Which   of   the   following   important laws implement some of the fundamental duties?

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 18
1.   Unlawful   Activities   (Prevention) Act, 1967
2.   The Representation of People Act,
1951
3.   Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013
4.   The  Maharashtra  Prevention  and
Eradication of Human Sacrifice and other Inhuman, Evil and Aghori Practices and Black Magic Act, 2013

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below


a)  All of the above b)  1, 2 and 4
c)  2 and 4
d)  1, 2 and 3



84.  The following four numbers represent the attendance in the Lok Sabha on a particular day of a session. In which of the following case(s) can a constitutional  amendment  bill  never be passed which seeks to expand the list of Fundamental duties?
1.   178
2.   274
3.   50
4.   358


Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below


a)  Only 3
b)  All of the above c)  1 and 3
d)  It can be passed in all the cases.



85. With  reference  to  the   Navjat  Shishu Suraksha Karyakram (NSSK), consider the following statements
1.   NSSK  is  a  programme  aimed  to train health personnel in basic newborn care and resuscitation
2. The training is for 2 days and is expected to reduce neonatal mortality significantly in the country.
3. This      programme      addresses important  interventions of care  at birth i.e. Prevention of Hypothermia, Prevention of Infection, Early initiation of Breast feeding and Basic Newborn Resuscitation.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a.   1 and 2 Only b.  2 and 3 Only c.   1 and 3 Only d.  All





86. Consider the following statements:
1.   A  constitutional  amendment  bill ends in case of a disagreement between the two houses.
2. The president can not return a constitutional  amendment  bill  to the Parliament for reconsideration.
Which of these is/are true?
a)  Only 1 b)  Only 2 c)  Both
d)  None



87. In  which  of  the  following  cases  of constitutional amendment can the law be possibly declared void by the Supreme Court for violating the basic structure of the constitution?
1.   An amendment which makes India a police state instead of a welfare state.
2. An amendment which gives the Parliament substantial judicial powers.
3.   An amendment which declares the
Parliament to be supreme.



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 19
Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below


a)  2 and 3 b)  1 and 3 c)  1 and 2
d)  All of the above




88. Consider   the   following   statements about the position of states concerning constitutional amendments:
1.   A  constitutional  amendment  bill can be initiated by the states in the USA unlike in India.
2.   The constitution does not provide a
time limit for getting the required
amendment cleared by the states in
India.

Which of these is/are true?
a)  Only 1 b)  Only 2 c)  Both
d)  None



89. Which,  among  others,  are  powers  of the  Supreme  Court  which  fall  under the Doctrine of „Basic Structure‟?
1.   Ancillary powers of the Court.
2.   The   provision   of   Special   Leave
petition.
3.   Power to declare laws binding on all courts in India.

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a)  2 and 3 b)  1 and 3 c)  Only 2
d)  None of the above
90. Which of the following would qualify to be an implementation of specific provisions of the DPSP?
1.   Cooperative farming.
2.   Distribution of surplus land among the landless labourers.
3.   Decentralization of socio-economic planning to local bodies.

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below



a)  1 and 2 b)  2 and 3
c)  All of the above
d)  Only 3



91. Consider   the   following   statements about the Directive principles outside of Part IV of the constitution:
1.   Promoting  Hindi  language
is  the  duty  of  the  Union government.
2. The    Panchayats    should endeavour to provide adequate facilities for instruction in mother tongue to  linguistic  minority primary school children.
Which of these is/are true?
a)  Only 1 b)  Only 2 c)  Both
d)  None





92. Consider   the   following   statements about economic reforms of post-1991: Assertion (A): The official view in the
government is that the Economic reforms are
to be continued even further.
Reason   (R):   They   were   based   on political consensus.




http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 20
In the context of the above two statements, which one of the following is correct?

a)  Both A and R are true and R is the correct explanation of A.
b)  Both A and R are true but R is not a correct explanation of A.
c)  A is true, but R is false. d)  A is false, but R is true.



93. The Constitution of India recognizes:
a)  Only religious minorities b)  Only linguistic minorities
c)  Religious and linguistic minorities d)  Religious,   linguistic   and   ethnic
minorities



94. Consider the following statements:
1. The first five year plan laid the heaviest emphasis on industries as they  were  choosen  as  the  prime
mover force of the economy.
2.   The five year plans after the first plan and till the ninth plan laid heavy  emphasis  on  agriculture  to
supplement     the     industry     led growth.

Which of these is/are true?
a)  Only 1 b)  Only 2 c)  Both
d)  None of the above



95. In which five year plan were the first dedicated rural employment programmes launched for the first time?
a)  Fifth Plan
b)  Sixth Plan
c)  Seventh Plan d)  Eighth Plan


96. Which of the following is/are NOT the members of the National Development Council (NDC)?
1.   Chief Secretaries of States
2.   Members       of       the       Planning
Commission other than the Deputy
Chairman
3. Ministers of State (Independent charge at the Centre)
4.   Administrators     of     the     Union
Territories (UTs)

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a)  1, 3 and 4
b)  1 and 3 only
c)  2 and 4 d)  Only 1



97. Consider   the   following   statements about vocal learning ability of humans and animals
1.   During vocal development, young birds and human infants struggle with similar difficulties, and go through a similar step-wise process of learning transitions between syllables
2. Our closest relatives, apes and monkeys, lack the ability for vocal
learning completely
3.   Besides   humans   and   songbirds, vocal learning exists in parrots and
hummingbirds, some marine mammals such as whales and dolphins too.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.  1 and 3 Only c.   3 Only
d.  All



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 21
98. With reference to Demand For Grants, during   budgetary   process,   consider the following statements
1. Article 113 of the Constitution mandates that the estimates of expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India included in the Annual Financial Statement and required to be voted by the Lok Sabha are submitted in the form of Demands for Grants.
2. The  Demands  for  Grants  are presented to the Lok Sabha along with      the      Annual      Financial
Statement.
3.   In                                               regard to Union Territories without Legislature, a separate Demand is
presented         for         each         of the Union Territories

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?

a.   1 Only
b.  2 and 3 Only c.   1 and 3 Only d.  All

99. Consider   the   following   statements about  the  source  of  capital  for  the states in India:
1. Finance      commission      cannot determine capital related issues of
the state. It is confined to revenue matters and grants-in-aid only.
2. The  Fiscal  Responsibility  and Budget   Management(FRBM)   Act has further restricted the freedom of the states to borrow for fulfilling their plan expenditure.
Which of these is/are true?
a)  Only 1 b)  Only 2
c)  Both
d)  None of the above



100.           Which   of   the   following   are Salient features of the new Companies Act 2013?
1.   Introduction of National Company
Law Tribunal
2.   Prohibition   on   forward   dealings
and insider trading
3.   Strengthening                        Women
Contributions through Board Room
4.   Democracy of Shareholders
5.   Corporate Social Responsibility

Choose  the  correct  answer  using  the  codes below

a.   1,2,3 and 5 Only b.  2,3,4 and 5 Only c.   1,3,4 and 5 Only d.  All
























http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 22






































































http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 23
