INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS






1.   Solution: b)

A MP can speak against his political party. This forms part of his/her Parliamentary privileges as well as Freedom of Speech and Expression (Article 19(a)). If this were not the case, then Parliamentary democracy will not be a reality in India post enactment of anti-defection law.




2.    Solution: c)

The High Court is at the head of the judicial hierarchy in that state.

The President appoints the judges of a high court. Moreover, their removal can only be done by the Indian Parliament and not the state legislatures.




3.    Solution: c)

The upper houses in the states do not take part in Presidential election. Therefore, if the
CM is a member of the upper house, he cannot vote.




4.    Solution: b)

Tilak made it very clear that he did not want to overthrow the British government. What he wanted instead was Swaraj. These words of his brought him closer to the moderates. This stand of Tilak was responsible for the merger of the two streams (moderates and extremists) at the Lucknow session of Congress.




5.    Solution: c)

Convertibility basically means the ability to be converted into either foreign currencies or gold for the purposes of trade or investment.




6.    Solution: d)

http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 1
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS


The two cases of advisory jurisdiction are:

a) An important question of law, constitution etc.

b) Disputes arising out of pre-constitutional treaties etc.

In the first case, the SC may refuse to give any opinion. In the second, it is constitutionally bound to.




7.    Solution: a)

An election exit poll is a poll of voters taken immediately after they have exited the polling stations. Unlike an opinion poll, which asks whom the voter plans to vote for or some similar formulation, an exit poll asks whom the voter actually voted for. A similar poll conducted before actual voters have voted is called an entrance poll. Pollsters – usually private companies working for newspapers or broadcasters – conduct exit polls to gain an early indication as to how an election has turned out, as in many elections the actual result may take hours or even days to count.

There was a widespread controversy during the Indian general election, 2014 when
the Election Commission of India barred media organisations from displaying exit poll results until the votes had been counted. This was followed by a strong protest from the media which caused the Election Commission to withdraw its statement and that the exit polls can be shown at 6:30PM on 12th may after the last vote is cast.




8.    Solution: d)

There were only 22 casualties and that too were in India, not in Canada. The ship was simply returned from Canada without letting it enter their premises.

It fuelled Ghadr movement as it involved mainly the Punjabi Sikh and Muslim population. The Ghadr leaders could sympathize with the victims.




9.   Solution: c)






http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 2
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS


Kaveri River, Kaveri also spelled Cauvery, sacred river of southern India. It rises on Brahmagiri Hill of the Western Ghats in southwestern Karnataka state, flows in a southeasterly direction for 475 miles (765 km) through the states
of Karnataka and Tamil Nadu, and descends the Eastern Ghats in a series of great falls. Before emptying into the Bay of Bengal south of Cuddalore, Tamil Nadu, the river breaks into  a large  number of distributaries forming a wide delta called the ―garden of southern India.‖ Known to devout Hindus as Daksina Ganga (―Ganges of the South‖), the Kaveri River is celebrated for its scenery and sanctity in Tamil literature, and its entire course is considered holy ground. The river is also important for its irrigation canal projects.


Its uppermost course is tortuous, with a rocky bed and high banks under luxuriant vegetation. After passing through a narrow gorge and tumbling about 60 to 80 feet (18 to 24 metres) in the rapids ofChunchankatte, the river widens about 900 to 1,200 feet (275 to 365 metres) across the Karnataka Plateau. There its flow is interrupted by a number of anicuts or weirs. At the Krishnaraja Sagara, the Kaveri is joined by two tributaries, the Hemavati and Lakshmantirtha, and dammed for irrigation, forming a
12-square-mile (31-square-km) reservoir.


In Karnataka the river bifurcates twice, forming the sacred islands of Srirangapatnam andSivasamudram,  50 miles (80 km) apart. Around Sivasamudram are the
scenic Sivasamudram Falls, comprising two series of rapids, Bhar Chukki and Gagana Chukki, plunging a total of 320 feet (100 metres) and reaching a width of 1,000 feet (300 metres) in the rainy season. The falls supply hydroelectric power
to Mysore, Bangalore (Bengaluru), and the Kolar Gold Fields, more than 100 miles (160 km) away.


10.  Solution: c)

The most appropriate and principal reason is C. Options B and D are not principal reasons though they are among the reasons for planning.




11.  Solution: a)


http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 3
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS


List system is a method of voting for several electoral candidates, usually members of the same political party, with one mark of the ballot. It is used to elect the parliaments of many western European countries, including Switzerland, Italy, the Benelux countries, and Germany. Electors vote for one of several lists of candidates, usually prepared by the political parties. Each party is granted seats in proportion to the number of popular votes it receives. There are several rules for computing the number of seats awarded to a party, the best known being the ―d‘Hondt rule‖ and the ―largest- remainder rule.‖ Seats are usually awarded to candidates in the order in which their names appear on the lists. Although ordinarily the list system forces the voters to cast their votes for parties rather than for individual candidates, a number of variations on the system permit voter preferences for individuals to be taken into account. The Swiss system, one of the most extreme variations, is marked by panachage, the ability of the voter to mix candidates from several party lists if he so desires.




12.  Solution: b)

http://physics.stackexchange.com/questions/43361/why-do-diamonds-shine




13.  Solution: d)

http://chemistry.about.com/od/waterchemistry/f/Why-Is-Water-The-Universal- Solvent.htm




14.  Solution: d)

The MLAs also vote as ordinary citizens in general elections. The MPs also do. But they cannot vote in the elections to Rajya Sabha.




15. Solution: c)

With a view to revamping financial-sector laws to bring them in tune with current requirements, the GoI set up the Financial Sector Legislative Reforms Commission (FSLRC) on 24 March 2011. The Commission submitted its Report on 22 March 2013.
The FSLRC has given wide-ranging recommendations  on the institutional, legal, and


http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 4
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS


regulatory framework, and operational changes in the Indian financial sector. Broadly, the recommendations  of the Commission can be divided into two parts, legislative and non-legislative aspects.

The legislative aspects of the recommendations  relate to revamping the legislative framework of the financial-sector regulatory architecture through a non-sectoral, principle-based approach and by restructuring existing regulatory agencies and creating new agencies wherever needed. The Commission has recommended a seven- agency structure for the financial sector.

The non-legislative aspects of the FSLRC recommendations are broadly in the nature of governance-enhancing principles for enhanced consumer protection, greater transparency in the functioning of financial-sector regulators in terms of their reporting system, greater clarity on their interface with the regulated entities, and greater transparency in the regulation making process by means of mandatory public consultations, incorporation of cost-benefit analysis, etc.




16.  Solution: d)

Agricultural income tax falls under the State List. Therefore, constitutionally it is levied, collected and appropriated by the states only.




17.  Solution: b)

This evoked a strong response from Nehru and his colleagues. Gandhi was certain that if Jinnah is made the PM, he would stop making demand for a separate Pakistan.




18. Solution: c)
http://www.iucnredlist.org/details/9917/0 http://www.wwfindia.org/about_wwf/priority_species/nilgiri_tahr/conservation_ch
allenges/




19.  Solution: b)


http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 5
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS


Atmospheric gases such as nitrogen and oxygen can dissolve in water. The amount of gas dissolved depends on the temperature of the water and the atmospheric pressure at the air/water interface. Colder water and higher pressure allow more gas to dissolve; conversely, warmer water and lower pressure allow less gas to dissolve.

When you draw a glass of cold water from your faucet and allow it to warm to room temperature, nitrogen and oxygen slowly come out of solution, with tiny bubbles forming and coalescing at sites of microscopic imperfections on the glass. If the atmospheric pressure happens to be falling as the water warms, the equilibrium between gas molecules leaving and joining the air/water interface becomes unbalanced and tips in favor of them leaving the water, which causes even more gas to come out of solution. Hence bubbles along the insides of your water glass.

An air bubble in water that is shaped like a normal glass lens would have roughly the opposite effect of the glass lens. There are at least three ways to see why.

The first way is by analogy. If we consider a convex bubble and a concave glass lens in air or vacuum, we can see that the interface between water and air in the bubble and the glass and air in the lens is really exactly the same: the material with the higher index (water or glass) curves in and the material with the lower index of refraction curves out. The only difference is that with the bubble, two of these interfaces are face to face and in the lens, they are back to back. Thus the convex bubble and the concave lens should behave the same.

The second way to analyze the problem is to do some ray tracing. A ray of light is bent toward the perpendicular when entering a higher index medium (like water or glass) and away from the perpendicular when exiting a higher index medium. For a concave bubble, a ray going through the center of the bubble will not be refracted at all a t either transition. A ray perpendicular to the plane of the "lens" formed by the bubble will be refracted away from the center of the bubble as it enters the bubble and then only partially back toward the original direction as it exits the bubble. The net effect is one of divergence.

The third method is to analyze a spherical lens using the lens-maker's formula. This will give a negative focal length for a convex lens of air inside water.




20.  Solution: d)




http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 6
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS


Night action for desert plants makes sense.  Without hot desert sunshine to wilt flowers or dry up nectar, plants have a better chance of finding a pollinator and spreading their genes around. The drawback is that night bloomers have to share the relat ively fewer night flying pollinators.  Flowers share pollinators by timing when in the season they bloom.




21.  Solution: d)

Denotified Tribes (DNTs), also known as vimukta jat1, are the tribes that were originally listed under the Criminal Tribes Act of 1871, as Criminal Tribes and "addicted to the systematic commission of non-bailable offences." Once a tribe became "notified"
as criminal, all its members were required to register with the local magistrate, failing which they would be charged with a crime under the Indian Penal Code. The Criminal Tribes Act of 1952 repealed the notification, 1.e. 'de-notified' the tribal communities. This act, however, was replaced by a series of Habitual Offenders Acts, that asked police to investigate a suspect's criminal tendencies and whether his occupation is "conducive to settled way of life." The denotified tribes were reclassified as habitual offenders in 1959.

The creation of these categories should be seen in the context of colonialism. The British authorities listed them separately by creating a category of castes or tribes labelled as criminal.

The name "Criminal Tribes" is itself a misnomer as no definition of tribe denotes occupation, but they were identified as tribes doing their primary occupation. The first Census was in 1871 and at that time there was neither consensus nor any definition of "tribe". The terms "tribe" and "caste" were used interchangeably for these communities.




22. Solution: d)

The Coriolis Effect is most apparent in the path of an object moving longitudinally. On the Earth an object that moves along a north-south path, or longitudinal line, will undergo apparent deflection to the right in the Northern Hemisphere and to the left in the Southern Hemisphere. There are two reasons for this phenomenon: first, the Earth rotates eastward; and second, the tangential velocity of a point on the Earth is a function of latitude (the velocity is essentially zero at the poles and it attains a maximum value at
the Equator). Thus, if a cannon were fired northward from a point on the Equator, the

http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 7
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS


projectile would land to the east of its due north path. This variation would occur because the projectile was moving eastward faster at the Equator than was its target farther north. Similarly, if the weapon were fired toward the Equator from the North Pole, the projectile would again land to the right of its true path. In this case, the target area would have moved eastward before the shell reached it because of its greater eastward velocity. An exactly similar displacement occurs if the projectile is fired in any direction.




23.  Solution: b)

On the administrative side, the Chief Justice of the High Court carries out the following functions:

     Maintenance of the roster;

     Appointment of court officials;

     General and miscellaneous matters relating to the supervision and functioning of the High Court and subordinate courts.

It is logical that he would not be in the control of other high court judges and the executive. The control would lie with the CJI.




24.  Solution: a)

http://scienceisntfiction.blogspot.in/2011/05/mutations-cased-by-radiation.html




25.  Solution: a)

http://hyperphysics.phy-astr.gsu.edu/hbase/surten2.html

This article tells you that the pressure inside an air bubble is more than the water. In water pressure is more than the air. Hence, when the bubble comes out, it is natural that it will increase in size.




26.  Solution: a)


http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 8
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS


Refer to the list of fundamental rights not available to foreigners in Laxmikanth.




27.   Solution: c)

Refer to the first page in the Chapter NHRC in Laxmikanth. It is necessary to appoint women members in National Commission for women and Child Welfare Committees etc.




28.  Solution: d)

The Moderates wanted to achieve self government , they did not aim for total independence. They demanded certain reforms and concessions from British government because they wanted to develop India under the guidance of benevolent British rule. On the other hand, Extremists wanted Swaraj ie, complete independence. Moderates were loyal to British rule and English crown. They considered British rule a gift for India. The Extremists were not loyal to British rule and they considered i t as a curse and wanted to uproot it from India.
'Swaraj is better than best form of foreign rule'-Bal Gangadhar Tilak.
The moderates believed in adopting constitutional and peaceful method to achieve their objective. They had full faith in British sense of justice.Extremists believed in non co- operation and adopted method of boycott against foreign goods and propagation of swadeshi and national education. They believed in Indian culture, c ivilization, religion and tradition. Whereas Moderates believed in British culture.
Moderates believed that Indians were not fit to rule. Under the moderates, national
movement was not a popular movement, it had no touch with people. While under extremists, people came under them.




29.  Solution: d)



The Ghadar Movement was a movement of patriotic, progressive, democratic, and enlightened Indians living abroad, working for the emancipation of India from the yoke of British colonialism and the birth of a new India based on national and social emancipation. They organized themselves in 1913 among communities throughout the
world, adopting the following goals and means:


http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 9
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS




1-To liberate India with the force of arms from British servitude and to establish a free and independent India with equal rights for all.
2-To establish their headquarters in San Francisco, that would serve as a base to coordinate all the activities for achieving these aims and objectives.
3-To publish a weekly paper, Ghadar, in Urdu, Hind1, Punjabi and in other languages of India.
4-To hold organisational elections every year to elect a coordination committee from the different committees to carry out all the work.
5-To organize cells amongst Indian railway, industrial, and farm workers, as w ell as
students who would be directly linked to the centre.
6-The coordination committee would elect a three-member commission to supervise the political and underground work.
7-Revenue would be drawn from each member through a monthly contribution of one dollar.
8-No discussion or debate was to take place on religion within the organization.
Religion was considered a personal matter and that it had no place in the organization.
9-Every member was duty bound to participate in the liberation struggle of that country in which they were resident.

To mark the centenary of the Gadar movement, the Indian Government is planning to fund the conversion of the Gadar Memorial in San Francisco into a museum and library. The Hindustan Gadar Party, when founded in 1913, begun its operation from 436 Hill Street  of the northern Californian city. It came  to be known as ‗Yugantar Ashram‘ and it was from here that the freedom fighters were active from 1913 to 1917. From this place they published a weekly magazine called Gadar to propagate the cause of Indian independence.




30.  Solution: d)

A speaker giving part of his or her speaking time to another speaker. While this practice is allowed in some legislative bodies, it is not allowed in deliberative assemblies, unless specifically authorized in the rules.




31. Solution: a)



http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 10
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS


Polar bear is a carnivorous bear whose native range lies largely within the Arctic Circle, encompassing the Arctic Ocean, its surrounding seas and surrounding land masses. It is not found in Antarctic.




32.  Solution: a)

Magnetic-levitation  is an application where superconductors  perform extremely well. Transport vehicles such  as trains can be made to ―float‖ on strong superconducting magnets, virtually eliminating friction between the train and its tracks. Not only would conventional electromagnets waste much of the electrical energy as heat, t hey would have to be physically much larger than superconducting magnets. A landmark for the commercial use of MAGLEV technology occurred in 1990 when it gained the status of a nationally-funded  project in Japan. The Minister of Transport authorized construction of the Yamanashi Maglev Test Line which opened on April 3, 1997. In December 2003, the MLX01 test vehicle attained an incredible speed of 361 mph (581 kph).




33. Solution: b)




34.  Solution: d)

Options 2 and 3 are protective functions of forests.
Forestry contributes significantly by its protective, regulative, and productive functions. The protective functions of forest include protecting the land/ soil from degradation
due to rain, wind and radiation, and protecting the flora and fauna from overexploitation.

The regulative functions of forest include absorption, storage and release of carbon, oxygen, water, nutrients, radiant and thermal energy. Even the adverse effects of sound and wind can be absorbed by forest belts.

The production functions of forest include a number of economic goods and services. The goods are fuelwood used as energy for cooking, poles and timber for housing, furniture, and posts; and the bulk  of the farmers‘ plough and agricultural tools are all
made of wood. Similarly, fodder, bedding material, grasses, charcoal, essential oils,


http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 11
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS


resins, gums, honey, katha, kutch, medicinal herbs, fruits, seeds, pulp and paper, fibre, canes and bamboos also come from the forest.

Services from the forests include conservation of soil and water, preservation of biodiversity, enhancement of landscape, aesthetic value, recreation, ecotourism, etc.




35.  Solution: d)

Please refer to http://agritech.tnau.ac.in/forestry/agroforestry_index.html#difference




36.  Solution: d)

The annual session of the Congress parties as well as Muslim League were held in
Lucknow in 1916. Separately they passed the same resolution, which we know as
―Lucknow Pact‖. Via this:

• Congress accepted the provision of Separate Electorate for Muslims, given through
Indian Council Act of 1909. This was earlier opposed by the Congress.

• For Provincial Legislative Assembly, seats  for Muslims was  to be reserved. The
Muslim leaders accepted under representation in Muslim-majority areas (for instance
40% of seats in Bengal, though the Muslim population in Bengal was 52%) in return for over-representation  in provinces like Bombay or United Provinces (30%). It is clear that the UP-based Muslim politicians dominated in the League. One-third elected seats of Central Legislative Assembly were reserved for Muslims, whose members had to come through separate electorate.

• If 3/ 4th members of any community in a Legislative Assembly objects  on any
Resolution on the ground that it is against their interests, it would not be passed.

• More  autonomy to the provinces in financial matters.

• 80% members of both  central and provincial Legislative Assembly should be elected.

• Half of the strength at least, of central and provincial Executive body shall  come  from
elected Legislative body.

• Except army and External Affairs, the Legislative Council should have control over all departments.


http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 12
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS


• India should be treated as 'Dominion Status country'.




37.  Solution: a)

Refer to the Chapter on Attorney General in Laxmikanth. He can removed on a recommendation of the Cabinet to the President.




38. Solution: b)

Sunspot, vortex of gas on the surface of the Sun associated with strong local magnetic activity. Spots look dark only by contrast with the surrounding photosphere, which is several thousand degrees hotter. The dark centre of a spot is called the umbra; the outer, lighter ring is the penumbra. Spots may be several times larger than Earth or so small that telescopic observation is difficult. They may last for months. Single spots do
appear, but most are in pairs or groups, with the members of a pair (leader and follower
in respect to the direction of the Sun‘s rotation) having opposite magnetic polarit y. This polarity reverses from one solar cycle (of 11 years duration) to the next; i.e., if leaders in one cycle are north magnetic poles, leaders in the succeeding cycle will be south poles. Leaders and followers in one hemisphere of the Sun are almost always opposite in polarity from their counterparts across the equator.




39.  Solution: b)

Radial tyres increase the life of the tyre and the high speed of the vehicle. Catalytic converter reduces the pollution emitted by the vehicle.
Streamlined body helps the car overcome air friction and thus reduce energy and the
amount of fuel taken to cover the same distance.




40.  Solution: d)

Satyagraha was based on truth and non-violence. In his technique of Satyagraha, apart from the mentioned options, even violence was preferred to cowardice. While evil was




http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 13
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS


to be opposed, it was not to be hated. It was to be loved. And, this wa s considered as love for truth.




41.  Solution: a)

The Montague declaration clearly stated that  the terms ―British India‖ and India were different. The former excludes the Princely states whereas the latter includes it. British India was to be governed by Governor-general; princely states by the princes.

The princely states were not sovereign in matters of both foreign policy and defense. For several local matters, the princely states were subject to the legislations.



42.  Solution: c)

This moisture absorber is made from sodium silicate. Its name may be misleading because this form of silica is actually solid. It is produced in a beaded or granular form. The silica gel has a very strong attractive effect on water molecules. The material is usually placed in a vapor-permeable plastic and placed inside airtight containers to prevent moisture from destroying the other contents of the containers. Silica gel should not be ingested, as it is a poisonous substance. To ensure that the product does not get eaten, manufacturers usually place  a warning on the silica gel‘s plastic container.

Silica gel has a very strong absorbing quality when in room temperature. However, it may give up the water it holds when exposed to temperatures near or higher than 40 degrees Celsius. These moisture absorbers are usually used in products that are placed in room temperature. Since silica gels are quite expensive, they are not recommended for larger areas such as basements and kitchens.




43. Solution: c)

The MJO, also referred to as the 30-60 day or 40-50 day oscillation, turns out to be the main intra-annual fluctuation that explains weather variations in the tropics. The MJO affects the entire tropical troposphere but is most evident in the Indian and western Pacific Oceans. The MJO involves variations in wind, sea surface temperature (SST),
cloudiness, and rainfall. Because most tropical rainfall is convective, and convective


http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 14
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS


cloud tops are very cold (emitting little longwave radiation), the MJO is most obvious in the variation of outgoing longwave radiation (OLR), as measured by an infrared sensor on a satellite.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Madden%E2%80%93Julian_oscillation#Connection_to_t he_monsoon




44.  Solution: c)

Please go through the Table of Precedence. It may be noted that this table in no way indicates their order of extent of authority and power within the gov ernment.




45.  Solution: d)

This power of the Parliament is derived from the sovereign nature of India. Sovereign deals need not be ratified by the states.




46. Solution: b)

The Earth‘s steady magnetic field is produced by many sources, both  above and below the planet‘s surface. From  the core outward, these include the
geomagnetic dynamo, crustal magnetization, theionospheric dynamo, the ring current, the magnetopause current, the tail current, field-aligned currents, and auroral, or convective, electrojets. The geomagnetic dynamo is the most important source because, without the field it creates, the other sources would not  exist. Not  far above the Earth‘s surface the effect of other sources becomes as strong as or stronger than that of the geomagnetic dynamo. In the discussion that follows, each of these sources is consi dered and the respective causes explained.




47.  Solution: c)

In the 1930s, an astronomer Fritz Zwicky noticed that in one of the clusters of Galaxies, many individual galaxies were moving around so fast there must have been a tremendous amount of gravitational pull toward the centre of the cluster. If it were not
so, the galaxies would literally fling out of the cluster. But the mount of matter that was

http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 15
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS


required to produce that much gravity exceeded the matter observed in these Galaxies. That implied that there was indeed an extra matter than what is obse rved. This invisible extra matter was called Dark Matter.

Taking the theory forward, in 1970s, two astronomers showed that the stars in Andromeda Galaxy were moving so fast that for the stars to stay in the galaxy there had to be a tremendous amount of matter surrounding and enveloping the entire galaxy like a giant cocoon. The interesting thing is that while it did not emit any electromagnetic radiation, and consequently not visible to telescopes, it exerted only gravity. After further researches, it was confirmed that Dark matter does exist and is an important constituent of matter around galaxies, in clusters of galaxies, and throughout the universe. Not only that, it is now estimated that around 80 per cent of the matter in the universe is dark matter!




48.  Solution: b)

Radio-frequency identification (RFID) is the wireless non-contact use of radio frequency electromagnetic fields to transfer data, for the purposes of automatically identifying and tracking tags attached to objects. The tags contain electronically stored information. Some tags are powered by and read at short ranges (a few meters) via magnetic fields (electromagnetic induction). Others use a local power source such as a battery, or else have no battery but collect energy from the interrogating EM field, and then act as a passive transponder to emit microwaves or UHF radio waves
(i.e., electromagnetic radiation at high frequencies). Battery powered tags may operate at hundreds of meters. Unlike a barcode, the tag does not necessarily need to be within line of sight of the reader, and may be embedded in the tracked object.

Radio frequency identification (RFID) is part of the family of Automatic Identification and Data Capture (AIDC) technologies that includes 1D and 2D bar codes. RFID uses an electronic chip, usually applied to a substrate to form a label, that is affixed to a
product, case, pallet or other package. The information it contains may be read, recorded, or rewritten.[1]

RFID tags are used in many industries. An RFID tag attached to an automobile during production can be used to track its progress through the assembly line. Pharmaceuticals can be tracked through warehouses. Livestock and pets may have tags injected,
allowing positive identification of the animal.



http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 16
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS


Since RFID tags can be attached to cash, clothing, everyday possessions, or even implanted within people, the possibility of reading personally-linked  information without consent has raised serious privacy concerns.




49.  Solution: c)

Apart from the above provisions, it denied the use of Habeas Corpus provision against detentions. The Act was passed to crush rebellions against the British Raj when Gandhiji was gearing up for the Non-cooperation movement.




50.  Solution: a)

The Government of India Act 1935 introduced the provincial autonomy and provided for an all India federation. This act introduced dyarchy at the central level. This act had
321 sections and 10 schedules. It made a provision for establishment of a Federal court. The franchisee was extended. It divided the subjects in 3 lists. The Indian council was abolished and an advisory body was introduced. Burma was separated from India, and Aden was surrendered to British Colonial office.




51. Solution: d)

The deposit made by a candidate shall be returned if the following conditions are satisfied:-


(i) the candidate is not shown in the list of co ntesting candidates, that is to say, either his nomination was rejected or after his nomination was accepted, he withdrew his candidature; or


(ii) he dies before the commencement of the poll; or


(iii) he is elected; or


(iv) he is not elected but gets more than 1/6th of the total no. of valid votes polled by all the candidates at the election.



http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 17
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS


N.B (1) If the candidate has polled exactly 1/6th of the total number of valid votes polled by all the candidates, the deposit will not be refunded.
(2) if the candidate was elected, the deposit will be refunded even if he did not poll more than 1/6th of the total valid votes polled by all the candidates.




Hence, if the number of candidates is very large, very few will be able to secure one - sixth of votes. Others will lose the deposit.




52.  Solution: a)

Its pressure is very low when evaporated to produce the temperatures needed for refrigeration. It condenses at pressures that are relatively low too. It carries much more heat  per pound than most  refrigerators, around twice  as efficient as HFC‘s in this respect. It is non-corrosive to certain metals like steel, stainless steel, aluminium, bronze etc. It is naturally existing chemical. It is even secreted by the human body. It does not deplete the ozone layer too.




53. Solution: d)

The current molecular composition of Earth‘s atmosphere is diatomic nitrogen (N2),
78.08 percent; diatomic oxygen (O2), 20.95 percent; argon (A), 0.93 percent; water (H20), about 0 to 4 percent; and carbon dioxide (CO2), 0.0395 percent. Inert gases such
as neon (Ne), helium (He), and krypton (Kr) and other constituents such as nitrogen
oxides, compounds of sulfur, and compounds of ozone are found in lesser amounts.




54.  Solution: c)

On August 16, 1932, the British Prime Minister McDonald announced the Communal Award. Thus it is also known as McDonald Award. The Communal Award was basically a proposal on minority representation.

Major proposals were as follows:


http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 18
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS


    The existing seats of the provincial legislatures were to be doubl ed.
    The system of separate electorates for the minorities was to be retained.
    The Muslims, wherever they were in minority, were to be granted a weightage.
    Except NWFP, 3 % seats for women were to be reserved in all provinces.
    The depressed , dalits or the untouchables were to be declared as minorities.
    Allocation was to be made to labor, landlords, traders and industrialists.


Thus, this award accorded separate electorates for Muslims, Europeans, Sikhs, Indian Christians, Anglo Indians, Depressed Classes, and even Marathas. (Some seats in Bombay were given to Marathas) The depressed classes were given seats which had to be filled by election from the special constituencies in which only they could vote. However, they were eligible to vote in the general constituencies as well. The labor, Commerce and Industry, Mining and Planting, Landholders were also given special electorates. Sikhs were 13.2% of the population in Punjab. Here they were given 32 seats out of the total 175 seats.




55.  Solution: c)

Cloud seeding is the attempt to modify weather by changing the amount or type of precipitation that falls from clouds. This is done, by dispersing substances into the air that serve as cloud condensation or ice nuclei. These substances alter the microphysical processes within the cloud. The intent is to increase rain or snow, and to suppress hail and fog at the airports.

Using an aircraft or dispersion devices located on the ground (generators, firing canisters from anti-aircraft guns or even rockets) the chemicals are dispersed in the atmosphere. If an aircraft is being used, the silver iodide flares are ignited and dispersed as the plane flies through the cloud. If ground based devices are used, then chemicals are simply fired at the cloud.

Common chemicals used for cloud seeding include silver iodide and dry ice (solid carbon dioxide), Liquid propane (which expands into a gas). The use of table salt is becoming more popular.




56.  Solution: b)

The consultative committees have no powers.




http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 19
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS


The administration is accountable to the Ministers concerned. They do not send reports to the MPs.

The Parliamentary committees like PAC, Estimates Committee, Committee on
Subordinate legislation etc. keep a watch on the administration.




57.  Solution: a)

QIM was suppressed, not withdrawn despite large scale violence.

CDM was withdrawn initially because of the Gandhi-Irwin pact. Despite the violence erupted in Calcutta, Gujarat, Karachi and elsewhere it was not withdrawn.




58. Solution: a)

Based on the interaction of wavelengths of ultraviolet radiation with biological materials, three divisions have been designated: UVA (400 –315 nm), also called black light; UVB (315–280 nm), responsible for the radiation‘s best-known effects on
organisms; and UVC (280–100 nm), which does not  reach Earth‘s surface.


Ultraviolet radiation is produced by high-temperature surfaces, such as the Sun, in a continuous spectrum and by atomic excitation in a gaseous discharge tube as a discrete spectrum of wavelengths. Most of the ultraviolet radiation in sunlight is absorbed by oxygen in Earth‘s atmosphere, which forms the  ozone layer of the lower stratosphere. Of the ultraviolet that  does reach Earth‘s surface, almost 99 percent is UVA radiation.





59.  Solution: d)

Based on the Citizen‘s grievance the state  government can take  action agai nst Panchayat members and officials. However, local bodies in India have the freedom to appoint their own personnel like in the case of Bangalore Municipal Corporation or Kolkata
Municipal Corporation. These personnel do not come under the control of the state
governments.





http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 20
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS


60.  Solution: a)

Recombinant DNA (rDNA) molecules are DNA molecules formed by laboratory methods of genetic recombination(such  as molecular cloning) to bring together genetic material from multiple sources, creating sequences that would not otherwise be found
in biological organisms. Recombinant DNA is possible because DNA molecules from all
organisms share the same chemical structure. They differ only in the nucleotide sequence within that identical overall structure.

Recombinant DNA molecules are sometimes called chimeric DNA, because they are usually made of material from two different species, like the mythical chimera. R-DNA technology uses palindromic sequences and leads to the production of sticky and blunt ends.

The DNA sequences used in the construction of recombinant DNA molecules can originate from any species. For example, plant DNA may be joined to bacterial DNA, or human DNA may be joined with fungal DNA. In addition, DNA sequences that do not occur anywhere in nature may be created by the chemical synthesis of DNA, and incorporated into recombinant molecules. Using recombinant DNA technology and synthetic DNA, literally any DNA sequence may be created and introduced into any of
a very wide range of living organisms.

Proteins that can result from the expression of recombinant DNA within living cells are termed recombinant proteins. When recombinant DNA encoding a protein is introduced into a host organism, the recombinant protein is not necessarily
produced. Expression of foreign proteins requires the use of specialized expression
vectors and often necessitates significant restructure by foreign coding sequence.

Recombinant DNA differs from genetic recombination in that the former results from artificial methods in the test tube, while the latter is a normal biological process that results in the remixing of existing DNA sequences in essentially all organisms.




61.  Solution: c)

Induced Pluripotency is artificially achieved from a non-pluripotent  cell - typically an adult somatic cell - by inducing a "forced" expression of specific genes.






http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 21
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS


Induced pluripotent stem cells or iPS cells or iPSCs are resemble natural Pluripotent stem cells, such as embryonic stem (ES) cells, in many aspects, but the full extent of their relation to natural Pluripotent stem cells is still being examined.

The production of iPSCs has been considered as an important advancement in stem cell research, as it may facilitate researchers to obtain Pluripotent stem cells, which are important in research and potentially have therapeutic uses, without the controversial use of embryos.

Researchers hope to use them to test drugs, to make models of diseases, to grow transplantable organs and, in the future they may be used by doctors to regenerate missing or damaged parts of their patient's bodies.




62.  Solution: a)

In ecology, edge effects refer to the changes in population or community structures that occur at the boundary of two habitats. Areas with small habitat fragments exhibit especially pronounced edge effects that may extend throughout the range. As the edge effects increase, the boundary habitat allows for greater biodiversity.

Types:

     Inherent—Natural  features stabilize the border location.

     Induced—Transient  natural disturbances (e.g., fire or flood) or human related activities, subject borders to successional changes over time.

     Narrow—One habitat abruptly ends and another begins (e.g., an agricultural field.)

     Wide (ecotone)—Substantial  distance separates border from point where physical conditions and vegetation do not differ from interior of patch.

     Convoluted—Border  is non-linear.

     Perforated—Border  has gaps that host other habitats. Height can create borders between patches as well



63.  Solution: b)

http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 22
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS


As a community reaches its climax, the functions become perfect and more sophisticated. The nutrient conservation instead of being low, becomes high. Same is the case with energy use efficiency.

Read more here http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/178264/ecological- succession




64.  Solution: c)

In deep oceans, light does not remain the limiting factor as after a certain depth light received at deeper ocean is the same. Hence, nutrients become the limiting factor.




65. Solution: c)

http://nilgiritahrinfo.info/sholaforest.htm




66.  Solution: b)

It depends on both temperature and moisture.

If temperature is high but no moisture, then no decomposition. Hence, in tropical
deserts decomposition is very little as compared to Steppe climate where some moisture is available and the temperature is also not low. Tropical rainforest is the ideal decomposition ecosystem.




67. Solution: b)

The Financial Stability Board (FSB) was established in 2009 under the aegis of the G20 bringing together the national authorities, standard-setting bodies, and international financial institutions to address vulnerabilities and to develop and implement strong regulatory, supervisory, and other policies in the interest of financial stability. India is an active Member of the FSB. The FSDC Secretariat in the Department of Economic Affairs coordinates with the various financial-sector regulators and other relevant agencies to represent India‘s views with the FSB. As a member of the  FSB, Basel
Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS), and International Monetary Fund (IMF),


http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 23
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS


India actively participates in post-crisis reforms of the international regulatory and supervisory framework under the aegis of the G20. India remains committed to adoption of international standards and best practices, in a phased manner and calibrated to local conditions, wherever necessary.

68.  Solution: d)

The CAG in no way control the receipt and issue of money. He is only an auditor. Please refer to the details given in the Chapter CAG –powers, functions in Laxmikanth.




69. Solution: c)

Among the in situ soils of India, the black soils found in the lava -covered areas are the most conspicuous. These soils are often referred to as regur but are popularly known as
―black cotton soils,‖ since cotton has been  the most  common traditional crop  in areas where they are found. Black soils are derivatives of trap lava and are spread mostly across interior Gujarat, Maharashtra, Karnataka, and Madhya Pradesh on the Deccan lava plateau and the Malwa Plateau, where there is both moderate rainfall and underlying basaltic rock. Because of their high clay content, black soils develop wide cracks during the dry season, but their iron-rich granular structure makes them resistant to wind and water erosion. They are poor in humus yet highly moisture- retentive, thus responding well to irrigation. These soils are also found on many peripheral tracts where the underlying basalt has been shifted from its original location by fluvial processes. The sifting has only led to an increased concentration of clastic contents.




70.  Solution: c)

The CM of the states are appointed by the Governors concerned. But in a UT, they are appointed by the President. The Administrator of the UT forwards the recommendation of the appointment to the President.

The Deputy Chairman of Planning Commission is appointed by the Cabinet.




71. Solution: d)



http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 24
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS


The rise in market share of the overseas market is a major external im pulse upon the Indian financial system. Global competition generates pressure on private players to become more efficient, which is a positive development. However, the outlook for onshore trading is hampered by policy problems. The outcome of this global competition hinges on six factors:

1. There are capital control frictions against foreign investors;

2. Often there are technical mistakes in rules on position limits and margins;

3. There is adverse tax treatment of non-resident participants;

4. Markets in India are not open at all hours;

5. There are bureaucratic and procedural overheads; and

6. The domestic market is less well developed than some competing markets





72.  Solution: d)

The SC or the HC decides on election disputes.

Elections to local bodies are conducted by the State Election Commission.




73.  Solution: d)

The people had adopted the twin programme of 'Boycott' and 'Swadeshi ' as parts of one and the same movement. These two words are two sides of the same coin and both were used as economic as well as political tools. Boycott referred to the boycott of British goods in order to register protest with the British public against the grave injustice inflicted upon Bengal. Boycott was a seemingly negative programme and Swadeshi as its positive corollary was accepted along with. Swadeshi meant use of, and encouragement to, native products as against foreign goods. Thus, the Boycott and Swadeshi movement brought all classes of Indian society, particularly in Bengal to a common platform for a national cause.




74.  Solution: a)


http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 25
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS


Conservation tillage is any method of soil cultivation that leaves the previous year's crop residue (such as corn stalks or wheat stubble) on fields before and after planting the next crop, to reduce soil erosion and runoff. To provide these conservation benefits, at least 30% of the soil surface must be covered with residue after planting the next crop. Some conservation tillage methods forego traditional tillage entirely and leave
70% residue or more.

Conservation tillage is especially suitable for erosion-prone cropland. In some agricultural regions it has become more common than traditional mouldboard ploughing.

Conservation tillage methods include no-till, strip-till, ridge-till and mulch-till. Each method requires different types of specialized or modified equipment and adaptations in management.

Read more here http://www.mda.state.mn.us/protecting/conservation/practices/constillage.aspx




75.  Solution: b)

The RBI‘s recently released study ‗Early Recognition of Financial Distress, Promp t Steps for Resolution and Fair Recovery for Lenders: Framework for Revitalizing Distressed Assets in the Economy‘ has suggested various steps for quicker recognition and resolution of stressed assets. Banks will now be required to classify Special Mention

Accounts (SMA) into three sub-categories:

1. SMA-0: Principal or interest not overdue but showing incipient signs of stress

2. SMA-1: Principal or interest overdue by 31-60 days

3. SMA-2: Principal or interest overdue by 61-90 days

The other main proposals in the framework are:

1. Centralized reporting and dissemination of information on large credit.

2. Early formation of a lenders‘ committee with timelines to agree to a plan for
resolution.





http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 26
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS


3. Incentives for lenders to agree collectively and quickly to a plan. There is better regulatory treatment of stressed assets if a resolution plan is under way, or accelerated provisioning if no agreement can be reached.

4. Improvement in current restructuring process: independent evaluation of large value restructurings is mandated, with a focus on viable plans and a fair sharing of losses (and future possible upside) between promoters and creditors.

5. More expensive future borrowing for borrowers who do not cooperate with lenders in resolution.




76. Solution: d)

As the high-sun season (that is, the Northern Hemisphere summer) moves northward during April, India becomes particularly prone to rapid heating because the highlands to the north protect it from any incursions of cold air. There are three di stinct areas of relative upper tropospheric warmth—namely,  (1) above the southern Bay of Bengal, (2) above the Plateau of Tibet, and (3) across the trunks of the various peninsulas that are relatively dry during this time. These three areas combine to form a vast heat-source region. The relatively warm area above the southern Bay of Bengal occurs mostly at the
500–100-millibar level. (This atmospheric pressure region typically occurs at elevations between 5,500 and 16,100 metres [18,000 and 53,000 feet] but may vary according to changes in heating and cooling.) It does not appear at a lower level and is probably caused by the release of condensation heat (associated with the change from water vapour to liquid water) at the top of towering cumulonimbus clouds along the advancing intertropical convergence. In contrast, a heat sink appears over the southern Indian Ocean as the relatively cloud-free air cools by emitting long-wavelength radiation. Monsoon winds at the surface blow from heat sink to heat source. As a result, by May the southwest monsoon is well-established over Sri Lanka, an island off the
southeastern tip of the Indian peninsula.


Also in May, the dry surface of Tibet (above 4,000 metres [13,100 feet]) absorbs and radiates heat that is readily transmitted to the air immediately above. At about 6,000 metres (19,700 feet) an anticyclonic cell arises, causing a strong easterly flow in the upper troposphere above northern India. The subtropical jet stream suddenly changes its course to the north of the anticyclonic ridge and the highlands, though it may occasionally reappear southward of them for very brief periods. This change of the
upper tropospheric circulation above northern India from westerly jet to easterly flow

http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 27
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS


coincides with a reversal of the vertical temperature and pressure gradients between
600 and 300 millibars. On many occasions the easterly wind aloft assumes jet force. It anticipates by a few days the ―burst,‖ or onset, of the surface southwesterly monsoon some 1,500 km (900 miles) farther south, with a definite sequential relationship, although the exact cause is not  known. Because of India‘s inverted triangular shape, the land is heated progressively as the sun moves northward. This accelerated spread of heating, combined with the general direction of heat being transported by winds,
results in a greater initial monsoonal activity over the Arabian Sea (at late springtime),
where a real frontal situation often occurs, than over the Bay of Bengal. The relative humidity of coastal districts in the Indian region rises above 70 percent, and some rain occurs. Above the heated land, the air below 1,500 metres (5,000 feet) becomes unstable, but it is held down by the overriding easterly flow. This does not prevent
frequent thunderstorms from occurring in late May.



77. Solution: d)

NON-BANKING  FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

Non-banking financial institutions (NBFIs) is a heterogeneous group of institutions that caters to a wide range of financial requirements and can broadly be divided into financial institutions (FIs) and Non Bank Financial Companies (NBFCs).

Financial institutions

There were four FIs under the regulation and supervision of the RBI: Export -Import Bank of India (EXIM), National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD), National Housing Board (NHB), and Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI).




78. Solution: a)

The RBI set up the Committee on Comprehensive Financial Services for Small Businesses and Low-Income Households (CCFS) in September 2013 under the Chairmanship of Dr Nachiket Mor. The Committee‘s Report was  released on 7 January
2014.

At its core, the Committee‘s recommendations are that  in order to achieve the task of
financial inclusion in a manner that enhances both  financial inclusion and stability,


http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 28
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS


there is need to move away from an exclusive focus on any one model to an approach where multiple models and partnerships are allowed to thrive, particularly between national full-service banks, regional banks of various types, NBFCs, and financial markets. The common theme of all the recommendations made by the Committee is that instead of focusing only on large generalist institutions, specialization and partnerships between specialists must be encouraged. Such an approach, in its view, would be far more effective at delivering high quality financial i nclusion, without compromising  financial stability or responsibility towards customers. Some of the key recommendations of the CCFS include:

1. Universal Electronic Bank Account for every resident to be made available at the time of issuing the Aadhaar number.

2. Licensing, with lowered entry barriers but otherwise equivalent treatment, more functionally focused banks, including payment banks, wholesale consumer banks, and wholesale investment banks.

3. Developing risk-based supervision processes for regional banks and strengthening existing ones before creating new regional banks.

4. Reorienting the focus of NABARD, SIDBI, and NHB to be market-makers and providers of risk-based credit enhancements.

5. Consolidating NBFC definitions into two categories: Core investment companies and other NBFCs. Restore permission of NBFCs-ND to act as business correspondents.

6. On priority sector lending, while the Committee acknowledged that the current focus of the policy, on small farmers, small businesses, and weaker sections, was well placed, it recommended an approach that incentivizes each provider to specialise in one or
more sectors of the economy and regions of the country. Government subsidies to be channelled as direct benefit transfers (DBTs) rather than as subventions or waivers.

7. All financial firms regulated by the RBI be required to have an internal process to assess suitability of products prior to advising clients with regard to them.




79. Solution: c)

http://www.livemint.com/Opinion/7az4qB8inmR51KmZ99BQOM/Why -RBI-chose- two-banks-andnot-more.html



http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 29
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS


Regarding first statement:

Refer to Paragraph 7 in the above link. It‘s a very  important article.

The RBI released ‗Guidelines for Licenses of New Banks in the Private Sector‘ on 22
February 2013, wherein applications for setting up new banks in the private sector were invited, for which 25 applications were received. A High Level Advisory Committee under the Chairmanship of Dr Bimal Jalan, former Governor RBI, was set up for screening these applications. The Committee submitted its Report along with its recommendations on 25 February 2014. Based on this, an internal scrutiny of the applications was  done and the RBI, on 2 April 2014, granted ‗in-principle‘ approval to two applicants, namely IDFC Limited and Bandhan Financial Services Private Limited, to set up banks under the Guidelines.




80. Solution: a)

A withholding tax, also called a retention tax, is a government requirement for the payer of an item of income to withhold or deduct tax from the payment, and pay that tax to the government. In most jurisdictions, withholding tax applies
to employment income. Many jurisdictions also require withholding tax on payments of interest or dividends. In most jurisdictions, there are additional withholding tax obligations if the recipient of the income is resident in a different jurisdiction, and in those circumstances withholding tax sometimes applies to royalties, rent or even the sale of real estate. Governments use withholding tax as a means to combat tax evasion, and sometimes impose additional withholding tax requirements if the recipient has been delinquent in filing tax returns, or in industries where tax evasion is perceived to
be common.

Refer Page: 96, Economic Survey 2014




81. Solution: a)

1.   What are the various types of financial markets?

The financial markets can broadly be divided into money and capital market.

Money Market: Money market is a market for debt securities that pay off in the short term usually less than one year, for example the market for 90 -days treasury bills. This


http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 30
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS


market encompasses the trading and issuance of short term non equity debt instruments including treasury bills, commercial papers, bankers acceptance, certificates of deposits, etc.

Capital Market: Capital market is a market for long-term debt and equity shares. In this market, the capital funds comprising of both equity and debt are issued and traded.
This also includes private placement sources of debt and equity as well as organized markets like stock exchanges. Capital market can be further divided into primary and secondary markets.

2.   What is meant by Secondary Market?

Secondary Market refers to a market where securities are traded after being initially offered to the public in the primary market and/or listed on the Stock Exchange. Majority of the trading is done in the secondary market. Secondary market comprises of equity markets and the debt markets.

For the general investor, the secondary market provides an efficient platform for trading of his securities. For the management of the company, Secondary equity markets serve as a monitoring and control conduit—by facilitating value-enhancing control activities, enabling implementation of incentive-based management contracts, and aggregating information (via price discovery) that guides management decisions.

3.  What is the difference between the primary market and the secondary market?

In the primary market, securities are offered to public for subscription for the purpose of raising capital or fund. Secondary market is an equity trading avenue in which already existing/pre- issued securities are traded amongst investors. Secondary market could be either auction or dealer market. While stock exchange is the part of an auction market, Over-the-Counter  (OTC) is a part of the dealer market.




82. Solution: b)

http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/2012-12-12/news/35774017_1_qfis- routes-for-foreign-portfolio-foreign-venture

http://www.thehindubusinessline.com/markets/sebi-to-take-up-chandrasekhar- panel-report-on-june-25-chidambaram/article4809866.ece




http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 31
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS


83.  Solution: a)

Option A is correct. The bill was introduced because the government was alarmed by the apread of socialist and communist ideas and believed that a crucial role was being played by the British and other foreign activists.




84.  Solution: a)

Their aim was to get heard and arrested. This was to be used as anti -British propaganda.

Public safety bill and Trade disputes bill were to be brought to curtail civil liberties in general and that of workers in particular.




85.  Solution: b)

The outcome of the All Parties Conference was that a committee was appointed under the Chairman ship of Motilal Nehru, to draft the proposed constitution. The draft constitution was prepared which was called "Nehru Committee Repo rt". This report was submitted on August 28, 1928 at the Lucknow conference of all the parties. But Jinnah Voted against this report. The main points of this report were as follows: India would be given Dominion status. This means independence within the British Commonwealth. India will be a federation which shall have a bicameral legislature at the centre and Ministry would be responsible to the legislature. Governor General of India would be the constitutional head of India and will have the same powers a s that of British Crown. There will be no separate electorate. The draft report also defined the citizenship and fundamental rights.



86.  Solution: d)

Biofertilizers are defined as preparations containing living cells or latent cells of efficient strains of microorganisms that  help  crop  plants‘ uptake of nutrients by their interactions in the rhizosphere when applied through seed or soil.  They accelerate certain microbial processes in the soil which augment the extent of availability of nutrients in a form
easily assimilated by plants.




http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 32
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS


Very often microorganisms are not as efficient in natural surroundings as one would expect them to be and therefore artificially multiplied cultures of efficient selected microorganisms play a vital role in accelerating the microbial processes in soil.

Use of biofertilizers is one of the important components of integrated nutrient management, as they are cost effective and renewable source of plant nutrients to supplement the chemical fertilizers for sustainable agriculture. Several microorganisms and their association with crop plants are being exploited in the production of biofertilizers. They can be grouped in different ways based on their nature and function.

They also protect against soil-borne diseases and drought.




87.  Solution: c)

In recombinant technology, even an animal gene can be inserted into plants. And this can be very specifically controlled. In another question on recombinant technology in the same test paper, all other details have been shared.




88.  Solution: d)




89.  Solution: b)
It has been dealt very comprehensively in this article. http://www.livemint.com/Money/59j9pDtGyszMVGGgXlc1fN/Small -payments-
banks-in-the-making.html




90.  Solution: c)

The Committee has submitted its Report on 12th May 2014 recommending, inter alia, (i) scrapping of Bank Nationalisation Acts, SBI Act and SBI (Subsidiary Banks) Act,
(ii) Converting all PSBs into Companies under the Companies Act,





http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 33
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS


(iii) Formation of a ―Bank Investment Company‖ (BIC) under the Companies Act and
transfer of all Shares held by the Central Government in PSBs to the newly formed BIC

(iv) Controlling authority/power of the Central Government over PSBs to the transferred to
BIC which would, in turn, hand over the same to respective Boards of the PSBs,

(v) Government‘s concern about PSBs would be limited only to earning ―return on investment‖ and BIC‘s ultimate responsibility would be limited only to ensuring a fair
―return on investment‖ to the Central Government,

(vi) appointment of CEOs, other ―inside Directors‖ and top  Executives of PSBs would be vested in ―Bank
Boards Bureau‖ (BBB) comprising of three serving or retired Chairm en of Banks and the
Government
would have no say in the matter,

(vii) Proportionate voting right to all shareholders,

(viii) Reduction of Government‘s share-holding to 40%,

(ix) Cases of vigilance enforcement against whole time directors and other bank employees for decisions taken by them must be based on evidence that the director or employee personally made a wrongful gain. For levelling criminal charges, fraud must manifest itself through evidence of self-benefit. In loan and expenditure cases, deviations from procedure must not constitute the sole basis for initiating criminal action.




91.  Solution: c)

http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/2012-12-05/news/35620311_1_free-atm- transactions-atm-network-atm-manufacturers




92.  Solution: c)

The Nightingale of India Sarojini Naidu was the first woman to become the governor of an
Indian state. She had served as governor of the United Provinces of Agra and Oudh from




http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 34
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS


1947 to 1949. She was also second woman president of the Indian National Congress
(after Annie Besant) in 1925 and the first Indian woman to do so.

In 1931, she participated in the Round table conference with Gandhi and Madan Mohan
Malaviya

She played a leading role during the Civil Disobedience Movement and was jailed along with Gandhi and other leaders. In 1942, she was arrested during the "Quit India" movement.




93.  Solution: d)
http://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/tradfa_e/tradfa_e.htm http://www.dnaindia.com/money/report-why-is-india-not-agreeing-to-the-wto-
trade-facilitation-agreement-2005181




94.  Solution: a)

Apart from discussion on issues such as energy security, infrastructure creation and burning global political problems, the recent BRICS meet saw some concrete steps being finalized. These are:




1.   The New Development Bank

2.   Contingency reserve fund - $100 billion (IMF - $1 trillion) - To tide over short- term liquidity pressures

Imp Facts about BRICS

     40% world population

     25% of world' GDP

     Five emerging economies with China and Russia holding claims of becoming global superpower





http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 35
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS


The Fortaleza declaration describes the NDB as a "supplement to the efforts of multi - lateral and regional finance institutions for global development"

Structure -  Similar to IMF and World Bank

Role

     Development finance institution with special focus on infrastructure (like WB
and Asian Development Bank)

     Help member countries in case of financial emergencies (e.g. BOP crisis) - resembles IMF

Capital base

$53 billion ( as compared to $223 billion WB)

Presidency

Rotation basis - 1st one with India

Bank will be located in China. China should not end up being in a position like the US is to IMF.  Nearly 40% of the bank's capital is coming from China.




95. Solution: d)

It was in news due to the rising prices of several essential commodities. The government recently added Onion and potato in the essential commodities list.

The Essential Commodities Act (ECA) was enacted by the Central Government in 1955 to control and regulate trade and prices of commodities declared essential under the Act. The Act is again in the limelight, as the Government is making it more stringent while bringing onions and potatoes under its purview. Here are some facts about its provisions that you may want to know and explanations about how the Act works.


What does the Act deal with?
The Act empowers the Central and state governments concurrently to control production, supply and distribution of certain commodities in view of rising prices. The measures that can be taken under the provision of the Act include, among others, licensing, distribution and imposing stock limits. The governments also have the power
to fix price limits, and selling the particular commodities above the limit will attract

http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 36
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS


penalties. Black marketing of essential commodities was a major problem in the p ast and this has now been controlled to a large extent. The Drug Price Control Order (DPCO) and such other orders have been issued under the powers of the ECA.


Which commodities does it cover?
Seven major commodities are covered under the act. Some of t hem are:

1.   Petroleum and its products, including petrol, diesel, kerosene, Naphtha, solvents etc

2.   Food stuff, including edible oil and seeds, vanaspati, pulses, sugarcane and its products like, khandsari and sugar, rice paddy

3.   Jute and textiles

4.   Drugs- prices of essential drugs are still controlled by the DPCO

5.   Fertilisers- the Fertiliser Control Order prescribes restrictions on transfer and stock of fertilizers apart from prices

Through various amendments in the Act in the past, the government removed many products such as herbicides, fungicides and exercise books from its purview. Onions and potatoes will be added


In the past, several products such as iron and steel came under the ambit of the Act, but were removed later. The Union Cabinet has already decided to add onions and potatoes under the ECA, but the notification is still awaited. The notification will have several clarities such as executing authorities and stock limits, among others. Both the commodities had been removed from the ESA through an order on November 25, 2004.


Powers of Central and states governments
The Act empowers the Centre to order states to impose stock limits and bring hoarders to task, in order to smoothen supplies and cool prices. Generally the Centre specifies upper limits in the case of stock holding and states prescribe specific limits. However in case there is a difference between states and the Centre, the act specifies that the latter will prevail.




96. Solution: a)



http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 37
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS


Financial repression refers to a set of governmental policies that keep real interest rates low or negative and regulate or manipulate a captive audience into investing in government debt. This results in cheap funding and will be a prime tool used by governments in highly indebted developed market economies to improve their balance sheets over the coming decades.

Example from researchaffiliates.com  - ―We should all be familiar with the effects  of financial repression by now. If not, compare the declining amount of interest income coming out of your savings account to the rising costs you pay for groceries, gasoline, or (shield your eyes) college tuition. It has been nearly five years since we heard a loud
―THUD‖ as the nominal yield of the short term U.S. Treasury note  hit zero  percent. ―




97. Solution: a)

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tax_buoyancy




98. Solution: c)

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nokrek_Biosphere_Reserve




99. Solution: a)

The Himalayas themselves stretch uninterruptedly for about 1,550 miles (2,500 km) from west to east between Nanga Parbat(26,660 feet [8,126 metres]), in the Pakistani- administered portion of the Kashmir region, and Namjagbarwa (Namcha Barwa) Peak
(25,445 feet [7,756 metres]), in the Tibet Autonomous Region ofChina.

The mountain-building process that created the range is still active. As the bedrock is lifted, considerable stream erosion and gigantic landslides occur.




100.           Solution: c)

http://www.geo.mtu.edu/UPSeis/waves.html

The first kind of body wave is the P wave or primary wave. This is the fastest kind of seismic wave, and, consequently, the first to 'arrive' at a seismic station. The P wave can
move through solid rock and fluids, like water or the liquid layers of the earth. It

http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 38
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS


pushes and pulls the rock it moves through just like sound waves push and pull the air. Have you ever heard a big clap of thunder and heard the windows rattle at the same time? The windows rattle because the sound waves were pushing and pulling on the window glass much like P waves push and pull on rock. Sometimes animals can hear the P waves of an earthquake. Dogs, for instance, commonly begin barking hysterically just before an earthquake 'hits' (or more specifically, before the surface waves arrive). Usually people can only feel the bump and rattle of these waves.

The second type of body wave is the S wave or secondary wave, which is the second wave you feel in an earthquake. An S wave is slower than a P wave and can only move through solid rock, not through any liquid medium. It is this property of S waves that led seismologists to conclude that the Earth's outer core is a liquid. S waves move rock particles up and down, or side-to-side--perpindicular to the direction that the wave is
traveling in (the direction of wave propagation)










































http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 39
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST – 19 : SOLUTIONS



































































http://insightsonindia.com                                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 40
