INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 14 - SOLUTIONS







1.   Solution: c)
Page No. 128 and 129 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tropical_savanna_climate




2.   Solution: c)

It is a comprehensive scheme  ‗Ujjawala‘ for prevention of trafficking, rescue, rehabilitation and reintegration of victims of trafficking and commercial sexual exploitation was introduced. The scheme provides prevention through formation of community vigilance groups and awareness and sensitization of key functioning, rescue and safe withdrawal of the victim from the place of exploitation. Provisions have also been made for rehabilitation, which include safe shelter for victims with basic inputs of food, clothing, counseling and vocational training.Number of Swadhar and Short Stay Homes which cater to trafficked women rescued or run away from brothels also increased to 240 and 380 respectively this year.




3.   Solution: d) http://www.unicef.org/crc/files/Survival_Development.pdf http://www.unicef.org/crc/files/Participation.pdf
http://www.unicef.org/crc/index_30177.html




4.   Solution: c)

Tropical deserts are located between 10° to 30° north and south of the equator on the western margin of the continents, for example, Atacama Desert in South America. Californian desert in North America, Namib and Kalahari Desert in Southern Africa, Sahara and West Australian desert.

(i) The deserts lie in the belt of the trade winds which blow from northeast in the northern hemisphere and southeast in the southern hemisphere. Therefore, the general direction of the trade winds is from the east to west. These winds shed their moisture on the eastern margins of the continents and by the time they reach the west they have lost their moisture.

http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 1
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 14 - SOLUTIONS


(ii) These deserts fall on the leeward side of the mountains and hence, get less rainfall.

(iii) It  is also  an area  of descending  air;  therefore, the  air  gets compressed  and becomes warm, so the moisture-holding capacity of the air increases.

(iv) The tropical deserts have cold currents flowing on the coast therefore there is less rainfall.

Source-Preserve articles https://faculty.unlv.edu/landau/desertgeography.htm
5.   Solution: a)

Cold ocean current both influence temperature and aridity of coastal deserts




6.   Solution: b)

The officer falls under the Ministry of Minority affairs. Hence not independent.
The constitution does not mention the qualifications and the procedure for removal of the officer.



7.   Solution: c)

In 1980, a National Transport Policy Committee, under the chairmanship of the late
B D Pande, a former Cabinet secretary, submitted its report.

The Committee recommended the following principles for declaration of a national waterway


     It should possess capability of navigation by mechanically propelled vessels of a reasonable size.
     It should have about 45 m wide channel and minimum 1.5m depth.
     It should be a continuous stretch of 50 km. The only exception to be made to waterway length is for urban conglomerations and intra-port traffic.
     It should pass through and serve the interest of more than one State (or).
     It should connect a vast and prosperous hinterland and Major Ports (or).
     It should pass through a strategic region where development of navigation is considered necessary to provide logistic support for national security (or).
     It should connect places not served by any other modes of transport.





http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 2
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 14 - SOLUTIONS


8.   Solution: b)

Page No. 139, Goh Cheng Leong

Public Finance; Technology- Environment Dilemma; Sustainability



9.   Solution: b)

There is no such budgeting as Development or Programmes budgeting. Zero-base; and Output and outcome have been in practice in India.



10. Solution: b)



11. Solution: d)

Any income that the government earns not by way of imposing taxes is called non- tax income. Grants by a foreign state also come in the category.



12. Solution: d)

Grants given to the states are used for infrastructural development and on developing human capital by way of social security schemes etc. Hence it is an investment on productive assets.



13. Solution: d)

Anything which is not recurring in nature is called capital. All the three options are not a part of the regular income of the GoI. Hence capital receipts.



14. Solution: d)

Refer to the section on capital expenditure in Ramesh Singh. It is important to note that all the options show expenditure on productive assets and qualify as capital expenditure. This however is not the sole reason to qualify for being capital expenditure.



15.  Solution: c)

Monetized deficit is the part of fiscal deficit which is provided to the government by the RBI in a particular year.


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 3
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 14 - SOLUTIONS


The government issues treasury bills to the RBI and gets assistance from it.



16.  Solution: d)

Any means by which the fiscal deficit be bridged which is not a part of the regular income of the government of India – becomes a part of deficit financing, whether internally or externally achieved.



17.  Solution: a)

Refer to the relevant section in Ramesh Singh for a detailed explanation.
The Act does not give a combined limit to the fiscal deficit of the states altogether.



18. Solution: c)



Refer to Laxmikanth – Polity. The statements are self-explanatory.



19.  Solution: c)

ZBB can be applied to the evaluation of schemes also, and that too quite objectively. But it is not possible to adopt ZBB fully, because a) it is not possible to measure the efficiency of every government process; and b) a lot of expenditure charged on the consolidated fund of India will not be scrutinized under ZBB.
For detailed explanation and other reasons refer to the relevant section in Ramesh
Singh.



20. Solution: b)

PSUs come under the ministries of the Government of India. Therefore any performance evaluation of the ministries will invariably lead to the evaluation of all the PSUs it controls.



21. Solution: d)

We import oil heavily. And if the increase in oil prices is not passed on the consumer, it becomes a subsidy burden. Moreover, the consumption in India has been growing leading to even increases subsidies.





http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 4
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 14 - SOLUTIONS


22. Solution: d)

DBT covers selective schemes such as MGNREGA, some scholarship schemes etc. Aadhaar is a must for availing DBT. It is applicable to urban India too. Local bodies do not play the role of an intermediary in the transfer of funds. It is done electronically.



23.  Solution: d)

International boundary criteria is an important, but not essential criteria for being a
SCS.
Refer to the link besides referring to the section on Ramesh Singh http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/rajan-panel-for-end-to-special- category-status-for-states/article5170719.ece



24.  Solution: c)

While introducing the system of Carbon credits would not lead to a reduction in gross emissions immediately. But it would motivate the relatively greener companies to invest in technologies by which they can reduce the emissions even further. And it would dis-incentivize the polluting companies to reduce their emissions.



25. Solution: d)

The formation of Congress Ministries and the vast extension of civil liberties unleashed popular energies everywhere. Kisan sabhas sprang up in every part of the country and there was an immense growth in trade union activity and membership. Student and youth movements revived and burgeoned. A powerful fillip was given to the state peoples‘ movement. Left parties were able to expand manifold. Even though it was under a Central Government ban, the Communist Party was able to bring out its weekly organ, The National Front, from Bombay. The CSP brought out The Congress Socialist and several other journals in Indian languages. Of particular interest is the example of Kirti Lehar which the Kirti Communists of Punjab brought out from Meerut, U.P., because they could not do so in Unionist-ruled Punjab.




26.  Solution: d)

Health is considered to one of the areas on which climate change will impact heavily. Therefore it is a vital component of SAPCC.


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 5
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 14 - SOLUTIONS


For more, refer to the section on SAPCC in Ramesh Singh chapter on sustainability.



27. Solution: c)

Food and energy are inextricably tied to the climate changes. In the future it may not be possible to use coal or oil as freely as we do it today. The pace and extent of urbanization might also have to reduced taking into account the deleterious impact
it has on the local temperature and forest cover.



28.  Solution: d)

Refer to the link http://www.in.undp.org/content/india/en/home/mdgoverview/



29.  Solution: b)

Refer to the link http://daccess- ods.un.org/access.nsf/Get?Open&DS=A/RES/66/288&Lang=E for many more details.



30. Solution: d)

The National Water Mission is one of the 8 National Missions which form the core of the National Action Plan for Climate Change. The Mission Document for National Water Mission was drafted by the Ministry of Water Resources through consultative process with full involvement of State Governments, concerned Central Ministries, Non-Governmental Organizations, academicians and other stakeholders.


The objective of National Water Mission is "conservation of water, minimizing wastage and ensuring its equitable distribution both across and within States through integrated water resources development and management". Five goals identified in the National Water Mission are Comprehensive water data base in public domain and assessment of the impact of climate change on water resources; promotion of citizen and state actions for water conservation, augmentation and preservation; focused attention to vulnerable areas including over-exploited areas; increasing water use efficiency by 20%; and promotion of basin level integrated water resources management.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Water-use_efficiency



31.  Solution: a)

http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 6
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 14 - SOLUTIONS



This has been explained very well in Ramesh Singh. Please refer to the box on Doha
Outcomes.



32.  Solution: d)

http://agneyablog.wordpress.com/2011/07/01/perform-achieve-and-trade-pat- under-the-nmeee/



33.  Solution: d)

Three tier Panchayat is established only in states with population more than 10 lakhs.
The posts of chairman at intermediate and higher levels are filled by indirect elections.



34. Solution: d)

Chairperson must necessarily be a member. Besides, the manner of selection of the
Panchayat chairperson is decided by the state assembly.



35. Solution: c)

http://lawmin.nic.in/ncrwc/finalreport/v2b3-6.htm

36.  Solution: d)

A person of the age 21 is not qualified to fight a state assembly election, but can fight a local body election.
The SEC is not subordinate to the CEC in the same way as the states are not subordinates to the center.



37. Solution: c)

The National Highways Network of India, is a network of highways that is managed and maintained by agencies of the Government of India.
The National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) is the nodal agency responsible for building, upgrading and maintaining most of the national highways network. It operates under the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways. The National Highways Development Project(NHDP) is a major effort to expand and upgrade the



http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 7
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 14 - SOLUTIONS


network of highways. NHAI often uses a public-private partnership model for highway development, maintenance and toll-collection.

National highways constituted about 2% of all the roads in India, but carried about
40% of the total road traffic as of 2010.[1] The majority of existing national highways are two-lane roads (one lane in each direction), though much of this is being expanded to four-lanes, and some to six or eight lanes.



38. Solution: c)

Loans given to Indian states qualify as capital expenditure. But grants to either a
Indian or a foreign state qualify as revenue expenditure.



39. Solution: a)

The higher level bodies have no power to dissolve the lower level bodies. Only the state government can do it that too on some conditions.



40. Solution: c)

Reservations for OBCs fall under the voluntary provisions.




41. Solution: b)

The CEO of the committee is generally a civil servant. Chairperson may also be a civil servant depending on the state.



42.  Solution: d)

Refer to the section on UTs in Laxmikanth – Polity.
President can only make regulations when the Parliament is not in session. Besides, parliament can legislate in all the spheres as the UT is not a unit of the federal system.



43.  Solution: c)

The administrator can take a different view in case his opinion conflicts with that of the council of ministers but only after referring it to the President.
The President appoints the CM.


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 8
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 14 - SOLUTIONS





44.  Solution: b)

The President declares scheduled areas under 5th schedule, not the Governor. This chapter is important. So please go through and remember all the important provisions.



45. Solution: b)

While these areas are autonomous, they fall under the executive power of the government.
The councils can adjudicate on minor civil and criminal disputes.



46.  Solution: d)

The President appoints him after consulting the cabinet only. There has been a demand to change this system.


The other commissioners can not be removed without the recommendation of the
CEC.




47. Solution: c)

A UPSC member can be removed by only a SC enquiry. But a chief election commissioner can be removed only in the same manner as that of a supreme court judge.



48. Solution: c)

Both are true. Page no. 134 Goh Cheng Leong



49.  Solution: a)

Tweaking taxes affect the level of savings in the economy. Savings affect investment. Increasing taxes in the country will lead to lower disposable income and lesser demand thus being counter-inflationary.
Foreign investments will be affected negatively if corporation and service taxes are
very high in the country.




http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 9
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 14 - SOLUTIONS


50. Solution: b)

Refer to the concerned section on UPSC‘s role and powers in Laxmikanth – Polity.



51. Solution: d)

It is constituted only by the President of India. The constitution prescribes detailed qualifications for each member of the commission.



52. Solution: a)

The Finance commission has no role to play in deciding for PSUs. The Planning commission may play a more relevant role. But it ultimately boils down to individual ministries.







53.  Solution: d)




54. Solution: d)

http://www.cwc.nic.in/main/webpages/activities.html



55.  Solution: b)

It is a constitutional body. It works for ensuring the right of the SCs. For details please refer to Laxmikanth.




56. Solution: d)

Any step which either increases the revenue or cuts the expenditure of the government will lead to fiscal consolidation.
Reducing MSP will lead to lower outgo on food support to farmers thus reducing subsidy burden.
If PSUs will run for profit then their income would bridge the fiscal deficit.





http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 10
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 14 - SOLUTIONS


57. Solution: a)

The scheme provides for cash transfer to the family of a girl child on fulfilling certain conditionality relating to registration of birth, immunization, enrolment and retention in school till class VIII; and an insurance coverage if the girl remains unmarried till the age of 18. The 79,555 girls are expected to benefit under the scheme during 2008-09.


58.  Solution: d)

The laws of the state do apply to township in every way possible. These townships however have their own set of rules and regulations conforming to the laws of the state.



59. Solution:  a)

The new Soviet regime electrified the colonial world by unilaterally renouncing its imperialist rights in China and other parts of Asia. Another lesson was driven home: If the common people — the workers and peasants and the intelligentsia — could unite and overthrow the mighty Czarist empire arid establish a social order where there was no exploitation of one human being by another, then the Indian people battling against British imperialism could also do so. Socialist doctrines, especially Marxism, the guiding theory of the Bolshevik Party, acquired a sudden attraction, especially for the people of Asia.

Socialist ideas now began to spread rapidly especially because many young persons who had participated actively in the Non- Cooperation Movement were unhappy with its outcome and were dissatisfied with Gandhian policies and ideas as well as the alternative Swarajist programme.




60. Solution: a)

In 1928, Jawaharlal joined hands with Subhas to organize the Independence for India League  to fight for complete independence and ‗a socialist revision of the economic structure of society.‘




61. Solution: b)

Nehru developed a complex relationship with Gandhiji during this period. He criticized Gandhiji for refusing to recognize the conflict of classes, for preaching

http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 11
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 14 - SOLUTIONS


harmony among the exploiters and the exploited, and for putting forward the theories of trusteeship by, and conversion of, the capitalists and landlords. In fact, Nehru devoted a whole chapter in his Autobiography to gently combating some of the basic aspects of Gandhian ideology. At the same time, he fully appreciated the radical role that Gandhiji had played and was playing in Indian society. Defending Gandhiji against his left-wing critics, Jawaharlal contended in an article written in January 1936 that ‗Gandhi has played a revolutionary role in India  of the greatest importance because he knew how to make the most of the objective conditions and could reach the heart of the masses; while groups with a more advanced ideology functioned largely  in the air.‘ Moreover, Gandhiji‘s actions  and teachings had
‗inevitably raised mass consciousness tremendously and made  social issues vital. And his insistence on the raising of the masses at the cost, wherever necessary, of vested interests has given a strong orientation to the national movement in favour of the masses.‘ Nehru‘s advice  to other  Leftists in 1939 regarding the approach to be adopted towards Gandhiji and the Congress has been well summed up by Mohit Sen: Nehru believed that ‗the overwhelming bulk of the Congress was composed of amorphous centrists, that Gandhiji not only represented them but was also essential for any genuinely widespread mass movement, that on no account should the Left
be at loggerheads with him or the centrists, but their strategy should rather be to
pull the centre to the left — possibilities for which existed, especially as far as
Gandhiji was concerned.‘




62. Solution: b)

Attracted by the Soviet Union and its revolutionary commitment, a large number of Indian revolutionaries and exiles abroad made their way there. The most well- known and the tallest of them was M.N. Roy, who along with Lenin, helped evolve the Communist International‘s policy towards the colonies.  Seven such Indians, headed by Roy, met at Tashkent in October 1920 and set up a Communist Party of India. Independently of this effort, as we have seen, a number of left-wing and communist groups and organizations had begun to come into existence in India after
1920. Most of these groups came together at Kanpur in December 1925 and founded
an all-India organization under the name the Communist Party of India (CPI). After some time, S.V. Ghate emerged as the general secretary of the party. The CPI called upon all its members to enroll themselves as members of the Congress, form a strong left-wing in all its organs, cooperate with all other radical nationalists, and make an effort to transform the Congress into a more radical mass-based organization.

63. Solution: c)



http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 12
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 14 - SOLUTIONS


The rapid growth of communist and WPP influence over the national movement was, however, checked and virtually wiped out during 1929 and after by two developments. One was the severe repression to which Communists were subjected by the Government. Already in 1922-24, Communists trying to enter India from the Soviet Union had been tried in a series of conspiracy cases at Peshawar and sentenced to long periods of imprisonment. In 1924, the Government had tried to cripple the nascent communist movement by trying S.A. Dange, Muzaffar Ahmed, Nalini Gupa and Shaukat Usmani in the Kanpur Bolshevik Conspiracy Case. All four were sentenced to four years of imprisonment.



64. Solution: b)

India and Brazil rank in the bottom when it comes to per capita emissions. Overall emissions may be somewhere in the middle of the list.



65. Solution: a)

On March 17, 1924, M.N. Roy, S.A. Dange, Muzaffar Ahmed, Nalini Gupta, Shaukat Usmani, Singaravelu Chettiar, Ghulam Hussain and others were charged that they as communists were seeking "to deprive the King Emperor of his sovereignty of British India, by complete separation of India from imperialistic Britain by a violent revolution.", in what was called the Cawnpore (now spelt Kanpur) Bolshevik Conspiracy case.

66. Solution: b)

The Priyadarshini scheme  is an IFAD assisted pilot project for Women‘s Empowerment and LivelihoodsProgramme in the mid Gangetic plains. It aims at holistic empowerment of vulnerable groups of women and adolescent girls through formation of Self-Help Groups (SHGs) and promotion of improved livelihood opportunities. The programme is implemented in 13 blocks spread over five districts in Uttar Pradesh i.e Baharaich, CSM Nagar, Raebareli, Shravasti andSultanpur and two districts Madhubani and Sitamarhi in Bihar.

http://www.indianyojana.com/yojana-for-girls/priyadarshini-yojana.htm




67. Solution: d)

Under the Gandhian strategy. which may be described as Struggle — Truce — Struggle (S-T-S‘), phases of a vigorous extra-legal mass movement and confrontation with colonial authority alternate with phases, during which direct confrontation is

http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 13
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 14 - SOLUTIONS


withdrawn, political concessions or reforms, if any, wrested from the colonial
regime, are willy-nilly worked and silent political work carried on among the masses within the existing legal framework, which, in turn, provides scope for such work. Both phases of the movement are to he utilized, each in its own way, to undermine the twin ideological notions on which the colonial regime rested — that British rule benefits Indians and that it is too powerful to be challenged and overthrown and to recruit and train  cadres  and to build  up the people‘s  capacity to struggle. The entire political process of S-T-S‘ was an upward spiralling one, which  also assumed that
the freedom struggle would pass through several stages, ending with the transfer of
power by the colonial regime itself.




68. Solution: d)

Refer to the section on Laxmikanth – Polity.




69. Solution: b)

Even though the Government had successfully suppressed the mass movement during 1932-33, it was aware that suppression could only be a short-term tactic. it could not prevent the resurgence of another powerful movement in the years to come. For that it was necessary to permanently weaken the movement. This could be achieved if the Congress was internally divided and large segments of it co-opted or integrated into the colonial constitutional and administrative structure. The phase of naked suppression should, therefore, be followed, decided the colonial policy makers, by another phase of constitutional reforms.

In August 1935, the British Parliament passed the Government of India Act of 1935. The Act provided for the establishment of an All-India Federation to be based on the union of the British Indian provinces and Princely States. The representatives of the States to the federal legislature were to be appointed directly by the Princes who were to be used to check and counter the nationalists. The franchise was limited to about one-sixth of the adults. Defence and foreign affairs would remain outside the control of the federal legislature, while the Viceroy would retain special control over other subjects.



70. Solution: a)

The 1930s bore witness to a new and nation-wide awakening of Indian peasants to their own strength and capacity to organize for the betterment of their living

http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 14
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 14 - SOLUTIONS


conditions. This awakening was largely a result of the combination of particular economic and political developments: the great Depression that began to hit India from 1929-30 and the new phase of mass struggle launched by the Indian National Congress in 1930.

The Depression which brought agricultural prices crashing down to half or less of their normal levels dealt a severe blow to the already impoverished peasants burdened with high taxes and rents. The Government was obdurate in refusing to scale down its own rates of taxation or in asking zamindars to bring down their rents. The prices of manufactured goods,  too, didn‘t  register comparable decreases. All told, the peasants were placed in a situation where they had to continue to pay taxes, rents, and debts at pre-Depression rates while their incomes continued to spiral steadily downward.



71. Solution: a)

In Malabar, in Kerala, for example, a powerful peasant movement developed as the result of the efforts mainly of CSP activists, who had been working among the peasants since 1934, touring villages and setting up Karshaka Sanghams (peasant associations). The main demands, around which the movement cohered, were for the abolition of feudal levies or akramapirivukal, renewal fees or the practice of policceluthu, advance rent, and the stopping of eviction of tenants by landlords on the ground of personal cultivation. Peasants also demanded a reduction in the tax, rent, and debt burden, and the use of proper measures by landlords when measuring the grain  rent, and an end to the corrupt practices of the landlords‘ managers.

The main forms of mobilization and agitation were the formation of village units of the Karshaka Sanghams, conferences and meetings. But a form that became very popular and effective was the marching of jat has or large groups of peasants to the houses of big jenmies or landlords, placing the demands before them and securing immediate redressal. The main demand of these jathas was for the abolition of feudal levies such as vasi, nuri, etc.




72. Solution: b)

The Bihar Provincial Kisan Sabha effectively used meetings, conferences, rallies, and mass demonstrations, including a demonstration of one lakh peasants at Patna in
1938, to popularize the kisan Sabha programme. The slogan of zamindari abolition,
adopted by the Sabha in 1935, was popularized among the peasants through


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 15
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 14 - SOLUTIONS


resolutions passed at these gatherings. Other demands included the stopping of illegal levies, the prevention of eviction of tenants and the return of Bakasht lands.

The Congress Ministry had initiated legislation for the reduction of rent and the restoration of Bakasht lands. Bakasht lands were those which the occupancy tenants had lost to zamindars, mostly during the Depression years, by virtue of non- payment of rent, and which they often continued to cultivate as share-croppers. But the formula that was finally incorporated in the legislation on the basis of an agreement with the zamindars did not satisfy the radical leaders of the kisan Sabha. The legislation gave a certain proportion of the lands back to the tenants on condition that they pay half the auction price of the land. Besides, certain categories of land had been exempted from the operation of the law.




73. Solution: b)

In late 1946, the share-croppers of Bengal began to assert that they would no longer pay a half share of their crop to the jotedars but only one-third and that before division the crop would be stored in their khamars (godowns) and not that of the jotedars. They were no doubt encouraged by the fact that the Bengal Land Revenue Commission, popularly known as the Floud Commission, had already made this recommendation in its report to the government. The Hajong tribals were simultaneously demanding commutation of their kind rents into cash rents. The tebhaga movement, led by the Bengal Provincial Kisan Sabha, soon developed into a clash between jotedars and bargadars with the bargadars insisting on storing the crop in their own khamars.








74. Solution: c)

Floud Commission  a land revenue commission established by the government of Bengal in 1938. ak fazlul huq, a leader of the nikhil banga praja samiti (est. 1929), and subsequently the leader of the krishak praja party (est.1935) was committed to the abolition of the zamindari system and restoring the rights of peasants. This was one of the major items of the KPP 21-point manifesto for the general elections of 1937.
The Congress and the muslim league were also highly sympathetic to the peasantry. However, this sympathy was politically grounded on the fact that the peasant vote would be the deciding factor in the ensuing general elections in which the peasant
section of voters constituted the absolute majority.

http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 16
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 14 - SOLUTIONS


After the elections, AK Fazlul Huq formed a coalition government with the support of the Muslim League and some other parliamentary groups. He was under pressure to take necessary measures to abolish the permanent settlement. To this end, a commission headed by Sir Francis Floud was formed to look into problems of the land revenue administration. In particular, the commission was to examine the question of the abolition of the zamindari system. The commission submitted its recommendations on 2 March 1940. Among its recommendations were the abolition of the Permanent Settlement and the end of rent receiving interests of all forms. It was observed that agrarian conditions had so changed since the introduction of the Permanent Settlement that the system had lost its utility and viability. This recommendation was strongly supported by the Administrative Inquiry Committee of 1944. But the government could do little towards implementing the recommendations of the Floud Commission. The main obstacles were political instability, the Great famine of 1943, communal unrest, and the politics of partitioning India. Under these constraints, successive governments led by Fazlul Huq, khwaja nazimuddin, and huseyn shaheed suhrawardy kept the Floud Commission Report in abeyance, though all these governments favoured the end of the zamindari system. The Permanent Settlement or Zamindari System was formally brought to an end in 1951 by the east bengal state acquisition and tenancy act, 1950.




75. Solution: d)

While the PC formulates the plans, the responsibility for fiscal consolidation falls on the finance ministry.



76. Solution: a)

Rolling stock originally referred to the vehicles that move on a railway.

Indian railways uses four gauges, the 1,676 mm (5 ft 6 in) broad gauge which is wider than the 1,435 mm (4 ft 8 1⁄2 in) standard gauge;
the 1,000 mm (3 ft 3 3⁄8 in) metre gauge; and two narrow gauges, 762 mm (2 ft 6 in) and 610 mm (2 ft). Track sections are rated for speeds ranging from 75 to 160 km/h (47 to 99 mph).

The total length of track used by Indian Railways is about 115,000 km (71,000 mi) while the total route length of the network is 65,000 km (40,000 mi). About 23,541 km (14,628 mi) or 36% of the route-kilometre was electrified as on 31 March 2013.
Broad gauge is the predominant gauge used by Indian Railways. Indian broad gauge—1,676 mm (5 ft 6 in)—is the most widely used gauge in India with


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 17
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 14 - SOLUTIONS


105,000 km (65,000 mi) of track length (91% of entire track length of all the gauges) and 56,000 km (35,000 mi) of route-kilometre (86% of entire route-kilometre of all the gauges).



77. Solution: c) http://www.gktoday.in/central-road-fund/ Page no. 846 India-2014



78. Solution: b)

The Border Roads Organisation operates a network of over 32,885 kilometres (20,434 mi) of roads and 12,200 metres (40,026 ft) of permanent bridges.[4] BRO has operations in twenty-two states, including the Andaman and Nicobar Islands,
a union territory.

The BRO was formed on 7 May 1960[4] as the Border Roads Development Board
with Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru as its chairman.

The BRO consists of Border Roads Develovement Board and the General Reserve Engineer Force (GREF). GREF—the execution force—under the Ministry of Surface Transport for budgetary allocation only otherwise it is under minisry of Defence for administrative control, and officers from Indian Army Corps of Engineers, who are posted to GREF on ERE .T




79. Solution: d)
http://www.newmangalore-port.com/Default.aspx http://www.thehindu.com/business/Industry/mangalore-port-to-
expand/article6082755.ece




80. Solution: d)

The powers, role and functions of the UPSC and SPSC are similar. What is true for
UPSC will mostly be true for SPSC too.



81. Solution: b)

http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 18
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 14 - SOLUTIONS



The CAG audits their account only when provided by the government.
Rest other provisions fall under the voluntary provisions under the 73rd amendment.



82. Solution: d)
http://pib.nic.in/newsite/erelease.aspx?relid=73321 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Airworthiness_certificate




83. Solution: a)

Pawan Hans was incorporated on 15 October 1985 as the Helicopter Corporation of India (HCL), the country's national helicopter company with the objective of providing helicopter support services to the oil sector for its off-shore exploration operations, services in remote areas and charter services for promotion of tourism. It is a government owned enterprise with 78.5% in government hands & 21.5%
with ONGC. ONGC has upped its stake to 49% recently, a move that will see the equity base of PHHL being enhanced to   245 crore from the existing
1.13 billion.




84. Solution: b)

National Water Policy 2012 governs water related policies in India.

The main emphasis of National Water Policy 2012 is to treat water as economic
good which the ministry claims to promote its conservation and efficient use.[4] This provision intended for the privatization of water-delivery services is being criticized from various quarters.[5] The policy also does away with the priorities for water allocation mentioned in 1987 and 2002 versions of the policy. The policy was
adopted with a disapproval from many states.


The other major features are


     To ensure access to a minimum quantity of portable water for essential health and hygiene to all citizens, available within easy reach of the household
     To curtail subsidy to agricultural electricity users
     Setting up of Water Regulatory Authority




http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 19
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 14 - SOLUTIONS


     To keep aside a portion of the river flow to meet the ecological needs and to ensure that the low and high flow releases correspond in time closely to the natural flow regime.
     To give statutory powers to Water Users Associations to maintain the distribution system
     Project benefited families to bear part of the cost of resettlement & rehabilitation of project affected families
     To remove the large disparity between stipulations for water supply in urban areas and in rural areas
     To support a National Water Framework Law



85. Solution: d)

http://nptel.ac.in/courses/Webcourse- contents/IIT%20Kharagpur/Water%20Resource%20Engg/pdf/m3l04.pdf

http://mowr.gov.in/micensus/mi3census/annexure-i.pdf

http://wrmin.nic.in/writereaddata/faq/faq_cadwm.pdf




86. Solution: d)

Please refer to http://www.ncst.nic.in/index1.asp?linkid=185&langid=1




87. Solution: d)

http://www.nih.ernet.in/rbis/india_information/Ravi%20and%20Beas%20Water%
20Tribunal.htm (last paragraph)







88. Solution: b)

http://www.business-standard.com/article/economy-policy/pancheshwar-multi- purpose-project-awaits-r-r-policy-107111201064_1.html


http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/2013-09-
14/news/42062420_1_mahakali-treaty-nepalese-delegation-nepal-and-india




http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 20
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 14 - SOLUTIONS



89. Solution: d)

Refer to the link on Model code of conduct http://eci.nic.in/eci_main/faq/faq_mcc.pdf
And read an analysis of the model code of conduct here :
http://indialawyers.wordpress.com/2012/02/23/dont-break-the-code/




90. Solution: d)


The Farakka Barrage Project was completed in 1975, with the primary objective of preservation & maintenance of the Calcutta Port and for increasing the navigation depth of the Bhagirathi - Hooghly waterway. The Project comprises of a 2225 m long barrage across river Ganga at Farakka in Murshidabad district of West Bengal, a canal head regulator at Farakka for diverting water to feeder canal, a 38.38 km long feeder canal (a part of the Haldia –Allahabad Inland Waterway No.-1), to drain out the augmented flows to river Bhagirathi. It has navigation locks at Farakka and Jangipur besides residential colonies at Farakka, Ahiron and Khejuriaghat (having around 4000 dwelling units). Its appurtenant works include flood embankments, marginal bunds, afflux bunds and guide bunds, etc. The Farakka Barrage also acts as road-cum-rail bridge across the river Ganga at Farakka and connects NE region with rest of the country.

Farakka Barrage Project is headed by General Manager of Chief Engineer level from Central Water Engineering Services Cadre from Central Water Commission. GM is also assisted by Four No. of Superintending Engineers, eleven no. of Executive Engineers and supporting technical and non-technical officers/ officials.

The Farakka Barrage Project is a subordinate office under the administrative control of the Ministry of Water Resources and thus, requisite funds are provided by the Union Ministry of Water Resources, from its budget. The scheme  ―Farakka Barrage Project‖ is an on-going central sector scheme under Transport Sector. A provision of Rs.558 crore has been made during XII Plan under XII Plan scheme of FBP.

During the last 38 years, river Ganga engulfed more than 50,000 ha of agricultural land and public property along its left bank in Malda district, upstream of the Farakka Barrage, and it is feared that, unless anti-erosion works are undertaken and completed in this reach starting from Manikchakghat area to the Barrage, the river may change its course further towards left bank, outflanking the Farakka barrage during the high floods. Considering the sensitivity of the matter, the Ministry of Water Resources extended the jurisdiction of Farakka Barrage Project up to 40km


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 21
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 14 - SOLUTIONS


upstream  and to 80 km downstream of the Barrage  in January‘2005  in consultation with the state government of West Bengal; so that the anti-erosion works along the river Ganga-Padma, in critical reaches, could be undertaken by the Farakka Barrage Project with due priority. Initially FBP had its jurisdiction 12.5 km u/s and 6.9 km d/s from the Farakka Barrage. Project is also a controlling point for implementation of Ganga Water Treaty 1996 between India and Bangladesh.

During XII Plan, it is also proposed to complete the replacement/renovation of all the 123 Gates of the Farakka Barrage and Head Regulator of the feeder Canal.




91. Solution: b)


The scheme of construction of hostels is one of the means to enable and encourage students belonging to scheduled castes to attain quality education. The scheme for construction of hostels for girls is in operation from 3rd Five Year Plan while for boys, the same was started from the year 1989-90. The earlier centrally sponsored scheme of hostels for SC boys and girls has been revised and is renamed as "Babu Jagjivan Ram Chhatravas Yojna' w.e.f. 01.01.08. The main modifications included in the revised scheme are- (a) 100% central assistance to States/UTs and Central Universities and 90% to deemed universities and private bodies for construction of girls hostel and (b) period of construction of hostels has been decreased from existing 5 years to 2 years.

The object of the Scheme is to provide residential accommodation facilities to SC Boys and Girls studying in middle schools, higher secondary schools, colleges and Universities.




92. Solution: d)

The largest population of Hausa are concentrated in Nigeria and Niger, where they constitute the majority

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hausa_people







93. Solution: a)






http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 22
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 14 - SOLUTIONS


Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment as the name suggests is to ensure equitable treatment to such sections of society who have suffered social inequalities, exploitation, discrimination and injustice.

The Social Defence Bureau of the Ministry mainly caters to the requirements of:

     Victims of alcoholism and substance abuse
     Senior Citizens

The programmes and the policies of the Bureau aim at equipping this group to sustain a life of respect and honour and to become useful citizens.

In this process, the Bureau plays the role of a catalyst and has promoted voluntary action. The State Governments, autonomous bodies, NGOs and even the corporate world are involved in formulating and implementing the policies.

All the programmes are meant to aid, prevent neglect, abuse and exploitation and provide assistance to those deprived and mainstream them.




94. Solution: c)

http://www.tribal.nic.in/Content/DefinitionofScheduledAreasProfiles.aspx

5th and 6th Schedules deal with scheduled areas.




95. Solution: b)

The Tribal Sub-Plan (TSP) is a strategy for the rapid Socio-economic development of tribal people. It forms a part of annual Plan of a State/UT. The benefits given to the tribals and tribal areas of a State or UT from the TSP are in addition to what percolates from the overall Plan of a State/UT. The funds provided under the Tribal Sub Plan have to be at least in proportion to the ST population of each State/UT. A total of 28 Central Ministries/Departments are identified for differentiated earmarking of Plan funds under TSP. The other Ministries/Departments also requested to make efforts for providing allocation for TSP on voluntary basis. The TSP is applicable in 22 States and 2 UTs which are: Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Odisha, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamilnadu, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, West Bengal, Andaman &
Nicobar Island and Daman & Diu.




http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 23
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 14 - SOLUTIONS


http://www.rcdcindia.org/EvDocument/8fc76ff7db9ef9a-8c0a-4afb-b808-
c04d66fc4bd4Concept%20note%20on%20TSP.pdf




96. Solution: d)

The Dargah Khwaja Saheb Act, 1955 is law of India passed by parliament in 1955. It provides for constitution of a Dargah Committee to manage Dargah Sharif in Ajmer. The Dargah Committee, appointed by the Government, manages donations, takes care of the maintenance of the shrine, and runs charitable institutions like dispensaries, and guest houses for the devotees




97. Solution: c)

‗Swayamsidha‘, an integrated scheme  for holistic empowerment of women through self-help groups was expanded to all blocks in the country. Tailormade training and capacity building programmes for Non Governmental Organizations especially working for the rehabilitation of trafficked victims were introduced under the scheme.

http://www.pib.nic.in/newsite/erelease.aspx?relid=46015




98. Solution: a)
These species are found prominently in Western Australia. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Geography_of_Western_Australia#The_biogeograph
y_of_Western_Australia




99. Solution: c)

The difference between the Congress provinces and the non -Congress provinces of Bengal and Punjab was most apparent in this realm. In the latter, especially in Bengal, civil liberties continued to be curbed and revolutionary prisoners and detenus, kept for years in prison without trial, were not released despite repeated hunger strikes by the prisoners and popular movements demanding their release.

The Congress could not attempt a complete overhaul of the agrarian structure by completely eliminating the zamindari system. This, for two reasons, According to the constitutional structure of the 1935 Act, the provincial Ministries did not have

http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 24
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 14 - SOLUTIONS


enough powers to do so. They also suffered from an extreme lack of financial resources, for the lion‘s share  of India‘s revenues was appropriated by the Government of India. The Congress Ministries could also not touch the existing administrative structure, whose  sanctity was guarded by the Viceroy‘s and Governor‘s powers.




100.           Solution: d)

The move towards the formation of a socialist party was made in the jails during
1930-31 and 1932-34 by a group of young Congressmen who were disenchanted with Gandhian strategy and leadership and attracted by socialist ideology. Many of them were active in the youth movement of the late 1920s. In the jails they studied and discussed Marxian and other socialist ideas. Attracted by Marxism, communism and Soviet Union, they did not find themselves in agreement with the prevalent political line of the CPI. Many of them were groping towards an alternative. Ultimately they came together and formed the Congress Socialist Party (CSP) at Bombay in October
1934 under the leadership of Jayaprakash Narayan, Acharya Narendra Dev and
Minoo Masani.







































http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                     Page 25
