INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 11 - SOLUTIONS


1.  Solution: d)

Stream capture, river capture, or stream piracy is a geomorphological phenomenon occurring when a stream or river drainage system or watershed is diverted from its own bed, and flows instead down the bed of a neighbouring stream. This can happen for several reasons, including:

     Tectonic earth movements, where the slope of the land changes, and the stream is tipped out of its former course

     Natural damming, such as by a landslide or ice sheet

     Erosion, either

     Head-ward erosion of one stream valley upwards into another, or

     Lateral erosion of a meander through the higher ground dividing the adjacent streams.

     Within an area of karst topography, where streams may sink, or flow underground (a sinking or losing stream) and then reappear in a nearby stream valley

The Maumee River basin. The Maumee, flowing north-east, has broken into part
of another river's basin, capturing west-flowing streams and forcing them to reverse direction on entering it.

The additional water flowing down the capturing stream may accelerate erosion and encourage the development of a canyon (gorge).

The now-dry valley of the original stream is known as a wind gap. Page no. 40, Goh Cheng Leong






2.  Solution: d)

The Government of India remained, as before 1858, an alien despot. Nor was this accidental. While moving the Indian Councils Bill of 1861, the Secretary of State for


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                              Page 1
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 11 - SOLUTIONS


India, Charles Wood, said: All experience reaches us that where a dominant race rules another, the mildest form of Government is despotism.‘ A year later he wrote  to Elgin, the Viceroy, that the only government suitable for such a state of things as exists in India  a despotism controlled from home.‖ This ‗despotism  controlled from home‘ was to remain the fundamental feature of the Government of India till 15 August 1947.

What was the role of Indian members in this Legislative Council? The Government had decided to add them in order to represent Indian views, for many British officials and statesmen had come to believe that one reason for the Revolt of 1857 was that Indian views were not known to the rulers. But, in practice, the Council did not serve even this purpose. Indian members were few in number — in thirty years, from 1862 to 1892,
only forty-five Indians were nominated to it. Moreover, the Government invariably chose rulers of princely states or their employees, big zamindars, big merchants or retired high government officials as Indian members.



3.   Solution: c)
In the WPI composition, manufactured products account for more than 60% of the total weightage. Hence the highest effect on inflation.



4.  Solution: a) http://www.ssb.nic.in/index.asp?linkid=59&sublinkid=32 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sashastra_Seema_Bal


5.  Solution: d)

There are four cultivated species of cotton viz. Gossypium arboreum, G.herbaceum, G.hirsutum and G.barbadense. The first two species are diploid (2n=26) and are native to old world. They are also known as Asiatic cottons because they are grown in Asia. The last two species are tetraploid (2n=52) and are also referred to as New World Cottons. G.hirsutum is also known as American cotton or upland cotton and G.barbadense as Egyptian cotton or Sea Island cotton or Peruvian Cotton or Tanguish Cotton or quality cotton.G.hirsutum is the predominant species which alone contributes about 90% to the global production. In USA and Uzbekistan, more than 90% area is
covered by G.hirsutum. Perhaps, India is the only country in the world where all the


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                              Page 2
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 11 - SOLUTIONS


four cultivated species are grown on commercial scale. In India, 45%, 30% and 24.7% area is covered by hybrids, upland cotton and diploid species respectively. G.barbadense is grown on a very little area (0.3%) in the state of Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh. G.herbaceum is limited to the states of Gujarat and Karnataka. G.hirsutum and G.arboreum are grown in all the major cotton growing states in India.




6.  Solution: a)

Eligibility criteria and procedure for grant of Maharatna status

The CPSEs meeting the following eligibility criteria are proposed to be considered for Maharatna status:

a)  Having Navratna status
b)  Listed  on  Indian  stock  exchange  with  minimum  prescribed  public
shareholding under SEBI regulations
c)  An average annual turnover of more than Rs.25,000 crore during the last 3 years
d)  An average annual net worth of more than Rs.15,000 crore during the last
3 years
e)  An average annual net profit after tax of more than Rs.5,000 crore during the last 3 years
f)   Should have significant global presence/international operations

The procedure for grant of Maharatna status as well as their review is proposed to be similar to that in vogue for the grant of Navratna status.
The introduction of the above scheme will not entail any additional expenditure on the part of the Government.


Enhanced powers to Maharatna CPSEs

The Boards of Maharatna CPSEs in addition to exercising all powers to Navratna CPSEs, will  exercise  enhanced  powers  in  the  area  of  investment  in  joint ventures/subsidiaries   and   creation   of   below   Board   level   posts.  The   Boards   of Maharatna CPSEs will have powers to (a) make equity investment to establish financial joint ventures and wholly owned subsidiaries in India or abroad and (b) undertake mergers &  acquisitions, in India or abroad, subject to a ceiling of 15% of the net worth of the concerned CPSE in one project, limited to an absolute ceiling of Rs.5,000 crore (Rs.1000 crore for Navratna CPSEs).  The overall ceiling on such equity investments and


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                              Page 3
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 11 - SOLUTIONS


mergers and acquisitions in all projects put together will not exceed 30% of the net worth of the concerned CPSEs.  In addition, the Boards of Maharatna CPSEs will have powers to create below Board level posts up to E-9 level.



7.  Solution: b)

A written constitution and fundamental rights restrict the authority of the Parliament. It has to ensure that its laws/constitutional amendments do not violate the constitution and the fundamental rights, and conform to the basic structure.
In a federal system, the state legislatures also have a say in matters of making laws and constitutional amendments. Parliament can not amend the constitution as it desires in certain cases.
There is no separation of powers in India. It is actually fusion of powers which makes
the Parliament even more powerful.



8.  Solution: c)


Born in 1845 in Bombay, Pherozeshah Mehta came under Dadabhai Naoroji‘s influence while studying law in London during the 1860s. He was one of the founders of the Bombay Presidency Association as also the Indian National Congress. From about the middle of the 1890s till his death in 1915 he was a dominant figure in the Indian National Congress and was often accused of exercising autocratic authority over it. He was a powerful debater and his speeches were marked by boldness, lucidity, incisiveness, a ready wit and quick repartee, and a certain literary quality.



9.  Solution: d)

http://www.jodidata.org/about-jodi/history.aspx




10. Solution: d)

Corporate farming in India is a recent entrant. Refer to the following link for some information about corporate farming. http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424052970204603004577266732670276216





http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                              Page 4
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 11 - SOLUTIONS


For a critical analysis of corporate farming refer to: http://www.thehindubusinessline.com/opinion/why-corporate-farm-ventures-are- failing/article2805962.ece

The other two have been in practice in India for quite some time.






11.Solution: b)

In order to address the issue of affordability of houses for all sections of society, the first urban area specific housing policy, the National Urban Housing & Habitat Policy (NUHHP), 2007 has been formulated, which has been laid on the Table of both Houses of the Parliament on 07.12.2007. The Policy seeks to set in motion a process for
providing "Affordable Housing for All" particularly for Economically Weaker Section
(EWS) and Low Income Groups (LIG) through various types of public-private partnerships and development of various financial and operational innovations.


According to the estimations of the Technical Group constituted by the Ministry for assessment of the urban housing shortage at the end of the 10th five Year Plan, the total housing shortage in the country is 24.71 million. During the 11th Five Year Plan period, the total urban housing requirement including the backlog and additional requirement is estimated as 26.53 million dwelling units.


'Land' and 'colonisation' being State subjects, State Governments have to take steps for implementation of initiatives envisaged in the Policy. The Policy has been widely publicized and has been forwarded to all States/Union Territories as well as to various Ministries of the Central Government and other implementing agencies.

http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/2010-12-20/news/27604309_1_national- urban-housing-housing-policy-affordable-housing




12. Solution: b)
High interest rates actually subdue the demand in the economy. It leads to lower inflation.



http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                              Page 5
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 11 - SOLUTIONS


Rupee depreciation will directly feed into the prices of imported commodities, especially oil and gold leading to higher inflation.



13.Solution: c)

The Aravali ranges are the oldest fold mountains in India. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fault_(geology)
Page no. 16, Goh Cheng Leong




14.Solution: d)

Highlights of the Bill


     The Bill requires every person to obtain a license or lease for carrying on mining or related activities.

     A new concession instrument called a High Technology Reconnaissance-cum- Exploration License has been introduced.

     The Bill provides for two methods of granting a mineral concession – competitive bidding where mineralisation is established and first-come-first-serve otherwise.

     A District Mineral Fund (DMF) will be established in each district where there are mining operations to make payments to affected persons.

     A mining leaseholder will pay an annual amount to the DMF for the benefit of affected persons.  This will be equal to 26 per cent of profits in case of coal, and royalty paid during the year for other minerals.

     Mining leaseholders will be liable to provide annual compensation and at least one non-transferable share to persons affected by mining operations.

Key Issues and Analysis




http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                              Page 6
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 11 - SOLUTIONS


     The Bill permits allocation of mineral concession in tribal areas to a non- tribal.  There are two conflicting Supreme Court judgments on the legality of such a provision.

     Royalty rates are set to achieve an optimum balance between attracting investments while maximising revenues for the state.  Mandating additional payments to the DMF could disturb this balance.

     The Bill mandates the issue of a non transferable share to affected persons.  The
Companies Act, 1956 does not permit the issuance of non-transferable shares.


     Any gap in the minimum compensation to be paid to affected families by the DMF is to be covered by the state government. This could put pressure on state government finances
     The Bill does not clearly define  some terms,  such as ‗High Technology
Reconnaissance-cum-Exploration License‘.

15.Solution: c)

An oxbow lake is a U-shaped body of water that forms when a wide meander from the main stem of a river is cut off, creating a free-standing body of water.
This landform is so named for its distinctive curved shape, resembling the bow pin of
an oxbow.

These are found in lower course of a river. Page no. 43. Goh Cheng Leong



16.Solution: d)

After the split, the Government immediately launched a massive attack on the Extremists. Extremist newspapers were suppressed. Tilak, their main leader, was sent to Mandalay jail for six years. Aurobindo Ghose, their ideologue, was involved in a revolutionary Conspiracy case and immediately after being judged innocent gave up politics and escaped to Pondicherry to take up religion. B.C. Pal temporarily retired
from politics and Lajpat Rai, who had been a helpless onlooker at Surat, left for Britain
in 1908 to come back in 1909 and then to go off to the United States for an extended

http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                              Page 7
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 11 - SOLUTIONS


stay. The Extremists were not able to organize an effective alternative party or to sustain the movement. The Government had won, at least for the moment.‘

The Moderates were indulging their own foolish beliefs. They gave up all the radical measures adopted at the Benaras and Calcutta sessions of the Congress, spurned all overtures for unity from the Extremists and excluded them from the party



17. Solution: b)

Gopal Krishna Gokhale was an outstanding intellectual who had been carefully trained in Indian economics by Justice Ranade and  G.V. Josh‘. He was no orator. He did not use strong and forceful language as Tilak, Dadabhai Naoroji and R.C. Dun did. Nor did he take recourse, as Mehta did, to humour, irony and courteous, sarcasm. As a speaker he was gentle, reasonable, courteous, non-flamboyant and lucid. He relied primarily upon detailed knowledge and the careful data. Consequently, while his speeches did not entertain or hurt,  they gradually took hold of the listeners‘ or readers‘ attention by their sheer intellectual power.

Gokhale was to gain great fame for his budget speeches which used to be reported extensively by the newspapers and whose readers would wait eagerly for their morning copy. He was to transform the Legislative Council into an open university for imparting political education to the people.



18.Solution: a)

This scheme has been extended till March 2015.

http://jnnurm.nic.in/wp-content/uploads/2011/01/PMSpeechOverviewE.pdf http://jnnurm.nic.in/wp-content/uploads/2014/04/11.pdf


19.Solution: c)
Refer to Ramesh Singh section on National Agricultural Policy. India never gives priority to export of food grains ordinarily. The first priority is food security of the nation. Hence, every provision will primarily be directed towards this very end.





http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                              Page 8
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 11 - SOLUTIONS



20.Solution: a)


The constitution may or may not be supreme – not in case of Britain.
In Britain legislature is bicameral. But it is not as powerful as the lower house because all the power is technically vested in the central government.




21. Solution: d)
Only some of the states have adopted this Model APMC Act, not all. There are several points of contention between the state governments‘ views  and the central government‘s views.
India heavily falls short when it comes to storing food grains. And this has been one of the biggest challenges before the Indian policymakers.

22.Solution: d)


Boom is the only stage where the demand is so huge that it greatly exceeds the existing supply/production levels. It is called over heating or heating up of the economy. It does not happen in the other stages as the demand is yet to recover fully.




23.Solution: a)

The  Government  of India has announced  a  national manufacturing  policy  with the objective of enhancing the share of manufacturing in GDP to 25% within a decade and creating 100 million jobs.  It also seeks to empower rural youth by imparting necessary skill sets to make them employable.  Sustainable development is integral to the spirit of the policy and technological value addition in manufacturing has received special focus.

The Policy is based on a principle of industrial growth in partnership with the States. Central Government will create the enabling policy framework, provide incentives for infrastructure development on a PPP basis through appropriate financing instruments, while State Governments will identify the suitable land and be equity holders in the NIMZs. The following are the key policy instruments for achieving the objective:

a)    Establishment  of  National  Investment  and  Manufacturing  Zones  (NIMZs) – green field integrated Industrial Townships with state –of-the-art infrastructure and land use on the basis of zoning; clean and energy efficient technology and


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                              Page 9
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 11 - SOLUTIONS


requisite social infrastructure. NIMZ proposed with land area of at least 5000 hectares.

b)   Industrial  Townships  are  proposed  to  be  self  governing  and  Autonomous
Bodies under Article 243(Q-c) of the Constitution.

c)    The trunk infrastructure will be financed appropriately by Central Government including through viability gap funding while SPV will develop the zone infrastructure in PPP mode.

d)   NIMZ will be managed by Special Purpose Vehicle, headed by. Govt. officials and experts, including those of environment.

The policy has also come up with proposals to improve access to finance for SMEs in the manufacturing sector.


The proposals in the policy are generally sector neutral, location neutral and technology neutral except incentivization of green technology.  While the National Investment & Manufacturing Zones (NIMZs) are an important instrumentality, the proposals contained in the Policy apply to manufacturing industry throughout the country including where ever industry is able to organize itself into clusters and adopt a model of self-regulation.


24.Solution: d)

Page no. 31 and 32, Goh Cheng Leong http://www.onegeology.org/extra/kids/earthprocesses/creep.html

25.Solution: d)


The real purpose of the Morley-Minto Reforms was to divide the nationalist ranks and to check the growing unity among Indians by encouraging the growth of Muslim communalism. To achieve the latter objective, the Reforms introduced the system of separate electorates under which Muslims could only vote for Muslim candidates in constituencies specially reserved for them. This was done to encourage the notion that the political, economic and cultural interests of Hindus and Muslims were separate and not common. The institution of separate electorates was one of the poisonous trees which was to yield a bitter harvest in later years.



http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 10
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 11 - SOLUTIONS


26. Solution: d)

Finance commission recommends the statutory grants and grants-in-aid to the states. The role of states is limited in getting the desired grants sanctioned.
The CAG is integrated audit machinery auditing both centre and states. CAG does not
merely audits the accounts for legality but also for performance of the government
expenditure. The states have no power over the election and removal of CAG.



27.Solution: c)


Union List – Banking, Atomic energy, currency, foreign affairs etc.
State list – Regulation of mines and mineral development, agriculture, police etc. Concurrent list – Socio-economic planning, labour welfare, education, forests etc.

These subjects are important and must be remembered, UPSC is fond of asking questions in this area. Only the important ones must be learnt.





28. Solution: b)

A single state assembly can not request the Parliament to make laws in the state list. It is only when such request comes from two or more states can it be considered. And the law would apply only in those states.
Parliament can legislate only during a national emergency not a financial emergency.



29. Solution: b)

The immediate control lies with the state governments. They can at maximum suspend the officer and not remove him from his post. The ultimate control lies with the central governments.
The Rajya Sabha must pass a resolution to the effect of creating a new All India service.
For, it lies in the federal domain.



30.Solution: b)

In April 1908, Prafulla Chaki and Khudiram Bose threw a bomb at a carriage which they believed was occupied by Kingsford, the unpopular judge at Muzzafarpur.

http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 11
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 11 - SOLUTIONS


Unfortunately, they killed two English ladies instead. Prafulla Chaki shot himself dead while Khudiram Bose was tried and hanged. Thousands wept at his death and he and Chaki entered the ranks of popular nationalist heroes about whom folk songs were composed and sung all over the country.




31.Solution: a)


In a financial emergency, the centre can give directions only related to financial matters, and not any matter. In the other two cases, any direction can be given. The centre becomes all powerful then.



32.Solution: a)

The bill has been passed by both the houses.

http://www.prsindia.org/billtrack/the-street-vendors-protection-of-livelihood-and- regulation-of-street-vending-act-2012-2464/

http://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Delhi/a-historic-day-for-street- vendors/article5103508.ece




33.Solution: d)


Finance commission is a constitutional body.
There is no council named Regional Development Council. However, there are several councils that are regional in nature like North-Eastern Council etc.
National Advisory panel makes policies at the national level. States do not have a say in it.
UGC coordinates the centre and the states in matters of university education.



34. Solution: c)


Electricity and land tax is levied and collected by the state governments. While Newspapers come in the concurrent list, the taxes on newspapers come under the Central domain.


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 12
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 11 - SOLUTIONS






35.Solution: a)


No court can decide such matter which is so technical in nature and involves public interest. It does not require legal interpretation of any legal claim or any equal division of resources. So, no court was empowered to look into any such affair.



36.Solution: d)


National emergency can also be imposed selectively.
It is not immune to judicial review. The court can question on grounds of being malafide in nature.
Both the houses need to approve it. However, while revoking only the approval of one house will do.
The President can unilaterally revoke emergency without the need for Parliamentary approval.






37.Solution: c)


Both these matters affect states‘ financial interests directly and therefore president‘s approval is required before introducing the bill. Even a surcharge on a tax needs prior President‘s approval.



38.Solution: a)

High stock of food grains can be used to increase supply in the market when food prices are high.
Fiscal consolidation reduces the demand in the economy that was created by public
spending.
Innovations help lower the cost of products and mass scale and efficient production. In the long run it is the best counter to inflation.
High Forex reserves actually further inflation. The RBI has to supply as much amount of rupees as the amount added to Forex.



http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 13
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 11 - SOLUTIONS


39. Solution: c)

Not just the concurrent list, the centre has power over the states in the residual list too. The state with a bigger population has more seats in the Rajya Sabha.




40.Solution: d)

Two of the most spectacular revolutionary terrorist actions of the period were the unsuccessful attempt under the leadership of Rash Behari Bose and Sachin Sanyal to kill the Viceroy, Lord Hardinge who was wounded by the bomb thrown at him while he
was riding an elephant in a state procession — and the assassination of Curzon-Wylie in
London by Madan Lal Dhingra. In all 186 revolutionaries were killed or convicted between the years 1908-1918. The revolutionary terrorists also established centres abroad. The more famous of them were Shyamji Krishnavarma, V.D. Savarkar and Har Dayal in London and Madame Cama and Ajit Singh in Europe.












41.Solution: b)


Inflation benefits borrowers not lenders. This is because; inflation erodes the interest rate that the lender is supposed to receive. Meanwhile the income of the borrower inflates. Hence, he pays less loan effectively.
The Indian economy is going through a high inflationary phase. In such cases, the real
interest rates will always be higher.



42. Solution: a)


It is self-explanatory. Refer to the section on effects of inflation in Ramesh Singh –
Indian economy.





http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 14
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 11 - SOLUTIONS


43. Solution: a)
There is no as such true or untrue indicator of inflation. Had there been one single true indicator, there would not have been so much of debate in academic and policy circles about a comprehensive inflation index. Every index has its own strengths and weaknesses.



44. Solution: a)


It gives an idea about  inflation from the producer‘s perspective, not consumer‘s
perspective. It includes only the cost of production of the commodity in the index.



45.Solution: b)


The Indian National Congress took up the Swadeshi call and the Banaras Session, 1905, presided over by G.K. Gokhale, supporter the Swadeshi and Boycott Movement for Bengal. The militant nationalists led by Tilak, Bipin Chandra Pal, Lajpat Rai and Aurobindo Ghosh were, however, in favour of extending the movement to the rest of India and carrying it beyond the programme of just Swadeshi and boycott to a full fledged political mass struggle The aim was now Swaraj and the abrogation of partition had become  the ‗pettiest and narrowest of all political  objects‖ The Moderates, by and large, were not as yet willing to go that far. In 1906, however, the Indian National Congress at its Calcutta Session, presided over by Dadabhai Naoroji, took a major step forward. Naoroji in his presidential address declared that the goal of the Indian National Congress was self- government or Swaraj like that of the United Kingdom or the Colonies.‘ The differences between the Moderates and the Extremists, especially regarding the pace of the movement and
the techniques of struggle to be adopted, came to a head in the 1907 Surat session of the
Congress where the party split with serious consequences for the Swadeshi Movement.




46.Solution: c)


Refer to the section on ―BOOM‖ in Ramesh  Singh – Indian economy for a detailed explanation. In brief, it is to be understood that supply and demand forces determine an economy‘s fate to a great  extent.  All strategies are aimed towards adjusting or affecting the same.





http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 15
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 11 - SOLUTIONS


47.Solution: b)

Atlantic coasts have very few volcanoes and that too dormant ones. Page no. 24, Goh Cheng Leong

48.Solution: c)
GR was not confined to only HYV seeds and fertilizers, but also encompassed every technique to boost agricultural productivity in the nation. Refer to the section GR in Ramesh Singh – Indian economy.



49. Solution: d)
The laws of the Parliament are applicable not only throughout India but also outside India to the property of the Indian citizens in any part of the world. This is because the Indian parliament exercises its sovereignty on its own citizens. It is sovereign within its territory.



50.Solution: a)
MSP can be anything that the government feels the farmers should fairly get. This is to help them get fair remuneration for their produce and to motivate or demotivate them to produce a particular crop. Hence it can be anything as compared to the market price. For e.g. if the government wishes to discourage rice farming, it would lower the MSP of rice.
The procurement system decentralization was started in 1997 where states play a very
important role in the supply chain.


51.Solution: c)

The Indian Councils Act 1861 made several changes to the Council's composition. The council was now called the Governor-General's Legislative Council or the Imperial Legislative Council. Three members were to be appointed by the Secretary of State for India, and two by the Sovereign. (The power to appoint all five members passed to the Crown in 1869.) The Governor-General was empowered to appoint an additional six to twelve members. The five individuals appointed by the Indian Secretary or Sovereign headed the executive departments, while those appointed by the Governor-General
debated and voted on legislation.




http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 16
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 11 - SOLUTIONS


52.Solution: c)

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_Nations_Commission_on_International_Trade_ Law

http://www.uncitral.org/uncitral/en/about_us.html



53. Solution: b)


Refer to the section AMS in Ramesh Singh – Chapter Agriculture for details. Any support that benefits the farmer in making his produce more competitive is a form of aggregate support by the government.



54. Solution: d)


A federal government does not only mean that the adjudication of disputes between states is not a part of the federal dynamics. States are autonomous in their areas of functioning and an independent court ensures that conflicts between them are resolved amicably.
Power to issue writs is to protect the political democracy in India by protecting fundamental rights, not federalism.



55.Solution: c)
Six industries still carry that burden: Aerospace and defence related; Explosives etc.; dangerous chemicals; tobacco etc.; alcoholic drinks; and drugs and pharmaceuticals. All these industries are directly related to public health and security. Hence, they have not been de-licensed.
56. Solution: d)
The proceeds go to the National Investment fund (NIF). From there they are invested in MFs and the returns: 75% is used in social sector schemes and the rest goes for reviving sick PSUs which can be turned around.



57.Solution: d)

Due to the axial tilt of the Earth, the amount of sunlight reaching any given point on the surface varies over the course of the year. This causes seasonal change in climate, with
summer in the northern hemisphere occurring when the North Pole is pointing toward

http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 17
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 11 - SOLUTIONS


the Sun, and winter taking place when the pole is pointed away. During the summer,
the day lasts longer and the Sun climbs higher in the sky. In winter, the climate becomes generally cooler and the days shorter. Above the Arctic Circle, an extreme case is reached where there is no daylight at all for part of the year—a polar night. In
the southern hemisphere the situation is exactly reversed, with the South Pole oriented opposite the direction of the North Pole.

Page no. 5, Goh Cheng Leong




58.Solution: a)

The plane through the centre of the Earth and orthogonal to the rotation axis intersects the surface in a great circle called the equator. Planes parallel to the equatorial plane intersect the surface in circles of constant latitude; these are the parallels. The equator has a latitude of 0°, the North pole has a latitude of 90° north (written 90° N or +90°), and the South pole has a latitude of 90° south (written 90° S or −90°). The latitude of an arbitrary point is the angle between the equatorial plane and the radius to that point.

The Trophic of Capricorn is located south of the Equator




59.Solution: d)

The Secretary of State for India had his own reasons for urging restrictions on immigration. For one, he believed that the terms of close familiarity of Indians with Whites which would inevitably take place in America was not good for British prestige; it was by prestige alone that India was held and not by force. Further, he was worried that the immigrants would get contaminated by socialist ideas, and that the racial discrimination to which they were bound to be subjected would become the source of nationalist agitation in India.‘ The combined pressure resulted in an effective restriction on Indian immigration into Canada in 1908. Tarak Nath Das, an Indian student, and one of the first leaders of the Indian community in North America to start a paper (called Free Hindustan) realized that while the British government was keen on Indians going
to Fiji to work as labourers for British planters, it did not want them to go to North
America where they might be infected by ideas of liberty.




http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 18
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 11 - SOLUTIONS


60.Solution: d)

Twilight is the illumination that is produced by sunlight scattering in the
upper atmosphere, illuminating the lower atmosphere when the Sun itself is not
directly visible because it is below the horizon, so that the surface of the Earth is neither completely lit nor completely dark. The word "twilight" is also used to denote the
periods of time when this illumination occurs.

Twilight between day and night

The most familiar occurrences of twilight are between dawn and sunrise and
between sunset and dusk each day. These occur for observers at latitudes within 48.5 degrees of the Equator on all dates of the year, and also for most observers at higher latitudes on many dates. However, at latitudes closer than 9 degrees to either Pole, the Sun cannot rise above the horizon and go more than 18 degrees below it on the same day on any date, so this type of twilight cannot occur.
Twilight lasting from one day to the next

At latitudes greater than about 48.5 degrees North or South, on dates near the summer solstice, twilight can last from sunset to sunrise, since the Sun does not go more than 18 degrees below the horizon, so complete darkness does not occur even at midnight. These latitudes include many densely populated regions of the Earth, including the entireUnited Kingdom and other countries in northern Europe.
Twilight between one night and the next, or for 24 hours

In Arctic and Antarctic latitudes in wintertime, the polar night only rarely produces complete darkness for 24 hours each day. This can occur only at locations within 5.5 degrees of latitude of the Pole, and there only on dates very close to the winter solstice. At all other latitudes and dates, the polar night includes a daily period of twilight, when the Sun is not far below the horizon. This period may be any fraction of the day. It may be brief, around noon, or it can last for the entire 24 hours.



61.Solution: d)
They are crystalline, do not form layers and do not contain fossils. Page no. 12 and 13, Goh Cheng Leong.





http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 19
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 11 - SOLUTIONS


62.Solution: b)

Ural mountains belong to Hercynian orogeny. Page no. 14, Goh Cheng Leong



63.Solution: a)
Article 356 empowers the centre  to impose President‘s rule in case a state has failed to comply with its directions. But if the state is incapable to do so on genuine grounds, it can not be imposed. If done so, the courts can intervene.
The legislations under the concurrent list enacted by the Parliament should be executed
by the states unless provided otherwise.



64.Solution: b)

Loess is formed by Aeolian process i.e. by wind activity.

Loess is an aeolian sediment formed by the accumulation of wind-blown silt, typically in the 20–50 micrometer size range, twenty percent or less clay and the balance equal parts sand and silt[2] that are loosely cemented by calcium carbonate. It is usually homogeneous and highly porous and is traversed by vertical capillaries that permit the
sediment to fracture and form vertical bluffs.

Loess is homogeneous, porous, friable, pale yellow or buff, slightly coherent, typically non-stratified and often calcareous. Loess grains are angular with little polishing or rounding and composed of crystals of quartz, feldspar, mica and other minerals. Loess can be described as a rich, dust-like soil.[5]

Loess deposits may become very thick; more than a hundred meters in areas of China and the Midwestern United States. It generally occurs as a blanket deposit that covers areas of hundreds of square kilometers and tens of meters thick.
65.Solution: d)

The water table is the surface where the water pressure head is equal to the atmospheric pressure. It may be conveniently visualized as the "surface" of the subsurface materials that are saturated with groundwater in a given vicinity. However, saturated conditions
may extend above the water table as surface tension holds water in some pores below



http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 20
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 11 - SOLUTIONS


atmospheric pressure. Individual points on the water table are typically measured as the elevation that the water rises to in a well screened in the shallow groundwater.

Page 34, Goh Cheng leong




66.Solution: b)

The partition of the state intended to curb Bengali influence by not only placing Bengalis under two admininistrations but by reducing them to a minority in Bengal itself as in the new proposal Bengal proper was to have seventeen million Bengali and thirty-seven million Oriya and Hindi speaking people! Also, the partition was meant to foster another kind of division— this time on the basis of religion. The policy of propping up Muslim communalists as a counter to the Congress and the national movement, which was getting increasingly crystallized in the last quarter of the 19th century. was to be implemented once again.  Curzon‘s speech  at Dacca, betrayed his attempt to ‗woo the Muslims‘ to support partition. With partition, he argued, Dacca could become the capital of the new Muslim majority province (with eighteen million Muslims and twelve million  Hindus) ‗which would Invest  the Mohammedans in Eastern Bengal with a unity which they have not enjoyed since the days of the old Mussulman Viceroys and Kings.‘ The Muslims would thus  get a ‗better deal‘ and the eastern districts would be freed of the ‗pernicious influence of Calcutta.‘




67.Solution: a)

Uplift of land and fall in sea level rejuvenates a river as it has to cut deeper to reach new base level.

On the other hand, submergence of land drowns the valleys and coasts slowing the flow of the river.

Page no. 44, Goh Cheng Leong

68.Solution: c)

Regional governments can be created by the Central government. But they do not derive their authority from the constitution. They derive it from the Central


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 21
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 11 - SOLUTIONS


government. And it can be taken back anytime by that central government too. They will not be autonomous units.



69.Solution: c)

The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs has approved the launch of the Rajiv Awas Yojana (RAY) as a Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS), to be implemented in Mission mode during 2013-2022. The CCEA has also approved the continuation of Affordable Housing in Partnership Scheme (AHP) as part of RAY with amendments. It has also been decided to continue the Interest Subsidy Scheme (ISS) for Housing the Urban Poor (ISHUP) and rechristen it as the Rajiv Rinn Yojana (RRY). This will be implemented as a stand alone Central Sector Scheme. The Planning Commission has allocated Rs. 32,230 crore for implementation of RAY during 12th Five Year Plan.


The RAY will provide support to States/Union Territories (UTs) and Central Government agencies for providing housing, including rental and transit housing, development/improvement of basic civic and social infrastructure and operation and maintenance of assets created under the scheme. RAY will cover all cities and towns, the selection of which will be made by the States in consultation with the Centre. States would required to include cities with religious/historic/culture/heritage and tourist importance and other cities taking into account the criterion of pace of growth of the city/slums within the city; predominance of SC/ST /minority population where property rights already stand assigned. The concerned state would give priority to towns with larger number of people living in slums. RAY will also be applicable to
―Urbanised villages‖ inside  the planning area of the city.







70.Solution: b)

Page no. 39, Goh Cheng leong




71.Solution: d)




http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 22
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 11 - SOLUTIONS


Indian exports in agriculture have only increased following WTO‘s establishment. The reasons are many including the opening up of the markets by developed nations; reduction in huge protectionist subsidies by many nations leading to better market access for other nations etc.



72.Solution: c)

Refer to the current policy of disinvestment in Ramesh Singh. Familiarity with the intention of the disinvestment policy is important.



73.Solution: c)

It was, perhaps, in the cultural sphere that the impact of the Swadeshi Movement was most marked. The songs composed at that time by Rabindranath Tagore, Rajani Kanta Sen, Dwijendralal Ray, Mukunda Das, Syed Abu Mohammed, and others later became the moving spirit  for nationalists of all hues, ‗terrorists, Gandhian or Communists‘ and are still popular. Rabindranath‘s Amar  Sonar Bangla, written at that time, was to later inspire the liberation struggle of Bangladesh and was adopted as the national anthem of the country in 1971. The Swadeshi influence could be seen in Bengali folk music
popular among Hindu and Muslim villagers (Palligeet and Jan Gàn) and it evoked
collections of India  fairy tales such as, Thakurmar Jhuli(Grandmother‘s tales) written by
Daksinaranjan Mitra Majumdar which delights Bengai children to this day.




74.Solution: b)

http://www.pib.nic.in/newsite/efeatures.aspx?relid=77571




75. Solution: d)
There is high unemployment, and not low during stagflation. It is amid high inflation and low growth, which are a temporary phenomenon. But, it can be caused not just by the government‘s attempts, but also by sudden shocks in the economy for e.g. some political crisis or a war etc.






http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 23
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 11 - SOLUTIONS



76. Solution: d)

Cheap money supply means easy monetary policy which means lower interest rates and more economic activity. Expansionary fiscal policy means more and more government spending to revive demand in the economy leading to recovery from a period of recession.



77.Solution: a)

http://eindia.eletsonline.com/2012/passport-seva-project-ministry-of-external-affairs/




78.Solution: d)




The Nalanda University Bill, 2010




     The Nalanda University Bill, 2010 was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on August
12, 2010 by the Minister of External Affairs, Shri S.M. Krishna. The Bill was passed by the Lok Sabha on August 26, 2010 and the Rajya Sabha on August 21,
2010.

     The Bill seeks to establish Nalanda University in Bihar as an international institution. The decision was arrived at the Second East Asia Summit in 2007 in Philippines about strengthening regional educational cooperation and later
reiterated at the Fourth Summit in Thailand in 2009.

     The Bill declares the Nalanda University as an institution of national importance.
It repeals the University of Nalanda Act, 2007. The jurisdiction of the university extends to the whole country.

     A governing board shall be constituted with a fixed term of three years for each member. Members include the Chancellor, the Vice Chancellor, five members among member states (member of East Asia Summit) who give maximum financial assistance, the Secretary in the Ministry of External Affairs, and two


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 24
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 11 - SOLUTIONS


representatives of the government of Bihar. The process of appointment of the various authorities is specified in the Bill.

     The President of India shall be the Visitor of the university. He has the power to cause an inspection of the university.

     If the governing board does not take action to the satisfaction of the Visitor, he may issue such directions as he may see fit and the board is bound to comply with such directions. The Visitor also has the power to annul any proceeding of
the university if it is not in conformity with the law.

     The governing board shall be responsible for managing the affairs of the university. Till the constitution of the board, the Nalanda Mentor Group shall
exercise the powers of the board.

     The university shall be a non-profit public private partnership which shall be
autonomous and accountable to the governing board.

     The key objectives of the university include (a) imparting education and enabling research in ancient science, philosophy, language, and history; (b) promoting regional peace by helping East Asian leaders relate to their past history; (c) harmonising academic standards and accreditation norms in teaching and research acceptable to all member states; and  (d) understanding Buddha‘s
teachings in the contemporary context.

     The university shall have the power to promote holistic and inclusive education; prescribe courses of study for degrees, diplomas and certificates; determine standards of admission and evaluation, set up a consortium of international partners to further its objectives; to generate resources through consultancy services, continuing educational programmes, collaborations and intellectual property rights; appoint faculty, to establish and maintain centres; and to borrow
with approval of the governing board.

     The Academic Council shall be the academic body of the university with the power to maintain standards of learning and evaluation. The university shall also have a number of Schools of Studies such as Buddhist Studies, Philosophy and Comparative Religions, Historical Studies, and International Studies and
Peace Studies.




http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 25
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 11 - SOLUTIONS


     The Bill specifies the service conditions of the employees and dispute resolution mechanism. It also specifies the procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students.




79.Solution: b)


The ruling party does enjoy enormous powers under the Anti-defection law, but the procedure for the appointment of the PM has nothing to do with it. The procedure was the same since the inception of the constitution. Anti-defection law was enacted as late as 1984.
In fact, there is no explicit reasoning given by the constitution or by the virtue of India being a Parliamentary democracy. Different Parliamentary democracies practice different models.




80.Solution: a)



81.Solution: d)

The first statement is false as the PM can only recommend the dissolution of the LokSabha and not the whole of Parliament which also includes the Rajya Sabha. He can do so by the virtue of being in the majority in the Loksabha.





82.Solution: d)


The main drawback of the Swadeshi Movement was that it was not able to gamer the support of the mass of Muslims and especially of the Muslim peasantry. The British policy of consciously attempting to use communalism to turn the Muslims against the Swadeshi Movement was to a large extent responsible for this. The Government was helped in its designs by the peculiar situation obtaining in large pasts of Bengal where Hindus and Muslims were divided along class lines with the former being the landlords and the latter constituting the peasantry. This was the period when the All India
Muslim League was set up with the active guidance and support of the Government.
More specifically, in Bengal, people like Nawab Salimullah of Dacca were propped up

http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 26
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 11 - SOLUTIONS


so centres of opposition to the Swadeshi Movement. Mullahs and maulvis were pressed into service and, unsurprisingly, at the height of the Swadeshi Movement communal riots broke out in Bengal.

Given this background, some of the forms of mobilization adopted by the Swadeshi Movement had certain unintended negative consequences. The use of traditional popular customs, festivals and institutions for mobilizing the masses—a technique used widely in most parts of world to generate mass movements, especially in the initial stages —was misinterpreted and distorted by communalists backed by the state. The communal forces saw narrow religious identities in the traditional forms utilized by the Swadeshi movements whereas in fact these forms generally reflected common popular cultural traditions which had evolved as a synthesis of different religious ‗prevalent among the people




83.Solution: d) http://www.pib.nic.in/newsite/efeatures.aspx?relid=86068 http://pib.nic.in/newsite/erelease.aspx?relid=77346



84. Solution: d)
Any reform that aims at making the land distribution system in India just, equitable and effective can be termed as a land reform. All these can be included under this definition. Green revolution was not a land reform. It was increase in agricultural productivity.



85. Solution: c)


The legislature is accountable to the people in both forms of government. It is in the Parliamentary form only that the executive or the government is directly accountable to the parliament. It establishes a responsible government as the legislature can question the government on its conduct. In the presidential form, this is not possible.



86.Solution: c)


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 27
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 11 - SOLUTIONS



It is self-explanatory. It is noteworthy that even deficit financing can act as a tax on people which actually was intended to boost demand in the economy.






87.Solution: b)

The shape of the Earth approximates an oblate spheroid, a sphere flattened along the axis from pole to pole such that there is a bulge around the equator.This bulge results from the rotation of the Earth, and causes the diameter at the equator to
be 43 km (kilometer) larger than the pole-to-pole diameter. Page no. 2, Goh Cheng Leong



88.Solution: d)


While National emergency has no time limit, President‘s rule has to be revoked after a maximum of three years. Proved maladministration or even corruption can not be a ground to impose president‘s rule as per the guidelines laid down by the Supreme Court in the Bommai case (1994).



89.Solution: b)

A traveler crossing the IDL(international date line) eastbound subtracts one day, or 24 hours, so that the calendar date to the west of the line is repeated after the following midnight. Crossing the IDL westbound results in 24 hours being added, advancing the calendar date by one day. The IDL is necessary to have a fixed, albeit arbitrary, boundary on the globe where the calendar date advances in the westbound direction.

Page no. 10, Goh Cheng Leong




90. Solution: c)





http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 28
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 11 - SOLUTIONS


Only six ministers are a part of the Inter-state council. They are nominated by the PM. Other members are the PM, CMs and administrators of UTs.



91.Solution: c)


The Kishenganga water dispute is an international water dispute solely handled by the
Central government. It does not show the federal spirit of our polity.
State election commissions conduct elections for local bodies, and not at the state level. The Election Commission of India conducts it at both the Central and State level. It
actually shows the centralizing tendency and not the federal one.




92.Solution: d)


Agricultural marketing starts from the point when the crop is harvested till it is sold in the market. The processes of grading and standardization start when the produce is segregated. Then it is stored in warehouses and then transported to godowns for storage.



93. Solution: b)

In the short-term inflation hints at higher demand in the economy which lead producers to produce more and leads investors to invest more in creating new capacities.
Domestic currency depreciates as inflation leads to lower level of competitiveness of domestic goods in the international market leading to lower exports. It lead to higher trade balance and thus lower demand of domestic currency in the international market leading to depreciation of the currency.



94.Solution: a)

Discretionary grants are given by the Planning Commission which is a non- constitutional mechanism. Grants-in-aid and statutory mechanism are recommended by the Finance Commission.



95.Solution: c)



http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 29
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 11 - SOLUTIONS


Parliament has overriding powers over state legislation normally too. This shows that the India is a quasi-federal polity, not a federal polity.



96.Solution: c)


The British had been suspicious of the National Congress from its inception. But they had not been overtly hostile, in the first few years of its existence because they believed its activities would remain academic and confined to a handful of intellectuals. However, as soon as it became apparent that the
Congress would not remain so narrowly confined, and that it was becoming a focus of
Indian nationalism, the officials turned openly critical of the Congress, the nationalist leaders and the
Press.
They now began  to brand the nationalists as ‗disloyal babus‘ ‗seditious Brahmins,‘ and
‗violent villains.‘ The Congress was described as ‗a factory  of sedition‘ and Congressmen as ‗disappointed candidates for office and discontented lawyers who represent no one but themselves.‘ In 1888, Dufferin, the Viceroy, attacked the National Congress in a public speech and ridiculed it as representing only the elite ‗a microscopic minority.‖ George  Hamilton, Secretary of State for India,  accused the Congress leaders of possessing ‗seditious and double sided  character.‘



97.Solution: a) http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lava#Felsic_lava Page no. 21 and 22, Goh Cheng Leong



98.Solution: d) http://www.pib.nic.in/newsite/erelease.aspx?relid=85187 http://pib.nic.in/newsite/erelease.aspx?relid=97908



99.Solution: b)

Marble and Slate are metamorphic rocks.


http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 30
INSIGHTS MOCK TEST 11 - SOLUTIONS


Page no. 13, Goh Cheng leong






100.        Solution: c)

On 1 November 1913, the first issue of Ghadar, in Urdu was published and on 9
December, the Grumukhi edition. The name of the paper left no doubts as to its aim. Ghadar means Revolt. And if any doubts remained, they were to be dispelled by the captions on the masthead: ‗Angrezi Raj ka Dushman‘ or ‗An Enemy  of British Rule.‘ On the front page of each issue was a feature titled Angrezi Raj Ka Kacha Chittha or ‗An Expose of British Rule.‘ This Chittha consisted of fourteen points enumerating the harmful effects of British rule, including the of wealth, the low per capita income of Indians, the high land tax, the contrast between the low expenditure on health and the high expenditure on the military, the destruction of Indian arts and industries, the recurrence of famines and plague that killed millions of Indians, the use of Indian tax payers‘ money  for wars  in Afghanistan, Burma,  Egypt,  Persia and  China the British policy of promoting discord in the Indian States to extend their own influence, the discriminatory lenient treatment given to Englishmen who were guilty of killing
Indians or dishonouring Indian women the policy of helping Christian missionaries
with money raised from Hindus and Muslims, the effort to foment discord between Hindus and Muslims: in sum, the entire critique of British rule that had been formulated by the Indian national movement was summarized and presented every
week to Ghadar readers.























http://insightsonindia.com                             INSIGHTS                                                                           Page 31
