
INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK PRELIMINARY EXAM - 2014


INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST - 8

GENERAL STUDIES

PAPER-I

Time Allowed: Two Hours                                                                                  Maximum Marks: 200


INSTRUCTIONS
1.   IMMEDITELY AFTER THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE EXAMINATION, YOU SHOULD
CHECK  THAT  THIS  TEST  BOOKLET  DOES  NOT  HAVE  ANY  UNPRINTED  OR  TORN  OR MISSING PAGES OR ITEMS, ETC. IF SO, GET IT REPLACED BY A COMPLETE TEST BOOKLET.
2.  You have to enter your Roll Number on the Test I
Booklet in the Box provided alongside. DO NOT
write anything else on the Test Booklet.

4.  This Test Booklet contains 100 items (questions). Each item is  printed only in  English. Each item comprises four responses (answers). You will select the response which you want to mark on the Answer Sheet. In case you feel that there is more than one correct response, mark the response which you consider the best. In any case, choose ONLY ONE response for each item.
5.  You have to mark all your responses ONLY on the separate Answer Sheet provided. See directions in the
Answer Sheet.
6.  All items carry equal marks.

7.  Before you proceed to mark in the Answer Sheet the response to various items in the Test Booklet, you have to fill in some particulars in the Answer Sheet as per instructions sent to you with your Admission Certificate.
8.  After you have completed filling in all your responses on the Answer Sheet and the examination has concluded, you should hand over to the Invigilator only the Answer Sheet. You are permitted to take away with you the Test Booklet.

9.  Sheets for rough work are appended in the Test Booklet at the end.
10.  Penalty for wrong answers :
THERE WILL BE PENALTY FOR WRONG ANSWERS MARKED BY A CANDIDATE IN THE OBJECTIVE TYPE QUESTION PAPERS.
(i)   There are four alternatives for the answer to every question. For each question for which a wrong answer has been given by the candidate, one-third of the marks assigned to that question will be deducted as penalty.
(ii)   If a candidate gives more than one answer, it will be treated as a wrong answer even if one of the given answers happens to be correct and there will be same penalty as above to that question.
(iii)    If a question is left blank, i.e., no answer is given by the candidate, there will be no penalty for that question.


http://insightsonindia.com


INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST SERIES FOR CIVIL SERVICES PRELIMINARY EXAM 2014





http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                        Page 1
1.   Consider    the    following    statements    with reference  to  Rashtriya  Krishi  Vikas  Yojana
(RKVY)
supervised                   and controlled in England.
1. It was started as part of
11th  Five Year plan and has  been  discontinued in 12th plan
2. Its   main   aim   was   to bring 4% growth in agriculture
3. During 11th  plan period agriculture  in  India grew at 4.1% rate

Which  of  the  statements  given   above  is/are incorrect?

a.   1 and 2 b.   2 and 3 c.   1 and 3 d.   3 Only




2.  With   reference   to   Sayyid   brothers, consider the following statements
1. They  adopted  the  policy  of religious intolerance
2.   They abolished jizyah but retained
pilgrimage tax

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.   2 Only c.   Both
d.   None




3.   Which   of   the   following   is/are correct about the Government of India Act 1858?
1.   It did not alter in any substantial way the system of government prevailing in India.
2.    The  Indian  government
after  this  Act  was  to  be
Choose the correct answer using the codes below

a.   Only 1 b.   Only 2 c.   Both
d.    None




4. With  which  of  the following counties is   India‟s   Free Trade agreement in force?



a.   India – Israel FTA
b.   India – Singapore FTA c.   India – Sri Lanka FTA d.   India – Chile




5.   Consider the statements about the education system under the British rule
1. A major weakness of the system was the neglect of mass education.
2.  In 1921 illiteracy was 92 %
and in 1911 it was 94 %
3.  The  emphasis  on  English as  medium  discouraged the spread of education
4. The    education    system created  a  wide  gulf between educated and the uneducated masses
5.  Girl education was almost completely neglected

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.   All
b.   2,3,4 and 5 c.   1,3,4 and 5 d.   1,2,3 and 4


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 2
6. With reference to Lalit Kala Academy, consider the following statements
1.  It was established by the British in 1945 as part of conservation of Indian art
2.  Its aim is to promote and  propagate Indian art
3. It        was        first established at Kolkata

Which of the above statements is incorrect?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.   1 and 3 Only c.   1 Only
d.   3 Only




7. The      features      of      Indian parliamentary system are:
1. Independent judiciary
2. Collective
responsibility of the executive to the legislature
3. A Written Constitution
4. Presence of de jure and de facto executives
5. Individual responsibility    of    the executive        to        the legislature

Choose the correct answer using the codes below

a.   2,3 and 4 b.   1,2 and 4 c.   2,4 and 5
d.   1,2,4 and 5




8.   The    industrial    Revolution    in
Britain impacted Indian economy
adversely. Consider the following statements.
1.   Agricultural      India was made economic colony of the British
2.   Free       trade       was
allowed   where British goods flooded Indian markets
3. British   encouraged westernization to sell more British goods
4.  Industrial revolution made India import raw cotton and raw silk

Which of the above statements is/are correct?




a.   1,2 and 4 b.   1,2 and 3 c.   All
d.   2 and 4 Only




9.   With  reference  to  SEZs,  consider the following statements
1.  Majority of SEZ are in manufacturing sector
2.    Kandla       and       Surat Export Processing Zones were converted to SEZs through SEZ 2005 act

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.   2 Only c.   Both
d.   None




10. Consider the following statements:
1.  The      British      crown assumed direct responsibility      for      the

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 3
governance of India before the sepoy mutiny of 1857.


2.  The Diwani rights to the company  allowed  them not only rights over revenue matters but also civil justice.


Which of the following statements is/are true?
a.   Only 1 b.   Only 2 c.   Both
d.   None




11. With reference to Dual System of Administration of Bengal during the Diwani of British from 1765, consider the following statements
1.    In 1765 the system of Dual   Government was established, in which the Nawabs ruled on behalf of the British and were mere puppets to the British
2.    In   1772   the   system was abolished and Bengal was brought under direct control of the British
3.   In                            1793 the Nizamat (governor ship)   of   the   Nawab was also taken away

Which of the above statements is/are correct?
12. Very recently (2014), which of the following country has been the top destination for India‟s exports
a.   China
b.   United States of America c.   United Arab Emirates
d.   Singapore




13. With  reference  to  National  Food Security Mission, consider the following statements
1. It was started with an aim to increase the production of rice by
10   million   tons,   wheat   by   8 million tons and pulses by 2 million tons by the end of the Eleventh Plan
2.   The average annual production of about 202.5 million tonnes of food grains during  the  10th  Plan  rose to  the  level  of  about  237.5 million tonnes during    the    11th Plan
3.   It  is  funded  by  the  centre  and state in 60:40 ratio

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.   1 and 3 Only c.   1 Only
d.   All




14. Which   of   the   following   is/are features   of   the   Charter   Act   of
1853?

a.   2 and 3 Only b.   1 and 2 Only c.   All
d.   None
1.   It introduced an open competition system of selection  and recruitment of civil servants.
2.   It   introduced   for   the first          time          local
representation    in    the


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 4
Indian                (Central)
legislative council. Choose the correct answer using the codes below
a.   Only 1
b.   Only 2 c.   Both
d.   None




15. Which  of  the  following  states  is not a major oilseeds producing state in India?
a.   Karnataka
b.   Tamil Nadu
c.   Himachal Pradesh d.   Odisha




16. The Hindu college was established by
a.   Derazio
b.   Rammohun Roy
c.   Ishwar                     Chandra
Vidyasagar d.   David Hare


17. With    reference    to    Centre    for Cultural     Resources     and Training (CCRT),     consider     the following statements,
1. It    works    towards    linking education with culture
2.   Established in 1979, pioneered by Smt. Kamaladevi Chattopadhyay and Dr. Kapila Vatsyayan, it functions as an autonomous organization under the aegis of Ministry  of  Culture,  Government of India.
3.   CCRT‟s  main   thrust  is  to  make variety of training programmes for in-service teachers, teacher educators, educational administrators       and       students
throughout the country.
4.   Dr   Kapila  Vatsyayan  is  one  of India‟s best exponent of Kathak dance

Which of the above statements is/are incorrect?

a.   2 and 4 Only b.   2 Only
c.   4 Only
d.   1 and 3 Only




18. Which of the following is/are the main objectives of the Special Economic Zone Act ?
1.   Generation        of        additional economic activity
2.   Promotion      of      exports      of manufactured goods
3.    Promotion of investment from domestic and foreign sources
4.   Creation        of        employment opportunities
5.    Development  of  infrastructure facilities
Select the correct answer using the codes below a.   1,2,3 and 5
b.   1,3,4 and 5 c.   2,3,4 and 5 d.   All




19. The features of the Indian federal system are:
1.    Division of powers
2.   Separation of powers between  three  organs of the state
3.    Independent judiciary
4.    Leadership     of     the Prime Minister and cabinet
5.   A written constitution

Choose the correct answer using the codes below

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 5
a.   2,3 and 5 b.   1,4 and 5 c.   1,2 and 5 d.   1,3 and 5




20. With   reference   to   the   Bringing Green Revolution in Eastern India programme  (BGREI )  which  was launched in 2010-11, consider the following statements
1. BGREI  is  an  independent scheme  taken  up  by  the ministry of Agriculture
2. Its focus states are Assam, Mizoram, Sikkim, Nagaland, Manipur, Meghalaya and Tripura
3.   This  program  focuses  mainly on   the   production   of   rice, wheat and pulses.

Which  of  the  statements  given  above  is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.   None
c.   1 Only
d.   1 and 3 Only




21. With  reference  to  Sangeet  Natak Academy, consider the following statements,
1.   The academy functions as the apex body of the Music in the country and aims towards promoting and propagating music of India
2.   The National School of Drama was
set-up    by    the    Sangeet    Natak
Academy

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.   Both
b.   1 Only c.   2 Only
d.   None




22. Tatvabodhini Sabha was
1.   Established by Debendranth Tagore
2.   Founded     to     propagate     Ishwar
Chandra Vidyasgar‟s ideas

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.   2 Only c.   Both
d.   None
23. With    reference    to    Ta    Prohm temples, consider the following statements
1.   They are located in Thailand near the
border with Laos
2.   These temple complex are included in UNESCO world heritage sites
3.   Archaeological  Survey  of  India  is involved in its restoration

Which one of the above statements is/are correct?

a.   1 Only
b.   2 and 3 Only c.   1 and 2 Only d.   All




24. Which of the following statements is/are true concerning the Government of India Act 1919?
1. It introduced diarchy in the provinces.
2.    It introduced for the first time the system of direct elections in the country.
3. It extended the principle of communal representation to include  other  minority communities too.
4.    It   authorized   the   provinces   to enact     their     budgets     thereby


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 6
separating their budgets from the central budgets.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below

a.   1 and 3
b.   All of the above c.   2,3 and 4
d.   1,2 and 4




25. Consider        the        about        the proceedings and powers of the constituent assembly?
1.   The   Muslim   league   withdrew from the assembly
2.   The    assembly    was    also    a
legislative  body  in  addition  to being a constituent assembly.
Which of the following statements is/are true?
a.   Only 1 b.   Only 2 c.   Both
d.   None




26. Consider the following statements
1. Accelerated    pulses    production programme  (A3P)  is  a  newly launched programme as part of National  Food  security  mission which aims to propagate integrated nutrient and pest management skills to  farmers  in  pulses producing blocks
2.   At 17 million tonnes, India produces
almost  25% of world‟s pulses

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.   2 Only c.   Both
d.   None
27. The Derozians did not succeed in creating   a   movement   in   early
1830s. It‟s because
a.  British Government suppressed their movement violently
b.   Masses  were  not  interested  in their radical ideas
c.   Social condition was not ripe at that time and their radicalism was bookish
d.   They were against religions and therefore could not connect with the masses




28. With   reference   to   National   e- Governance Plan in Agriculture (NeGP-A), consider the following statements:
1. NeGP-A  aims  to  provide  an integrated and seamless interface to the farmers for making informed decisions
2.   It has been initiated by the Ministry of Science and  Technology with the aid of department of Information technology, government of India

Which of the above statements is/are incorrect?


a.   1 Only b.   2 Only c.   Both
d.   None





29. With   reference   to   Ramakrishna Mission Institute of Culture, Kolkata, consider the following statements
1.   It was established and is being run by  the  Ministry  of  Culture  and
Tourism, Government of India





http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 7
2. The Governor of Bengal is the President of its Managing committee

Which of the above statement is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.   2 Only c.   None d.   Both




30. Consider the following statements about Ryotwari system of land revenue
2.   The  Ryotwari  system  is  associated  with the name of Sir Thomas Munro, who was appointed   Governor   of Madras in   May
1820
3. Munro gradually increased the rate of taxation from one third  to one half of the gross produce
4.   The   levy   was   not   based   on   actual revenues  from  the  produce  of  the  land, but instead on an estimate of the potential of the soil

Which  of  the  statements  given  above  is/are correct?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.   2 and 3 Only c.   1 Only
d.   All




31. Consider the following statements
1.   Plantation Division is part of the Ministry   of   Agriculture   which looks  after  affairs  related  to rubber, tea and coffee productions
2.   In 1942, the Coffee VII Act of 1942 was passed to regulate coffee exports,  under  which  the Coffee Board   of   India got   established, operated     by     the Ministry     of
Commerce and Industry
3. Tamil  Nadu  is  third  largest producer of coffee in India

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.   All
b.   1 and 2 c.   1 and 3 d.   2 and 3




32. Which of the following statements is  true  concerning  the fundamental rights in India?
1.   They    promote    the    idea    of    political democracy
2.    They operate as limitation on the powers
of the state.
Choose the correct answer using the codes below a.   Only 1
b.   Only 2 c.   Both
d.   None




33. With    reference   to   the    Wood‟s Despatch, consider the following statements
1.  Its objective was to   develop practical and vocational skills of the Indians people so that more  and  more  articles  could  be  produced and also to create a good market for consumption of those goods
2.   It recommended the creation of  Department of Public Instruction in each of the five provinces of Bengal, Bombay, Madras, the Punjab and the North Western provinces.
3.   The         Despatch         recommended         the
establishment of universities in the three Presidency towns of Calcutta, Bombay and Madras.
4. However the Wood‟s Despatch did not recommend the establishment of teacher training   schools   and   discouraged   female
literacy


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 8
Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.   1,2 and 3 Only b.   1,2,3 and 4
c.   2,3 and 4
d.   All




34. Consider the following statements
1.   He abolished the provincial courts of appeal and circuit
2.   He raised the status and powers of Indians in the judicial service and appointed them as Deputy magistrates

Above contributions or works are attributed to?

a.   Lord Macaulay
b.   Lord William Bentinck c.   Warren Hastings
d.   Lord Cornwallis






35. Ustad  Rahim  Fahimuddin  Dagar was a renowned exponent of,
a.     Dagar
vani Dhrupad of Hindusta ni classical music
b.   Malliks
(Darbhanga gharana)       of
Hindustani classical music
c.     Mishras    (Bettiah gharana of Hindustani classical music
d.   None of the above




36. Provisions contained in which of the    following    make    India    a
„secular‟ country?
1.   Fundamental Rights
2.    Fundamental Duties
3.   Directive Principles of State Policy

Choose the correct code
a.   1 and 2 b.   2 and 3 c.   1 and 3
d.   All of the above




37. Consider the following statements:
1. National   mission   for   Protein Supplements is a sub scheme of Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana
2. This mission mainly focuses on producing protein rich pulses and cereals in rainfed areas

Which of the above statements is/are incorrect?

a.   1 Only b.   2 Only c.   Both
d.   None




38. With    reference    to    Subsidiary Alliance system, consider the following statements
1.   It was started by Lord Cornwallis
2.   Under   this   system,   An   Indian ruler entering into a subsidiary alliance with the British had to accept British forces within his territory  and also agreed  to  pay for their maintenance.
3.   The   ruler   would   acknowledge the East   India   Company as   the paramount power in India
4.   If the Indian rulers failed to make the payments required by the alliance,  then  part  of  their territory was to be taken away as a penalty

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.   All
b.   1,2, and 4 c.   2,3 and 4
d.   1,3 and 4


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                      Page 9



39. Which of the following statements is/are true?
1.   The  73rd   and  74th   amendments
establish    a    system    of    local government in India.
2.   Such  a  system  is  not  found  in any other constitution in the world.
Choose the correct code a.   Only 1
b.   Only 2 c.   Both
d.   None




40. With   reference   to  Kisan   Credit Cards, consider the following statements
1.   It was started by the Government of India, Reserve  Bank  of  India (RBI), and National  Bank  for  Agriculture and  Rural  Development (NABARD) in 1998-99 to help farmers access timely and adequate credit.
2.   Only small and marginal farmers are eligible to get these cards
3.   Validity of this card is Ten years

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.   1 and 2 Only c.   1 Only
d.   None




41. Consider the following statements:
1. Kutiyattam,    Sanskrit    theatre, which is practised in the province of  Tamil  Nadu, is  one  of  India‟s oldest living theatrical traditions.
2.   Originating more than 2,000 years
ago,    Kutiyattam    represents    a synthesis   of   Sanskrit   classicism
and reflects the local traditions of
Tamil Nadu.
3.    Kuttiyatam and 18 other forms of cultural expression have been declared       by       UNESCO       as
'Masterpieces      of      oral      and
intangible heritage of humanity‟
4. Kutiyattam     is      traditionally performed in theatres called Kuttampalams, which are located in Hindu temples.

Which of the above statements is/are incorrect?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.   2 and 3 Only c.   1 and 4 Only d.   3 and 4 Only




42. With    reference    to    Mahalwari system, consider the following statements
4.   The       government       of William Bentinck  realized that that the result  of  the  Regulation  of  1822 was  nothing  other  than widespread misery and hence, introduced this system
5.   It introduced the fixation of the average rents for different classes of soil.
6.   This            system            consisted of landlords or
Zamindars claiming   to   represent entire villages or even groups of villages.

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.   None
b.   2 and 3 c.   1 and 3 d.   All




43. Consider the following statements:

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 10
1.   Chhau       is       a       genre of Indian tribal martial dan ce   which   is   popular   in the Indian states  of Odisha and Madhya Pradesh
2.   The Chhau dance is mainly performed during regional festivals, especially the spring                        festival of Chaitra Parva         which lasts for thirteen days and in which the whole community participates
3.   The Chhau dance is mainly performed  by  the Munda, Mahato,
Kalindi, Pattnaik, Samal,
Daroga, Mohanty,
Acharya, Bhol, Kar, Dubey, and Sahoo communities.
4.   There  are  three  subgenres of the dance, based on its places of origin and development, Seraikella Chhau, Mayurbhanj Chhau and Purulia Chhau

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.   1,2 and 3 Only b.   2,3 and 4 Only c.   3 and 4 Only
d.   1 and 2 Only






44. Which of the following is/are true concerning  the  Directive Principles of state policy(DPSP) enshrined in the Indian constitution?
1.   They   are   fundamental   to   the governance of the country.
2.   They     are     non-justiciable     in nature.
3.  The  Indian  constitution  is founded on the bedrock of the balance  between  the Fundamental rights and DPSP.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below

a.   1 and 2 b.   2 and 3 c.   1 and 3
d.   All of the above




45. Regarding  Integrated  Scheme  of Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil Palm and Maize (ISOPOM, consider the following statements
1.   Under      this      scheme,      financial
assistance is provided to farmers for purchase of breeder seed, production of foundation seed, production and distribution of certified seed etc
2.   It‟s          a           fully            Centrally
Sponsored programme

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.   2 Only c.   None d.   Both




46. With reference to missionaries and their intentions during the early phases of establishment of the British  empire  in  India,  consider the following statements
1.   They  exerted  pressure  on  the  company  to
promote   and   encourage   modern   secular westernized education in India
2.   Missionaries believed that modern education would destroy the faith of the people in their own religion and lead them to adopt Christianity

Which of the above statements is incorrect?



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 11
a.   1 Only b.   2 Only c.   Both
d.   None




47. With    reference   to    Zero   Duty Export Promotion Capital Goods (EPCG) Scheme, consider the following statements
1. Zero duty EPCG scheme allows import of capital goods for pre production, production and post production at zero Customs duty, subject to certain conditions.
2.  Along with many goods, import of
motor cars is also allowed under the scheme
3. The period for import under the scheme would be 18 months

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.   1 and 3 b.   2 and 3 c.   3 Only d.   All




48. With     reference     to     National Horticulture Mission, consider the following statements
1.   It is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme to promote holistic growth of the horticulture sector through an area based regionally differentiated strategies.
2.   At   present   India  is   the   second largest producer of fruits and vegetables in the world
3. It deals with issues relating to production and productivity improvement, post-harvest management, processing and marketing

Which of the above statements is/are incorrect?
a.   1 and 2 Only b.   All
c.   2 and 3 Only d.   None




49. Which   of   the   following   ensure
Judicial independence in India?
1.   Security of tenure for judges
2.   Ban on practice after retirement of judges
3.   Prohibition on discussion on the conduct of judges in the legislatures
4.   Power of the courts to punish for contempt

Which of the following codes is correct?

a.   1, 2 and 3 b.   2,3 and 4 c.   1,3 and 4
d.   All of the above




50. There   are   three   major   schools or gharana of    this    dance    from which performers today generally draw  their  lineage:  the  gharanas of Jaipur,
Lucknow    and Varanasi (born   in the                    courts                    of the Kachwaha Rajput kings,
the Nawab             of             Oudh, and Varanasi respectively);    there is   also   a   less   prominent   (and later) Raigarh gharana           which amalgamated technique from all three preceding gharanas but became famous for its own distinctive compositions.


To    which    dance    does    the    above statement refer to?


a.   Bharatanatyam
b.   Odissi

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 12
c.   Kathakalli
d.   Kathak



51. With reference to Rural Godowns Scheme, consider the following statements
1.   It‟s   a    fully    centrally   sponsored
scheme
2.   It is a not a demand driven scheme
3.   The   projects   for   construction   can only be taken up by local bodies and not by individuals

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.   1 Only
b.   1 and 3 Only c.   1 and 2 Only d.   All




52. Which of the following statements is/are true?
1. The    doctrine    of    judicial supremacy in the Indian constitution is associated with that of the American Supreme court.
2.    The   scope   of   judicial   review power of the Supreme Court in the U.S. is broader than what exists in India.


Which of the following statements is/are true?
a.   Only 1 b.   Only 2 c.   Both
d.   None




53. With   reference   to   the   National Mission                                          for Manuscripts (NAMAMI), consider the following statements
1.    It is  an  autonomous  organisation
under Ministry                                of
Culture, Government     of     India, established to survey, locate and conserve Indian manuscripts, with an aim to create national resource base  for  manuscripts,  for enhancing their access, awareness and use for educational purposes
2. Kritisampada   is   its   national database of manuscripts
3. The  Mission  was  initiated  in February 2003, by the Ministry of Tourism and Culture, Government of        India and Indira        Gandhi National        Centre        for        the Arts (IGNCA) is  the  nodal  agency for the execution of this project

Which of the above statements is/are incorrect?

a.   2 Only b.   1 Only c.   3 Only d.   None




54. Consider the following statements about South African Customs Union
1.   It is the oldest customs union of the
world
2. Lesotho, Swaziland, South Africa, Botswana, Namibia are its members
3. India  and  SACU  have  signed Preferential trade Agreement and it came into operational in 2012

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.   1 Only
c.   3 Only
d.   1 and 2 Only






55. Consider the following statements

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 13
1.   He was known as Father of Marathi journalism for his efforts in starting journalism in Marathi language
2.   He specifically dealt with the issues of widow re-marriage in his newspaper
3.   He   founded  „The   Bombay   Native
General Library‟

To which social reformer does above statements refer to?

a.   Dadabhai Navroji
b.   Gopal  Hari Deshmukh c.   Balshastri Jambhekar
d.   M G Ranade




56. Consider  the  following  matches concerning the borrowings of the Indian constitution:
1.   Fundamental   Rights   –
American constitution
2.  Directive Principles of state policy – Irish Constitution
3. Rule of law – British constitution
4. Fundamental   Duties- Soviet Constitution

Which of these is/are correctly matched?

a.   1, 2 and 3 b.   2,3 and 4 c.   1 and 4
d.   All of the above




57. Consider the following statements,
1.   During the British rule, nearly the entire amount of over 350 crores of rupees invested in constructing Indian  railway  was  provided  by the British investors, Indian capital contributing  only  a  negligible share in it
2. In planning, development and management  of  railways, economic   development   of   India was kept in mind
3.   By   1905,   nearly   45000   kms   of railway was built

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.   2 and 3 Only c.   3 Only
d.   None




58. In  2013,  which  of  the  following archaeological site was given UNESCO World Heritage tag in cultural category?
a.   Mahabodhi    Temple    Complex    at
Bodh Gaya
b.   Chhatrapati        Shivaji        Terminus
(formerly Victoria Terminus)
c.    Hill Forts of Rajasthan d.   Champaner-Pavagadh Archaeological Park




59. With    reference    to    Kisan    Call Centres, Consider the following statements
1. The Kisan Call Centre scheme is available over the complete country
2.   At  present  the  Call  Centre  services are available at a common toll free telephone number which can be dialed from anywhere in the country.
3.   Since 10th June, 2004 the Call Centres
service has  been  made available  24 hours and the the calls are attended in the IVRS mode.

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.   2 and 3 Only c.   1,2 and 3

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 14
d.   1 and 3 Only


60. Consider the following statements
1. Lord Cornwallis established the college of Fort Williams at Calcutta for the education of young recruits to the civil service
2.   During the days of Cornwallis, even Indians were recruited to the civil services

Which of the above statements is/are incorrect?

a.   None b.   Both
c.   2 Only d.   1 Only




61. With reference to arrival of foreign tourists into the country, consider the following statements
1.  Between 2002 and 2012, owing to terrorist attacks and economic crises, tourist arrivals to India decreased from 5.5 million to 5 million
2. Visa On Arrival scheme has been extended to eleven countries which includes France and Australia

Which of the above statements is/are incorrect?

a.   1 Only b.   None
c.   2 Only d.   Both




62. With reference to The Directorate General of Foreign  Trade‟s electronic Bank Realization Certificate  (e-BRC)  project, consider the following statements
1.   It  recently  won  the  2013  eASIA
Award under Trade Facilitation category as announced by Asia Pacific       Council       for       Trade
Facilitation and Electronic Business (AFACT) in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam
2.   e-BRC project launched on June 5,
2012 created an integrated platform for receipt, processing and subsequent use of all Bank Realization related information by exporters, banks, central and state government departments
3. Bank Realization  Certificate is required for discharge of export obligation and to claim incentives under Foreign Trade Policy
4. e-BRC project enables banks to upload  Foreign  Exchange realisation information relating to merchandise  goods  exports  on  to the DGFT server under a  secured protocol
5.   It‟s a  voluntary  scheme for  banks
and exporters and not mandatory


Which of the above statements is/are correct?


a.   1,2,3 and 4 Only b.   2,3,4 and 5 Only c.   2,3 and 4 Only
d.   All




63. With  reference  to  the  Permanent Settlement land revenue policy, consider the following statements
1.    In order to keep powerful people happy and to collect better revenue, Lord Cornwallis introduced the Permanent Settlement
2.   In      this      system      Zamindars      were
antagonized
3.   In this system, the rate of revenue was not to be increased ever in the future

Which  of  the  statements  given  above  is/are incorrect?

a.   1 Only

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 15
b.   2 Only c.   3 Only d.   None




64. Consider the following statements
1. He relieved the zamindars of their police functions  and  established  a  regular  police force
2.   He  established  a  system  of  circle  or  thanas
headed by a daroga, who was an Indian
3.   He believed that,  “every native  of Hindustan is corrupt‟

To   which   Governor   General   are   the   above statements refer to?

a.   Lord Cornwallis
b.   Lord William Bentinck c.   Lord Curzon
d.   Lord Canning







65. With        reference        to        farm mechanization in India, consider the following statements
1.   The  world  average  is  19  tractors
per 1000 hectares whereas in India it is about 16
2. A  dedicated  Sub-Mission  on Agricultural Mechanisation has been   proposed   for   the   Twelfth Plan, which includes custom-hiring facilities for agricultural machinery as one of its major components.
3. In order to attain the projected demand of 280 mt of food grains by
2020-21, farm power availability in the country has to be scaled up to at least 2.0 Kw/ha by the end of the Twelfth Plan.
4. In    2009-2010,    farm    power availability stood at 1.73 Kw/ha

Which of the above statements is/are correct?
a.   1 and 4 Only
b.   1,2 and 3 Only c.   2 and 3 Only
d.   All




66. Which   of   the   following   is/are
„Unitary‟   features  of  the   Indian constitution?
1.   Single Constitution
2.   Flexibility of constitution
3.   Integrated judiciary
4.   Position  and  appointment of the governor
5.   Emergency provisions
Choose the correct answer using the codes below a.   2, 4 and 5
b.   1,3,4 and 5
c.    All of the above d.   1,2 and 3




67. With reference to the Charter Act of 1813, consider the following statements,
1.   The  Act  expressly  asserted the  Crown's
sovereignty over British India
2.  It  allotted  Rs  100,000  to  promote education in India.
3.   Christian  missionaries  were  allowed  to come to British India and preach their religion

Which of the above statements is incorrect?

a.   All
b.   None
c.   2 Only d.   3 Only






68. Anand Fellowship, a Fellowship in the name of the great scholar and

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 16
aesthete             Dr.             Ananda
Coomaraswamy, is offered by,


b.   Lalit kala Academy c.   Sahitya Academy
d.   Sangeet Natak Academy
e.   National School of Drama




69. Consider the following statements,
1.    India                        Tourism
Development
Corporation (ITDC) is     the only       public sector undertaking of the Ministry of Tourism
2.   Ashoka group of hotels are
owned  by  the  government of India
3.   Clean India pilot project, an initiative by the Ministry of Rural Development to provide  sanitation  and clean drinking water has roped in ITDC to clean rich heritage sites in India

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.   1 and 2 Only c.   2 and 3 Only d.   All









70. With  reference  to  Rainfed  Area development   programme, consider the following statements:
1.   This program focuses on Integrated Farming System for enhancing productivity and minimizing risks associated with climatic variabilities
2.   About  76.77 million  hectares  of net sown area is cultivated under rainfed (unirrigated) conditions
3.   Maharashtra    has  highest  irrigated land in the country

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.   1 and 2 Only b.   2 and 3 Only c.   1 and 3 Only d.   All




71. With   reference   to   Metals   and Minerals Trading Corporation of India (MMTC Ltd), consider the following statements,
3.   MMTC is one of the two highest foreign exchange earner for India (after petroleum refining companies)
4.   The main objectives of the company was export   of mineral   ores and   import   of essential metals.
5.  It is one of the global players in agro products

Which of the above statements is/are incorrect?


a.   1 and 3 b.   2 and 3 c.   None
d.   3 Only



72. Four   countries   from  Africa   are
collectively known  as  the  „cotton
4‟ because they are cotton producing  countries  in  West Africa and have been trying to the get the US to reduce their cotton subsidies for almost a decade. Which of the following countries is not one of them?
a.   Benin b.   Egypt
c.   Burkina Faso


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 17
d.   Mali




73. With reference to Battle of Buxar, consider the following statements
1.   The  British  forces  were  led  by
Hector Munro
2.   The battle marked the end of the attempt to rule Bengal through a puppet nawab; thenceforth the company took control
3.   The Treaty of Allahabad heralded the establishment of the rule of the East India Company in one-eighth of   India   proper   with   a   single stroke
4.   Buxar  is  located  in  present  day
West Bengal

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.   1,2 and 3
b.   2 and 3 Only c.   1,2,3 and 4
d.   2,3 and 4




74. Which    of    the    following    acts provided for the first time for the separation of powers/functions of the  Governor-General‟s  council into legislative and executive?
a.   Charter Act of 1833 b.   Charter Act of 1853
c.   Government of India Act 1858 d.   Indian Councils Act 1861




75. With reference to National Project on Organic Farming (NPOF), consider the following statements,


1. Its      objective      includes Capacity building for soil health assessment, organic input  resource  management,
technology development through support to research and market development.
2.   It  was  launched  during  10th
plan period
3.   In   India,   Madhya   Pradesh leads in organic farming

Which of the above statements is/are incorrect?


1.   1 and 2 Only
2.   1 and 3 Only
3.   None
4.   All





76. Consider the following statements about the Act of 1909:
1.    It  provided for the first  time  the association of Indians with the executive council of the viceroy.
2.  It   provided   for   communally separate electorates.


Which of the following statements is/are true?
a.   Only 1 b.   Only 2 c.   Both
d.   None




77. With  reference  to  the  Regulating act 1773, consider the following statements
1. It prohibited the servants of company from engaging in any private trade or accepting presents or bribes from the natives.
2.   It was  an Act of the Parliament of
Great Britain intended to overhaul the management of the East India Company's rule in India
3.   This act was an improvement over
Pitt‟s India  act
4.   A supreme court was established at Fort William at Calcutta. British

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 18
judges were to be sent to India to administer the British legal system that was used there.

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.   1,3  and 2 b.   2 and 3
c.   1,2 and 4 d.   All




78. With    reference    to    agricultural marketing reforms, consider the following statements
1. Under the APMC Act, only State Governments are permitted to set up markets.
2. Monopolistic       practices       and modalities of the State-controlled markets have prevented private investment in the sector.
3.   AGMARK is                   a certification mark employed      on      agricultural products in India, assuring that they conform to a set of standards approved     by     the Directorate     of Marketing and Inspection, an agency of the Government of India
4.   The AGMARK system was designed to benefit local growers throughout India who were, in the absence of a certification as to quality, exposed to receiving less for their produce from dealers than its true worth

Which of the above statements is/are incorrect?

a.   None
b.   3 and 4 c.   2 and 3 d.   1 and 2
79. The  Governor-General  of  Bengal became the Governor- General of India by:
a.   Government of India Act of 1858 b.   Indian Councils act of 1861
c.   Pitts India Act of 1784 d.   Charter Act of 1833




80. The years between 1775 and 1780 were considered as dark hour for the British. Because
a.   They were defeated by the French in the Mediterranean
b.   The united front of Maratha, Mysore and Hyderabad forces waged a powerful war against them
c.   They  were  losing  their  markets  to
Dutch in East Indies d.   None of the above


81. Which   of   the   following   is/are correctly matched?
1.   1909   Act   -   Principle   of election
2.   1919      Act      -Communal reservations
3.   1935       Act       –Provincial autonomy
4.   1947   Act   –   Responsible government


Choose the correct code from below a.   Only 4
b.   3 and 4 c.   1 and 3 d.   2 and 3



82. Consider the following statements with regard to interest subvention scheme to farmers
1.   To encourage prompt repayment of
loans     by     farmers,     government


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 19
provides    4%    additional    interest subvention
2.   At present farmers receive loan upto
Rs 3 lakhs at 7% interest rate

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.   2 Only c.   Both
d.   None




83. Advertisement   campaigns     “Go Beyond” and  “Find  What  You Seek” have been launched by,
a.   Ministry of Commerce, India
b.   Ministry of Tourism and Culture, India c.   Government of Gujarat
d.   Government of Kerala




84. Which    of    the    following    acts introduced the principle of elections in India?
a.   Indian Councils act of 1861 b.   Indian Councils act of 1892 c.   Morley Minto Act 1909
d.   Government of India Act 1919




85. Statutory     recognition     to     the portfolio system was accorded by:
a.   Indian Councils act of 1892 b.   Indian Councils act of 1871 c.   Indian Councils act of 1861 d.   Indian Councils act of 1882


86. With  reference to  India‟s  exports and  imports,  consider  the following statements


1.   The total trade of goods and services stands at over US $ 1trillion which is
56% of GDP
2.   According to WTO, in merchandise trade, India is 19th largest exporter in the world with a share of 1.6%

Which of the above statements is/are incorrect?

a.   None b.   Both
c.   2 Only d.   1 Only




87. With   reference   to   Doctrine   of Lapse, consider the following statements
1.    According     to     the     Doctrine, any princely     state or     territory under the direct influence (paramountcy)  of  the British  East India                           Company (the dominant imperial power            in the subcontinent),      as      a vassal state under the British Subsidiary System, would automatically be annexed if the ruler was either "manifestly incompetent or died without a direct heir"
2.   The   princely   state   of Kittur was taken over by the East India Company in 1824 by imposing a
'Doctrine Of Lapse

Which of the above statements is incorrect?

a.   1 Only b.   2 Only c.   Both
d.   None




88. The     Salient    features    of    the Government  of  India  Act,  1935 are:
2.   All India federation
3.   Provincial autonomy
4.   Dyarchy at the centre
5.   Abolition of diarchy in the states


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 20
Choose the correct answer using the code below

a.   1 and 2
b.   1,2 and 3 c.   2,3 and 4
d.   All of the above




89. With reference to The Technology Upgradation  Fund  Scheme (TUFS), consider the following statements
1. It provides plan support for modernization  of  textiles industry in the form of interest reimbursement and capital subsidy
2. The     scheme     has     been discontinued since 2011

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.   None b.   1 Only c.   Both
d.   2 Only




90. Which of the following statements are incorrect?
1. India and European Union have finalized Broad Based Trade and Investment Agreement between each other
2.   Recently   India    and   Sri    Lanka signed Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement
Choose the correct answer using the codes below a.   1 Only
b.   2 Only c.   Both
d.   None
91. With    reference    to    agricultural credit, consider the following statements
1. The target of flow of credit to agricultural  sector  has  been envisaged at Rs 7 lakh crores for year
2013-14
2.   Banks  have  been  advised  to  issue
General  Credit  Cards  upto  Rs  2.5
Lakhs  without  insisting  on  security and end use of funds to farmers

Which  of  the  statements  given  above  is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.   2 Only c.   Both
d.   None






92. With    reference    to    export    of agricultural products by India, consider the following statements
1.   In   last   four   years,   growth   in India‟s agricultural         exports has exceeded  the  rise  in  exports  of other products.
2. India  is  a  net  exporter  of agricultural products

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.   1 Only b.   2 Only c.   Both
d.   None




93. Consider the following statements about the Regulating Act of 1773:
1.   The British government did not try to control and regulate the affairs of East India company before this
act



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 21
2.    It laid the foundations of Central
Administration in India then.


Which of the following statements is/are true?
a.   Only 1 b.   Only 2 c.   Both
d.   None











94. Which   of   the   following   is   not related to the contribution and life of Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar?


a.   He opened Sanskrit college to non- Brahmin students
b.  Because of his efforts, first lawful widow   remarriage   happened   in
1856
c. He founded Bethune School to promote and propagate female education in India
d.   He was against child marriage




95. Consider the following statements
1.   Served from India Scheme has been launched by the Ministry of Tourism and Culture to promote the exports of traditional crafts from the country
2.   The objective of this scheme is to accelerate  growth  in  export  of services  so  as  to  create  a  powerful and unique 'Served From India' brand, instantly recognized and respected world over.

Which of the above statements is/are incorrect?

a.   1 Only b.   2 Only c.   None
d.   Both











96. With  reference to “Early  Harvest” scheme at WTO negotiations, consider the following statements
1.   It is  meant to thrash out a deal on a select set of sectors, would impact  the  ability  of developing countries such as India to strike a bargain with trade in farm goods, where the developed countries boost exports  through  heavy  doses of subsidies , and industrial products.
2.  Early harvest was pushed by developed countries as they were   unwilling   to   open   up farm trade, a domestic hot potato, even as countries such as India were not very keen on the plan.
3.   India   was   opposed   to   this scheme

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a.   1 and 3 Only b.   3 Only
c.   All
d.   2 and 3 Only




97. Which of the following statements is/are true about the composition of the constituent assembly?
1.   The   seats   allocated   to each  British  province were divided proportionally    amongst

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 22
principal communities of
India.
2.   The    representatives    of each community were to be elected indirectly through the provincial legislatures.
3.   It  was  a  partly  elected and party nominated body.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below

a.   1 and 2 b.   2 and 3 c.   1 and 3
d.   All of the above



98. Consider the following statements about Raja Rammohun Roy,
1.   He   wrote   his   famous   work   in Persian,   Gift   to   Monotheists,   in which he made arguments against belief in many gods
2.   He held that Vedas and Upanishads preached monotheism
3.   He wanted high moral message of
Christ     to     be     incorporated     in
Hinduism
4. He  started  Brahmo  Samaj  to promote and encourage atheism in India and beyond

Which  of  the  statements  given  above  is/are incorrect?

a.   1 Only b.   2 Only
c.   3 Only
d.   4 Only



99. To     which     of     the     following organizations is India not a member state?
1.   Asia Pacific Trade Agreement
2.   Global System of Trade Preferences
3.   Indian     Ocean     Rim    Ocean     for
Regional Cooperation
Choose the correct answer using the codes below a.   1 and 2 Only
b.   1 Only c.   2 Only d.   None



100.            The   Objectives   resolution which formed the bedrock of the Indian constitution guaranteed which of the following:


1.   Social justice
2.   Economic justice
3. Safeguards       for       minorities including the tribals
4.   Separate  status   for  Jammu  and
Kashmir
Choose the correct answer using the codes below a.   1 and 2
b.   2, 3 and 4 c.   1 and 3
d.   All of the above














http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 23






































































http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      Page 24
