VISIONIAS z™
www.visionias.in www.visionias.wordpress.com

ANSWERS & EXPLANATION GENERAL STUIDES (P) 2015 – Test 6 (1555)




Q 1.C


In the tropical cyclones cumulonimbus clouds with great vertical extent are generated. Nimbus clouds are thick mass of water vapour & rain carrying clouds generally occur as nimbus or in combination of nimbus like cumulonimbus or stratonimbus etc.  Cirrus are the  highest clouds formed between  the altitude of 8 km to 12 km.

Hence, only statement 1 is incorrect.


Q 2.B


South Africa lies in the warm temperate zone. But it has a moderate climate due to several reasons. It is surrounded on three sides by oceans. The great height of plateau, on which it lies, is another reason for its cool climate. It is further cooled by the cold ocean current along the west coast.


Q 3.B


     Stars are formed by the process of Nuclear fusion reaction of hydrogen (four small hydrogen nuclei fuse to produce a bigger helium nucleus and tremendous amount of energy).

     Order of surface temperature : Red Stars < White Stars < Blue Stars


Q 4.A


    Nile river outflows in Mediterranean sea.
    Mekong outflows in South China sea.
    Refer Atlas.


Q 5.C


Igneous rocks are crystalline in structure whereas Sedimentary rocks are non-crystalline in nature.


Q 6.B


     Stratosphere has higher temperature but the reason is the presence of ozone gas which absorbs the ultraviolet part of incoming solar radiation, raising the temperature. In fact more is the amount of gases in the atmosphere, greater is its heating. It is the reason that near the surface of earth, where the density of atmosphere is maximum the temperature is highest.

     Because tropopause is at the height of about 18km & 8 km at equator & poles respectively, the tropopause temperature above equator  is of about  -80 degree centigrade& above poles is -45 degree centigrade.

     Hence, only statement 2 is correct.


Q 7.A

1                                                                www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 8.D

The reef-building corals survive best under the following conditions:

1.   The water temperature must not fall below 68°F. (20°C). This virtually limits the areal distribution of corals to the tropical, and sub-tropical zones. Again they will not flourish where there are cold currents because of the upwelling of the cold water from the depths that cools the warm surface water.  This  explains  why  coral  reefs  are  generally absent on  the  western  coasts  of  the  warm currents, e.g. the Gulf Stream, means that corals are found far to the north of the West Indies in the Atlantic Ocean. The Pacific and the Indian Oceans, however, have the most numerous coral reefs.

2.   The depth of the water should not exceed 30 fathoms or 180 feet, because beyond this depth sunlight is too faint for photosynthesis to take place. This is essential for the survival of the microscopic algae, on which the coral polyps depend. Shallow water of less than 100 feet is ideal. But there should always be plenty of water as polyps cannot survive for too long out of water.

3.   The water should be saltish and free from sediment. Corals therefore survive best in the moving ocean water well away from the silty coasts or muddy mouths of streams. The corals are best developed on the seaward side of the reef, where constantly moving waves, tides and currents maintain an abundant supply of clear, oxygenated water. They also bring an adequate supply of food in the form of microscopic organisms.


Q 9.C

     The Ring of Fire is an area where a large number of earthquakes and volcanic eruptions occur in the basin of the Pacific Ocean. The Ring of Fire is a direct result of plate tectonics and the movement and collisions of lithospheric plates. So option 1 is correct.

     Barren Island is located in the Andaman Sea, one of the most easterly of the Andaman Islands. It is the only confirmed active volcanoin South Asia. So option 2 is correct.


Q 10.B


Temperature and Humidity also plays a large role but RAINFALL is the MAIN factor

Tropical evergreen forests: This type of vegetation is found in areas where rainfall is above 250 cms and temperature ranges between 25C and 27C. Since the trees are always green they are called evergreen forests. The heavy rainfall, high temperature and humidity are responsible for the growth of these dense forests. The trees grow about 60 mts. high. The branches of trees form a canopy and prevent the sun's rays from reaching the ground. In India, most of these forests are found on the western side of the Western Ghats,in the North-Eastern hills and the Andaman and Nicobar islands. The semi evergreen forests are found in the lower rainfall areas of the Western Ghats, Orissa and West Bengal. Ebony, mahogany, rose-wood and rubber are the important trees. Bamboo bushes are also found.


Q 11.B

     In Eurasia temperate grasslands which are known as steppe are quite extensive. These stretch eastward from the shores of Black sea across great Russian plain to the foothills of Altai mountain. In north America also Prairies are quite extensive in comparison to Pampas and Downs. So option 1 is correct.

     Temperate grasslands in Australia are known as Downs. So option 2 is correct.

     Due to continentality climate in temperate grasslands has extremely hot summer and very cold winters.
But in southern hemisphere due to effect of sea climate is not so extreme. So option 3 is correct.

Q 12.D

     The earth rotates 360° in about 24 hours, which means 15° an hour or 1° in four minutes. Thus, when it is 12 noon at Greenwich, the time at 15° east of Greenwich will be 15 4 = 60 minutes, i.e., 1 hour ahead of Greenwich time, which means 1 p.m.
2                                                                www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
     Similarly the time gap between Greenwich and 142 ½o latitude is 9 hours and 30 minutes. When it is 4 pm at Greenwich, the time at 142 ½o latitude will be 1:30 am next day i.e Monday.


Q 13.C


Chota Nagpur region gets rainfall due to Arabian Sea branch as well. The winds flow through the rift valley between Vindhyas & Satpura & cause rainfall over the plateau.

Position of Equatorial jet stream along eastern coast of Africa is one of the many factors that impact the distribution & intensity of Monsoon in India. Hence, statement 3 is correct.


Q 14.C

     Hess argued that constant eruptions at the crest of oceanic ridges cause the rupture of the oceanic crust and the new lava wedges into it, pushing the oceanic crust on either side. The ocean floor, thus spreads.

     The younger age of the oceanic crust as well as the fact that the spreading of one ocean does not cause the shrinking of the other, made Hess think about the consumption of the oceanic crust. He further maintained that the ocean floor that gets pushed due to volcanic eruptions at the crest, sinks down at the oceanic trenches and gets consumed.


Q 15.A


Continental Plateaus rise abruptly from the lowlands or the sea. Piedmont Plateaus are called plateaus of denudation as areas which were high formerly have now been reduced by erosion. Third statement applies for Intermontane plateaus.


Q 16.A


Those that have been known to errupt and show signs of possible erruption in future are dormant volcanoes. Other statements are correct.


Q 17.A















Q 18.B


Table showing permanent gases of the earth’s atmosphere

Constituent           Percentage by volume
Nitrogen                             78.08
Oxygen                              20.95
Argon                                 0.93
Carbon dioxide                       0.036
Neon                                0.002
Helium                             0.0005
Krypto                               0.001

     The greater part (NOT the entire part) of South America lies within the tropical zone.
     Campos and Llanos are tropical grasslands found in South America.

Q 19.B

     Black Hole is formed from a very massive neutron star.

     The presence of a black hole can be felt by the effect of its gravitational field on its neighbouring objects in the sky. e.g. – if a star moves in a circle without any visible star in the centre we can conclude there’s a black hole in the centre.

3                                                                www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 20.D

     Earth’s distinct seasons are produced by interactions of revolution (annual orbit about the Sun) and
rotation (Earth’s turning on its axis).

     As Earth rotates, the boundary that divides daylight and darkness is the circle of illumination.

     Other reasons for seasons include axial tilt (at about 23.5° from a perpendicular to the plane of the ecliptic), axial parallelism (the parallel alignment of the axis throughout the year), and sphericity (appears as an spheroid to the Sun’s parallel rays; the geoid).


Q 21.B


Gentle slope which start at the mountain foot reduces the speed of running water and heavy load of sediments could not be carried further.


Q 22.D


River capture is back-cutting (head ward erosion) which happens in the Upper course. Oxbow lakes are formed in the Lower course. It applies for the Middle course.


Q 23.B


If you are in an open ground then it is better to sit on the floor as it will reduce your area and can prevent you from lightening. Lightening conductor is a rod longer than the house and some part of it is above the roof.


Q 24.D


Temperature controls density of seawater through the phenomenon of thermal expansion. Pressure controls through compressive effects. And, Salinity affects through addition of dissolved substances.


Q 25.D


Q 26.D


All statements are correct.


Q 27.A

     The climate history preserved within layers of sediments that slowly accumulate on the bottoms of lakes and oceans can span hundreds of millions of years or longer. The resolution of these records is variable; it may be annual or on the order of a century or millennium. Sequences of sediments that are currently at the bottom of lakes or on the ocean floor are used to interpret climates of the recent past
     Rocks preserved on the continents that are thousands, millions, hundreds of millions, or even billions of years old are used to interpret the much more distant past.


Q 28.B


Both Steppe and Prairies are temperate grasslands.


Q 29.D


Single element minerals like sulphur, copper, silver are also found.
4                                                                www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 30.C

     Vertical pressure gradient is much larger than horizontal pressure gradient, but strong verticals current are not observed because the pressure gradient force is balanced by the downward gravitational force.

     Near the surface air is heated due to conduction, while at some height the air is heated due to convection of air where cold air from top moves down and gets heated by coming in contact with earth
& then moves up & the cycle continues.

     Because of presence of the continuous oceans in the southern hemisphere it has more continuous isobars, while in north the continuity is broken due to alternate presence of land & water
Q 31.C Q 32.C

     Lack Victoria is the largest lake of Africa which is also a source of river Nile. It is the longest river of world. So option 1 is correct.

     Zaire river which is also known as Congo river flows through central Africa and discharges water into
Atlantic Ocean. So option 2 is incorrect.

     Africa consists of many plateaus and rivers drop from the higher plateaus to the coastal lowlands making water falls not suitable for navigation. So option 3 is correct.


Q 33.C


Heat is transmitted to the lower sections of the oceans through the mechanism of conduction from the surface of ocean water. Also, the second statement can be explained by the fact that though the surface temperature of the seas decreases from equator towards the poles, but the temperature at the ocean bottoms is uniform from the equator towards the pole.


Q 34.A

     Because of ice melt there would be fewer of these storms.

     POLAR storms are among the most vicious weather systems on the planet.

     These mini-hurricanes occur in the Arctic winter, when freezing air flows out of the region and over the warmer Atlantic Ocean. As the Arctic warms in the coming decades, there are expected to be fewer of them.

     But without the storms, the rest of the world could face weather disruption. They are vital to the global thermohaline circulation in the ocean, which underpins ocean currents and weather systems


Q 35.B


Earth's magnetic field, also known as the geomagnetic field, is the magnetic field that extends from the Earth's interior to where it meets the solar wind, a stream of charged particles emanating from the Sun. Its magnitude at the Earth's surface ranges from 25 to 65 microtesla (0.25 to 0.65 gauss). Roughly speaking it is the field of a magnetic dipole currently tilted at an angle of about 10 degrees with respect to Earth's rotational axis, as if there were a bar magnet placed at that angle at the center of the Earth. Unlike a bar magnet, however, Earth's magnetic field changes over time because it is generated by ageodynamo (in Earth's case, the motion of molten iron alloys in its outer core).


Q 36.D

     The earth’s core has a radius of 3470 km, a little more than half the earth’s total radius.

5                                                                www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 37.C


Q 38.D


The correct order of events is: Stellar Nebula -Red giant – Supernova – Neutron star


Q 39.D

    Tundra is extreme northern part of with very cold climate having snow for major part of the year.
    Taiga lies in south of the Tundra, winter are long and sever and annual rainfall around 50 cm.
    Mixed forest belt lies in south of the Taiga in central and western part of the Europe.
    Mediterranean type vegetation confines to southern Europe along the Mediterranean sea coast.
    These are the name given to the type of Vegetation in these areas according to their climate type.


Q 40.B


The orbit of the earth makes an angle of 66 ½ o with the plane parallel to the Orbit. I.e. orbital plane. The duration of Solar day is more than the Siderial day. The earth completes one rotation in 24 hours. This is called a Solar Day. The duration between the passage of a particular star over a meridian twice is called Sidereal day. It lasts 23 hours 56 minutes and 4 seconds. The third statement is correct


Q 41.B


When a cyclone approaches there is a fall in the pressure of air, while in case of anticyclone reverse happens.
In cyclones isobars are closer causing a strong pressure gradient force generating high velocity of winds.
NH:
Cyclone: anti-clockwise
Anti-cyclone: clock-wise

SH:
Cyclone: clock-wise
Anti-cyclone: anti-clockwise
Hence, only statement 2 is correct.


Q 42.D

     Landslides usually occur on steep slopes such as in mountainous areas, on cliffs or where man has artificially steepened slopes. For example, in road or rail cuttings,  Landslides may be caused because a steep slope is undercut by  a river or  the seas  so that it falls by gravity. Earthquakes  or  volcanic disturbances may  loosen rocks and start off a landslide. Man-made steepening both undercuts the slope and sets up vibrations which may loosen rocks or soil. But often landslides are caused by the lubricating action of rainwater.


Q 43.B


International date time curved because to avoid any confusion of date and day in some of the island group.


Q 44.A


Along high rocky coasts, waves break with great force against the land shaping the hill sides into cliffs. With constant pounding by waves, the cliffs recede leaving a wave-cut platform in front of the sea cliff. While along the low sedimentary coasts, the rivers appear to extend their length by building coastal planes and deltas. Wave is the most important agent in rocky as well as sedimentary coasts.
6                                                                www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 45.C


1. Isonormal - Any line representing continuous value on maps.

2. Isobaths - Lines of equal depth in the sea.

3. Isogonal - Lines joining places with the same magnetic declination.

4. Isohaline - Line of uniform salinity.


Q 46.C







Q 47.C Q 48.C











Q 49.C


     Not the meteorite but a meteor is called a shooting star burning as a bright streak of light due to resistance of air.

     If the meteors is big and does not burn up completely before reaching the earth’s surface than it is
called a meteorite.



     Lake Superior, lake Michigan, lake Huron, lake Erie, lake Ontario constitutes Great lakes of North
America.



     It needs to be in orbit around the Sun – Yes.

     It needs to have enough gravity to pull itself into a spherical shape – Yes

     It needs to have “cleared the neighborhood” of its orbit.

Pluto's orbit is eccentric enough that it travels on its path within the orbit of Neptune. Quite clearly, given Neptune's robust size and mass, Neptune will eventually capture Pluto as a moon, if it does not pull Pluto into collision or throw it off somewhere else in space in a more severely eccentric orbit. What is about Pluto's moons? Well, they may or may not survive the encounter with Neptune when next they come close.



Jet streams are geostrophic winds. Hence they flow at a height of at least 3 to 4 km & the friction due to earth’s surface is absent. In geostrophic wind the coriollis force is balanced by horizontal pressure gradient force. Hence the wind flows parallel to isobar.

Polar jet streams have been found to flow at the highest speeds.

Jet streams are also found to occur on other planets where they blow due to solar heating or internal heat of the planet.

Hence, only statements 1 & 4 are correct.


Q 50.C









Q 51.A


     The observation that only one side of the moon is visible from the earth.

     The moon is in captured orbit. This means that it always keeps the same face towards the earth.
Therefore the moon rotates once around its axis for every orbit it makes round the earth (otherwise if it kept the same face, say, towards the sun, we would see it appear to rotate as it orbited the earth).



     The most popular argument regarding the origin of the universe is the Big Bang Theory. It is also called expanding universe hypothesis. Edwin Hubble, in 1920, provided evidence that the universe is expanding(red shift). As time passes, galaxies move further and further apart.


7                                                                www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
     Similarly,  the distance  between  the  galaxies  is  also  found  to  be  increasing  and  thereby,  the universe is considered to be expanding.

     Scientists believe that though the space between the galaxies is increasing, observations do not support the expansion of galaxies.


Q 52.C


     The point on the surface of the earth where the first earthquake wave is experienced is called epicentre.

     The earthquake waves travel faster in denser medium when compared to rarer medium.

     The shadow zone of S wave is larger than the P wave.


Q 53.D


When the air remains over a homogeneous area for a sufficiently longer time, it acquires the characteristics of the area. The homogenous regions can be the vast ocean surface or vast plains. The air with distinctive characteristics in terms of temperature and humidity is called an airmass. It is defined as a large body of air having little horizontal variation in temperature and moisture. The homogenous surfaces, over which air masses form, are called the source regions. The five major source regions are warm tropical and subtropical oceans, the subtropical hot deserts, relatively cold high latitude oceans, very cold snow covered continents in high latitudes and permanently ice covered continents in the Arctic and Antarctica.


Q 54.A


The variation of salinity in the various seas and oceans is affected by the following factors:

1.   Rate of evaporation. The waters fringing the High Pressure Belt of the Trade Wind Deserts, between
200 and 30oN. and S., have high salinity because of the high rate of evaporation caused by high
temperature  and  low  humidity.  The  temperate  oceans  have  lower  salinity  due  to  the  lower temperature and a lower rate of evaporation.

2.   The amount of fresh water added by precipitation, streams and icebergs. Salinity is lower than the average 35% in equatorial waters because of the heavy daily rainfall and high relative humidity. Oceans into which huge rivers like the Amazon, Congo, Ganges, Irrawaddy and Mekong drain, have much of their saltness diluted and have a lower salinity. The Baltic, Arctic and Antarctic waters have a salinity of less than 35% because of the colder climate with little evaporation and because much fresh water is added from the melting of icebergs, as well as by several large poleward-bound rivers, e.g. Ob, Lena, Yenisey, and Mackenzie.

3.   The degree of water mixing by currents. In wholly or partially enclosed seas such as the Caspian Sea, Mediterranean Sea, Red Sea and Persian Gulf, the waters do not mix freely with the ocean water and they are not penetrated by ocean currents. Salinity is high, often over 37%. In areas of inland drainage  without links  with the  oceans, continuous  evaporation under  an almost cloudless  sky causes the accumulation of salts around the shores. In the open oceans where currents freely flow, salinity tends to be near the average 35% or even a little lower. The range of salinity is negligible where there is free mixing of water by surface and sub-surface currents.


Q 55.C


EIA is done before the starting of any project, assessment start in very first stage.






8                                                                www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 56.C

   Igneous rocks are parent rocks and also known as primary rocks.

   Acidic igneous have more silica e.g Granite, whereas Basic igneous rocks have lower quantity of silica , e.g. Gabbro.

   Sedimentary rocks contain layers or strata, therefore often known as stratified rocks.

   Shale is not a metamorphic rock, its mechanically formed sedimentary rock. Marble, Quartzite, Slate, Schist, Gneiss are some common metamorphic rock types.

   Hence, both statements 1 and 3 are correct.


Q 57.D


The continental shelves off the Ganga, the Godavari, the Krishna and the Cauvery mouths have been formed through delta formation. The continental shelves from Midinapur to Madura are the result of sedimentation and consequent subsidence. The continental shelves off western coast are due to faulting and consequent submergence.


Q 58.A

    Wind deflection due to Coriolis force is maximum at the pole.
    Coriolis force does not affect the speed of the wind.


Q 59.B


Aurora are the curtains of brilliant coloured lights which appear on the dark nights. Where as sudden blinding which makes horizon vanish with no difference between white land and dull sky is known as white-out.


Q 60.B

     Fiord  coasts. Fiords  are  submerged  U-shaped  glacial  troughs.  They  mark  the  paths  of  glaciers  that plunged  down  from  the  highlands.  They  have  steep walls, often  rising  straight from  the  sea, with tributary branches joining the main inlet at right angles. Due to the greater intensity of ice erosion fiords are deep for great distances inland but there is a shallow section at the seaward end formed by a ridge of rock and called the threshold. Off the fiord coast are numerous islands or skerries which, with the shallow  thresholds, sometimes  only  200 feet deep,  complicate  coastal  navigation.  Fiord coasts  are almost entirely confined to the higher latitudes of the temperature regions which were once glaciated.


Q 61.B


The seismic zones are numbered as Zones- 2, 3, 4 and 5.


Q 62.A

     Sedimentary rocks do not occur in crystalline form and often contain fossils. They may be coarse or fine grained, soft or hard.


Q 63.B

1.   Higher precipitation in the Bay of Bengal than in the Arabian Sea.

2.   The Arabian Sea records higher salinity than the Bay of Bengal because there is higher rate of evaporation due to relatively less humid conditions and low influx of freshwater compared to the Bay of Bengal.

9                                                                www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
3.   Circulation of water mass from the Bay of Bengal to the Arabian Sea and vice-versa helps in maintaining salinity, not an enhancing factor.

4.   The Bay of Bengal receives more fresh water from rivers than the Arabian Sea.


Q 64.C

     Red and laterite soils are not rich in potash.


Q 65.B


Sunspots are dark & cooler patches on the sun’s surface. It is because of concentration of magnetic field that inhibits  convection  & result in reduced surface temperature when  compared  to surroundings. Hence, if they increase there is a slight decline in incoming insolation & earth becomes slightly cooler. Since, they are a magnetic phenomenon they impact the electromagnetic waves used in the communication. They increase and decrease in a cycle of about 11 years.

Hence, only statements 2 &  3 are correct.


Q 66.A

     Terrestrial planets lack a ring system and have very few natural satellites or no satellites.

     E.g. only Earth and Mars have one and two satellites respectively among all the 4 terrestrial planets
(namely Mercury, Venus, Earth and Mars)


Q 67.A

(i)   The drainage pattern resembling the branches of a tree is known as “dendritic” the examples of which are the rivers of northern plain.

(ii)  When the rivers originate from a hill and flow in all directions, the drainage pattern is known as ‘radial’.
The rivers originating from the Amarkantak range present a good example of it.

(iii) When the primary tributaries of rivers flow parallel to each other and secondary tributaries join them at
right angles, the pattern is known as ‘trellis’.

(iv) When the rivers discharge their waters from all directions in a lake or depression, the
pattern is know as ‘centripetal’.


Q 68.B


Mediterranean climate is mainly characterized by winter rain. It is due to shifting of wind belts with movement of the sun in summers, when the sun is overheated at the Tropic of Cancer, the belt of influence of the Westerlies is shifted a little polewards. Rain bearing winds are therefore not likely to reach the Mediterranean lands. The prevailing trade winds are off-shore and there is practically no rain. The air is dry, the heat is intense and the relative humidity is low. In winters, westerlies shift equatorwards. In winters, on-short westerlies bring much cyclonic rain from the ocean.


Q 69.C


Tides clear away the sediments brought by rivers, it helps in cleaning the coastal regions.


Q 70.A


How can whole water come down suddenly? Statement 1 is vague. A cloudburst is an extreme amount of precipitation, sometimes with hail and thunder, which normally lasts no longer than a few minutes but is capable of creating flood conditions. Colloquially, the term cloudburst may be used to describe any

10                                                              www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
sudden heavy, brief, and usually unforecastable rainfall. The rainfall of more than 100 mm per hour is classified as cloudburst and not 100 cm.


Q 71.C

     Brazil is the homeland of the rubber. The rubber tree was first found growing in the forest of amazon.
From here it was taken to the countries of Africa and Asia. But today its production is negligible Coffee was introduced in Brazil by the Portuguese more than 100 years ago. Today, Brazil is the largest producer and exporter of the coffee.


Q 72.C

    Important off shore island groups of India with extensive reef growth include the Andaman and Nicobar Islands in the Bay of Bengal and the Lakshadweep group of Islands in the Arabian sea. The Andaman and Nicobar islands have fringing reefs and a 320 km long barrier reef on the west coast. The Lakshadweep Islands are made up of atolls.


Q 73.C

     All the cyclones in India are tropical cyclones.

     The WMO/ESCAP Panel on Tropical Cyclones at its twenty-seventh Session held in 2000 in Muscat, Sultanate of Oman agreed in principal to assign names to the tropical cyclones in the Bay of Bengal and Arabian Sea. After long deliberations among the member countries, the naming of the tropical cyclones over north Indian Ocean commenced from September 2004.


Q 74.D


JFM is based on principle of community participation in the management of forests.


Q 75.C
     The equinox is experienced on two days each year (usually 21st March and 21st September) when the Sun is vertically overhead at the equator.


Q 76.A

     Conduction is the molecule-to-molecule transfer of heat energy as it diffuses through a substance.

     Convection takes place when the physical mixing involves a strong vertical motion. It is possible in only in liquids and gases.

     When horizontal motion dominates, the term advection applies.

     Hence only first and third statements are correct.


Q 77.B

     Unlike, the equatorial forests which are luxuriant and contain trees of various heights, coniferous forests are more uniform and grow straight and tall. Almost all conifers are evergreen. these are conical in shape. To check excessive transpiration, the leaves are small, thick, leathery and needle shaped.

     There are four major species in the coniferous forests e.g pine, fir, spruce and larch.


Q 78.D


Regions with monsoon climates receive rain in summers due to differential heating of the land and sea. In winters, wind blow away from land and thus, no rainfall during winter. The savanna type of climate is
11                                                              www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
characterized by an alternate hot, rainy season and cool, dry season. The annual rainfall is almost entirely concentrated in the summer. The prevailing winds of the region are the trade winds, which bring rain to the coastal districts. In the steppe climatic regions, winter rain is due to the depressions carried by westerlies and in summers due to convectional sources when continental interiors are intensely heated up. Mediterranean climate is mainly characterized by winter rain. It is due to shifting of wind belts with movement of the Sun. In winters, on-short westerlies bring much cyclonic rain from the ocean.


Q 79.B

    Due to anticyclonic conditions, winds are not able to rise which is necessary for rainfall.
    The winds here also blow from land and hence they are devoid of any moisture necessary for rainfall.
    Statement 3 is wrong. There is presence of cold current which causes desiccating effect which further reduces the possibility of rainfall.


Q 80.D


All the statements are correct


Q 81.B


The cool temperate western margin climate is also known as British type of climate. It is under the permanent influence of the westerlies all round. These are the regions of much cyclonic activities. The climate  is  equable  with  moderately  warm  summers  and  mild  winters.  The  natural  vegetation  is deciduous forests, they shed their leaves in the cold season.

Market gardening, mixed farming, sheep rearing and some other agricultural activities are practiced here for economic development. This climate is highly favorable for maximum human output.


Q 82.D


Sargasso sea is a region in North Atlantic Sea found between North Equatorial Current, Canaries current and Cayenne current and Gulf Stream.


Q 83.B




Q 84.C


Basic lavas are the hottest lavas and are highly fluid. They are rich in iron and magnesium but poor in silica. They spread out as thin sheet over great distances resulting in shield or dome.

     Both the magnetic poles are moving northward.

     The magnetic AXIS is not a straight line. Q 85.D
     In tropics albedo is maximum because of clouds, while near the poles because of increase in snow cover,
hence the minimum is in subtropical region.

     Albedo is the percent of incoming radiation that is directly reflected. Hence, always less than insolation.

     Hence, all statements are correct.


Q 86.A


The first statement is correct. A meteoris the flash of light seen from the earth when the debris burns up due to friction with atmosphere. A Meteorite is a larger fragment of rock that completes the journey to the Earth's surface without being destroyed.

12                                                              www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 87.B


Thunderstroms and tornadoes are local storms and are the manifestation of the atmosphere’s adjustments to varying energy distribution. They are of short duration, occurring over a small area but are violent. A tornado is a violently rotating column of air that is in contact with both the surface of the earth and a cumulonimbus cloud. From severe thunderstorms sometimes spiraling winds reaches to earth like an elephant trunk with a very low pressure at the centre, causing massive destruction on its way. Tornadoes generally occur in middle latitudes. The tornado over the sea is called water sprouts.


Q 88.C

     A gorge is a deep valley with very steep to straight sides and a canyon is characterised by steep step like side slopes and may be as deep as a gorge.

     A canyon is a variant of gorge.

     Canyons commonly form in horizontal bedded sedimentary rocks and gorges form in hard rocks.


Q 89.C

     It is known as the golden fibre. Jute grows well on well-drained fertile soils in the flood plains where soils are renewed every year. High temperature is required during the time of growth. West Bengal, Bihar, Assam, Orissa and Meghalaya are the major jute producing states. It is used in making gunny bags, mats, ropes, yarn, carpets and other artefacts. Due to its high cost, it is losing market to synthetic fibres and packing materials, particularly the nylon.

     Kharif crops are grown with the onset of monsoon in different parts of the country and

     These are harvested in September-October. Important crops grown during this season are Paddy, maize, jowar, bajra, tur (arhar), moong, urad, cotton, jute, groundnut and soyabean.


Q 90.D


1. 2000-5000 liters of water is needed to produce one person's daily food.

2. Water is primary medium through which the climate change impacts the earth's ecosystem.

3. Fresh water is 2.5% of total water on earth.


Q 91.B

     Statement 1 and 3 are correct.

     Homosphere extends up to the Mesopause.

     Thermosphere is divided into two layers viz. (i) ionosphere, and (ii) exosphere
Q 92.D Q 93.A
     Asthenosphere is the upper portion of the mantle.


Q 94.D


Both statements are incorrect. The belt explained in first is called as bhabar and in second is called as bhangar. Question interchanged the definitions.



13                                                              www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 95.C


A glacial plateau does not mean formed by the glaciers, rather its a plateau modified and transformed by glacial actions. Plateaus formed at the foothill zone of extensive mountains is called Piedmont plateau. Fourth statement is correct.


Q 96.A


Only statement 1 is correct. It is not suited for livestock farming because the grasses are not nutrition in these regions. They get maximum rainfall during winters instead of summers.


Q 97.D


Playa lakes (also called dry lakes) are formed by streams that flow into lower depression. They contain high percentage of salts because of high evaporation and are glistening white on drying up.


Q 98.C


With the exception of the Nile and the Zaire, few African rivers can be used for shipping. This is because the rivers drop from the higher plateaus to the coastal lowlands making waterfalls. So because of these frequent waterfalls shipping is impossible in the Africa. One of the special physical features of Africa is its Great Rift Valley. A rift valley is a long and deep valley formed due to cracks or rifts in the land. In Africa there is a long chain of such rift valleys. Many of these valleys are filled with water called as lakes. Therefore, there are several large lakes in the highland region of the North Africa.


Q 99.A


Lake Baikal is the deepest lake in the world with a maximum depth of 1,632m . It is also the world's largest volume of fresh water 23,000 cubic km. More than 300 streams and rivers flow into Lake Baikal, but there is just one outlet, the Angara.


Q 100.D

Most of the hotspot areas are in the tropical zone.





















Copyright © by Vision IAS
All  rights  are  reserved.  No  part  of  this  document  may  be  reproduced,  stored  in  a  retrieval  system  or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise,
without prior permission of Vision IAS


14                                                              www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
