GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1565

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

1. Rock salt is often sprinkled on  frozen roads and walkways to melt ice. This  practice is effective primarily because the salt:
(a)  Decreases the freezing point of the water. (b)  Breaks the covalent bonds within the water
molecules.

(c)  Increases the temperature of the water.

(d)  Eliminates the hydrogen bonds between the water molecules.


2. A lubricant is a substance introduced to reduce friction between moving surfaces.A good lubricant possesses the following characteristics :-

1. High  boiling point.

2. Low freezing point.

3. High  resistance to oxidation.

4. High  tribo-electric effect.

Select the correct answer using the code given below

(a)  1 and 3 only       (b)  1, 2 and 3 only

(c)  2 and 4 only       (d)  1, 2, 3 and 4


3. Which of the following statements describes the difference between endothermic and exothermic chemical reactions :-

(a)  Energy is absorbed in endothermic reactions but is released in exothermic reactions.

(b)  Energy is conserved in endothermic reactions but is not conserved in exothermic reactions.

(c)  Endothermic reactions involve changes in the nucleus of an atom, but exothermic reactions do  not involve changes in the nucleus.

(d)  Endothermic reactions occur when electrons are shared between atoms, but exothermic reactions occur when electrons are transferred between atoms.


4. Potassium Permanganate is a poisonous salt that forms dark purple crystals and is purple-red when dissolved in water. Potassium Permanganate is used for  purifying drinking water, because

(a)  it is a sterilising agent means it eliminates or kills
all forms of microbial life  including transmissible agents such as fungi, bacteria, viruses, spore forms etc.

(b)  it dissolves the impurities of water which are biological and chemical.

(c)  it is a reducing agent means it is the substance that causes the reduction of another element.

(d)  it is an oxidising agent means it has the ability to add oxygen, remove hydrogen or remove electrons from an element or compound.


5. The  international emphasis on  the recycling of aluminum has been successful primarily because :-

(a)  Strict laws associated with recycling enacted in many states enforce the return of aluminum cans.

(b)  There is an ethical incentive for  the consumers to recycle aluminum cans.

(c)  The  extraction of aluminum from ore uses a significantly greater amount of energy than recycling.

(d)  Mining aluminum ore has become unprofitable under current environmental laws.


6. Consider the following statement-

1. Magnetite is chemically formulated as Fe2O3.

2. Odisha has the largest desposits of Manganese.

3. Nickel is used to harden steel.

4. Raipur and Bastar is one of the diamond bearing region in India.

Which of the above statement is/are correct? (a)  1, 2 and 3 only  (b)  1, 2 and 4 only
(c)  3 and 4 only       (d)  1, 2, 3 and 4



7. Which of the following statements is right explanation about 'Oxygen toxicity' :-

(a)  It is a medical condition caused by  exposure to oxygen at high pressure.

(b)  It is a medical condition caused by  deficiency of oxygen at high altitude.

(c)  It is a medical condition caused by  deficiency of
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1565

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

oxygen and exposure of carbon monoxide.

(d)  It is a medical condition caused by  deficiency of oxygen and exposure of carbon dioxide.


8. Consider the following statement about Lamp
Black:


1. It was traditionally produced by  collecting soot from oil lamps.

2. It is the most pure form of carbon allotrope.

3. The  root is used in making printing ink,  shoe polish and eye – root or kajal.

Which one of the above statement is/are correct? (a)  1 only                  (b)  1 and 2 only
(c)  2 and 3 only      (d)  1, 2 and 3


9. Solids may be considered to be either crystalline or non-crystalline. The  basic difference between them is that a crystal, in contrast to a non-crystal :-

(a)  has a sharp melting point.

(b)  has an irregular array of atoms. (c)  exhibits double refraction.
(d)  has a completely regular atomic or molecular structure.


10. Which greenhouse gases are included in the
Kyoto protocol?

(a)  Carbon Dioxide, Methane, Nitrous Oxide, Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs), and Sulphur Hexafluoride.

(b)  Carbon Dioxide, Methane, HFCs,  PFCs, Tetrafluoro Methane, Nitrogen Trifluoride

(c)  Carbon Dioxide, Methane, Nitrous Oxide, HFCs, Hexafluoro Ethane, Nitrogen Trifluoride

(d)  Carbon Dioxide, Methane, PFCs,  Sulphur Hexafluoride, Tetrafluoro Methane, Nitrogen Trifluoride


11. Alpha glucose and beta glucose are important forms of glucose which are essential in human metabolism. What is/are differences between Alpha and Beta Glucose?
1. Alpha glucose has the more number of carbon atoms, hydrogen atoms, and oxygen atoms than beta glucose.

2. Alpha glucose is compact, yet its molecules can be easily taken apart on  the other hand, the molecules of beta glucose are very stable hence they cannot be easily taken apart.

3. Starch is made up of chains of alpha glucose while cellulose, or fiber, is made up of chains of beta glucose.

4. The  tasty parts of the plants are usually made up of chains of alpha glucose while the hard parts of plants are usually made up of chains of beta glucose.

Select the correct answer using the code given below:

(a)  1 and 2 only        (b)  1, 3 and 4 only

(c)  2, 3 and 4 only    (d)  1, 2, 3 and 4


12. Observations from lakes in areas with granitic bedrock indicate that lakes are becoming depleted
of living organisms. The  primary cause is considered to be:

1. Lowered water levels

2. Garbage dumping

3. Oil spills

4. Acid  rain

Select the correct answer using the code given below

(a)  1, 2, 3 and 4      (b)  1 only

(c)  2 only                 (d)  4 only


13. The  six  noble gases that occur naturally are helium, neon, argon, krypton, xenon and the radioactive radon.These are chemical elements with similar properties under standard conditions.Which of the following properties is/are similar between them :-

1. They are odorless.

2. They are colorless.

3. They have very low  chemical reactivity.

4. Heat capacity is the same for  all.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1565

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1 and 3 only         (b)  1 and 2 only

(c)  2, 3 and 4 only     (d)  1, 2, 3 and 4


14. Which of the following are produced  in a biogas plant?

1. Hydrogen sulphide

2. Hydrogen

3. Methanedf

(a)  3 only                 (b)  1 and 3 only


(c)  2 and 3 only     (d)  None of the above



15. Particulates are small pieces of solid material dispersed into the atmosphere. Which of the following statements is/are true about different types of this?


1. Mist  - Aerosol consisting of solid particles that are blown into the air  or are produced from larger particles by  grinding them down.

2. Fume - same as smoke but often applies specifically to aerosols produced by  condensation of hot vapors of metals.

3. Plume - Geometrical shape or form of the smoke coming out of a chimney

4. Fog  - Aerosol consisting of any liquid droplets

Select the correct answer using the code given below

(a)  1 and 2 only           (b)  2 and 3 only

(c)  1, 3 and 4 only       (d)  1 and 4 only


16. Dry  Ice, consider the following statements:

1. It is   the solid form of carbon dioxide.

2. It is used primarily as a cooling agent.

3. It has lower temperature than that of water ice and does not leave any residue.

4. Earth has vast blankets of dry  ice.
Which of the above statements is/are correct? (a)  2 and 3        (b)  1, 2 and 3
(c)  1, 2 and 4     (d)  2, 3 and 4


17. Hot  air  balloons rise to the sky  because of the fundamental property of the hot air  filled in them. Which of the following statements is/are true about this :-
1. It is driven by  breeze and so there is no  control over the flight path.

2. Balloon rises to find  its equilibrium with the surrounding air.
3. Ballon stays in the air  because of buoyant force. Select the correct answer using the code given
below.

(a)  1 and 2 only      (b)  2 and 3 only

(c)  1 and 3 only      (d)  1 , 2 and 3


18. By which of the following processes will make cooking of liquid food faster?

1. Putting lead on  vessel

2. Adding more salt to it

3. Adding more oil to it

(a)  1 only             (b)  1 and 2

(c)  1 and 3          (d)  1, 2 and 3


19. Which of the following statements is/are true?

1. Gunmetal is resistant to corrosion from steam and salt water.

2. Gunmetal is a type of bronze.
3. Copper are Tin are ingredients of gun metal. Select the correct answer using the code given
below.

(a)  2 and 3 only     (b)  1 and 3 only

(c)  1 and 2 only     (d)  1, 2 and 3


20. Now  a days, often it happens that the alcoholics, by  mistake, drink ethanol, mixed with methanol also called denatured alcohol, which results in blindness
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1565

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

and death. Which one of the following statements is most plausible reason for  blindness and death?

(a)  In the body, methanol is metabolized first to formaldehyde and then to formic acid, which most cause blindness by  destructing optic nerve and can be fatal due to its CNS depressant properties.

(b)  In the body, methanol is readily absorbed and due to its solubility in fats, it destroy the lipid structure of plasma membrance and hence causing large scale cell  death including the cell  of cornea and brain.

(c)  Methanol reacts with alcohol under the effect of some biological enzymes and hence it causes ethanol poisoning.

(d)  Methanol is absorbed by  the blood and instantly stops the sodium-potassium pump (Na+ - K+  pump)


21. Which of the following is MOST  soluble in the water?


(a)  Norcamphor, a camphor derivative with the three methyl groups replaced by  hydrogen.
(b)  Sulfur with the activated carbon in the water. (c)  Common salt,because when dissolved in water
the sodium chloride dissociates in Na+ ions and Cl-
ions.

(d)  Sugar, because sucrose is a polar molecule.


22. Which of the following statements is/are true about “Black Box”  ?

1. Black Box  is a common term for  Flight Recorder.

2. Black Box  has two components Flight Data
Recorder and Cockpit Voice Recorder.


3. Black box is usually bright orange in colour. (a)  1 and 2            (b)  1 and 3
(c)  2 and 3            (d)  1, 2 and 3


23. Allotropy is the property of some chemical elements to exist in two or more different forms.Carbon is capable of forming many allotropes due to its valency. Among the various allotropes of carbon:-

(a)  Coke is the hardest, graphite is the softest
(b)  Diamond is the hardest, coke is the softest

(c)  Diamond is the hardest, graphite is the softest

(d)  Diamond is the hardest, lamp black is the softest


24. A cobalt chloride solution soaked into a piece of cotton can be used as an indicator for  changes in humidity levels by  its colour.Which of the following statements is/are true about this :-

1. Pink  indicates a high-humidity environment.

2. Pink  a low-humidity environment.

3. color changes caused by  the loss and readsorption of the cobalt's waters of hydration.

4. color changes caused by  the vaporization and redeposition of cobalt chloride.

Select the correct answer using the code given below

(a)  1 and 3 only       (b)  1 and 4 only

(c)  2 and 3 only       (d)  2 and 4 only


25. Which of the following statements are correct about “Bitcoin”?

1. Bitcoin is a peer-to-peer payment system introduced as open source software.

2. It was introduced by  developer Satoshi Nakamoto in 2009.

3. Any number of Bitcoins can be generated by  the process known as “mining”.

4. Bitcoin is the preferred currency of Silk Road, the online market place for  drugs.

(a)  1, 2 and 3        (b)  2, 3 and 4 (c)  1, 3 and 4        (d)  1, 2 and 4

26. Two  hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom makes a water molecule. Heavy water is also water, but it contains a higher proportion of the hydrogen isotope – deuterium. Which of the following statements is/are differences between Water and Heavy Water?


1. Heavy water has a higher freezing when compared to water.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1565

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

2. Heavy water has a lower boiling point when compared to water.

3. Heavy water has a higher dynamic viscosity when compared to water.

4. Heavy water has a lower surface tension when compared to water.

Select the correct answer using the code given below:

(a)  1 and 2 only    (b)  3 and 4 only

(c)  1 and 3 only    (d)  1, 2, 3 and 4


27. Consider the following processes

1. Photosynthesis

2. Food presentation

3. Refrigerant

4. Preparation of soft drinks

5. Fire  extinguishers

In which of the above processes carbon dioxide is used?

(a)  1, 3 and 5 only    (b)  1, 2, and 4 only

(c)  3, 4 and 5 only    (d)  1, 2, 3, 4, 5


28. Which of the following statements best describes what happens to water during evaporation:

(a)  The  temperature of the water increases until the water molecules react with the air.

(b)  Water molecules on  the surface overcome intermolecular forces and change into the gas phase.

(c)  Water molecules on  the surface come in contact with air  molecules and are pulled into the gas phase.

(d)  The  temperature of the water increases until the water molecules separate and form oxygen and hydrogen gas.


29. In science, the terms diffusion and osmosis are two kinds of movement that does not require energy. What is the Difference Between Diffusion and Osmosis?
(a)  Unlike the osmosis Diffusion occurs from higher concentration to a field of lower concentration.

(b)  Unlike the Diffusion, Osmosis can also occurs in living things.

(c)  In osmosis it mostly involves movement of water molecules.

(d)  Diffusion is limited to occur in liquids only.


30. Which of the following statements is/are true about CFCs  (Chloro-fluorocarbons)?

1. These are non-flammable.

2. These are non-toxic.

3. Their structure is same as that Halons.
4. The  CFCs  and the halons are heavier than air. Select the correct answer using the code given
below

(a)  1 and 3 only          (b)  1 and 4 only

(c)  2 and 3 only          (d)  1, 2, 3 and 4


31. Which of the following is/are the examples of colloids  :-

1. Colddrink

2. Gels

3. Foams

4. Saltwater

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1 and 4 only     (b)  2 only

(c)  2 and 3 only     (d)  4 only


32. Consider the following statements about free radicals in the body.

1. These are highly reactive radicals which can damage the cells.

2. To prevent free radical damage the body has a defence system of antioxidants.

3. Vitamin C and E are the chief anti oxidants used by  the people.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1565

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Which of the following statements is/are correct? (a)  2 and 3 only    (b)  1 and 3 only
(c)  2 only                (d)  1, 2 and 3



33. Diamond is an excellent electrical insulator but it is a good thermal conductor. Could explain the
above mention property of diamond.


(a)  Diamond is the strongest material thus has very high thermal conductivity.

(b)  An ideal crystals has very good thermal conductivity.

(c)  Thermal conduction in diamond is caused by moving electrons.

(d)  Density of diamond is very high which is directly proportional to thermal conductivity.


34. Cobalt has an atomic mass of 59 and an atomic number of 27. What does this information reveal about cobalt atoms ?


1. They contain more neutrons than protons.

2. They naturally have a net negative charge.

3. They attract protons more strongly than electrons.
4. They form ions with a charge of +2 in compounds. Select the correct answer using the code given
below.

(a)  1 only                (b)  1 and 3 only

(c)  2 and 4 only      (d)  1 and 4 only


35. Carbon monoxide is a poisonous gas. Which of the following statements is/are correct about Carbon mono-oxide?


1. Carbon monoxide is a colorless gas.

2. Carbon monoxide is a odorless.

3. It combines with the hemoglobin of the blood.

4. It depletes the dissolved oxygen in the blood by forming carbon dioxide.
Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  4 only                  (b)  1, 2 and 3 only

(c)  2 and 3 only      (d)  1, 2, 3 and 4


36. Metals are good conductors of electricity but they are good conductors of heats also. Which of the following statement explains the reason behind good conduction of heat?

(a)  It is because they contain free electrons and the electrons are free to move in a network of metal atom.

(b)  It is because the molecules inside metal are closely packed together.
(c)  It is because  they have very high melting point. (d)  It is because metallic bonds are made from a
lattice of ions.


37. Which of the following statements is/are true:-

1. NaHCO3 is a sodium salt of carbonic acid and it is also known as washing soda or soda ash.

2. Na2CO3 has long been known and is widely used salt and has many related names such as baking soda, bread soda, cooking soda.

Select the correct answer using the code given below

(a)  1 only               (b)  2 only

(c)  1 and 2            (d)  None of these


38. Consider the following statements regarding
Virtual labs:


1. Virtual labs is an initiative by  Ministry of Science and Technology under the National Mission on Education through ICT (NMEICT).

2. Its  objective is to provide remote-access to Labs in various disciplines of Science and Engineering.

3. These Virtual Labs would cater to students at the undergraduate level, post graduate level as well  as to research scholars.

4. It will have features of simulation, data sharing and real time Remotely triggering an experiment in an actual lab.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1565

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Which of the above statements is/are correct? (a)  1, 2 and 3 only   (b)  1, 2 and 4 only
(c)  2, 3 and 4 only   (d)  1, 2, 3 and 4


39. Which of the following statements is/are correct?

1. A flame is produced only when gaseous substances burn.

2. A luminous flame is seen when the atoms of gaseous substance are heated and start to glow.

(a)  1 only                 (b)  2 only

(c)  Both 1 and 2     (d)  Neither 1 nor 2



40. Which of the following statements is/are correct about Vitamin C?

1. Vitamin C is water soluble and is not readily stored in the human body.

2. Deficiency of Vitamin C causes Scurvy. (a)  Only  1                (b)  Only  2
(c)  Both 1 and 2     (d)  Neither 1 nor 2



41. Which of the following statement/s is/are true?

1. Crystalline silicon solar cells dominate the market currently whereas thin film  technology occupies a minor share.

2. Thin  film  solar cells have higher energy conversion efficiency than crystalline silicon cells.

3. Crystalline Silicon based solar cells are cheaper than thin film  solar cells.

(a)  1 only              (b)  1 and 2

(c)  2 and 3           (d)  1, 2 and 3


42. As the temperature of a gas increases, the density of the gas will decrease if it is allowed to expand. This  property of gases is most directly involved in which of the following?

(a)  Convection currents in the atmosphere that occur on  warm days.

(b)  Condensation of water vapor from moist air  on
cool nights.

(c)  Evaporation of water vapor from lake surfaces on hot days.

(d)  Sublimation of water vapor from snow fields on cold dry  days.


43. Which of the following statements is/are correct about the light produced when an object is burnt?


(a)  Because the bond energies of   atoms are liberated breaking of bonds.

(b)  Because bond energies of atoms liberated is more than the energy consumed.

(c)  Hydrogen act like  fuel in these objects. (d)  Carbon act like  fuel in these objects.

44. Copper was and is used even today to layer the boats made of wood because?

(a)  Copper is a metal which is water repellant and hence prevents the decay of wood from sea water

(b)  It is cheap and hence preferred to be used to protect the boat form impact of water

(c)  Copper has anti-bacterial properties that prevent the decay of wood form sea organisms

(d)  Copper increases the mechanical strength of ship unlike any other metal does


45. Which of the following materials can be considered under "poly-metallic sulphides" , which would be recovered through deep sea mining?

1. Precious metals

2. Rare earth materials

3. Radio active materials

(a)  1, 2 and 3         (b)  1 only

(c)  1 and 2            (d)  2 and 3


46. Liquid water is heated and converted into steam. Consider the following statements:

1. It is an exothermic reaction

2. There is an increase in volume
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1565

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

3. Heat stored in steam is same as that of water at
1000C

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1 only                (b)  1 and 2 (c)  2 only                (d)  2 and 3

47. The  technical definition of pH is that it is a measure of the activity of the hydrogen ion  (H+). Which of the following statements is/are true about this?


1. The  pH scale ranges from 0 -14  and In the scale the reading 0 denotes the neutral point.

2. Normal rainwater has a pH of slightly base.

3. The  pH of drinking water falls in the range of 6.5-
8.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  3 only                 (b)  1 and 2 only

(c)  2 and 3 only     (d)  1, 2 and 3


48. Consider the following statements about lethal injection (used for  capital punishments in some countries):

1. Generally two drugs are used in a lethal injection, first to cause muscle paralysis and respiratory arrest and second to stop the heart.

2. The  drugs are injected simultaneously into the body of the subject.

3. The  European Union has banned export of certain medical products which are used for  capital punishment.

4. All the states of USA (which have not abolished capital punishment) use only this method for  capital punishment.

Which of the above statements is/are incorrect? (a)  1 and 2                (b)   2, 3 and 4
(c)  1, 2 and 4             (d)  1 and 4


49. Silicon Carbide is used in many activities. Which of the following is NOT one of them?
(a)  Making of a Glass Ionomer Cement.

(b)  Lightning arresters in electric power systems. (c)  Popular abrasive in modern lapidary.
(d)  High  performance "ceramic" brake discs.


50. Alpha rays are different from Beta rays in one of the following ways:


(a)  Alpha rays are deflected in a magnetic field and beta rays are not.

(b)  Alpha rays are identical to the electron in mass, and beta rays are not.

(c)  Alpha rays have a positive charge and beta rays have a negative charge.

(d)  Alpha rays are produced within the nucleus and beta rays are produced outside the nucleus.


51. Which of the following statements is/are true about the inert gases?


1. These gases are low  melting.

2. These gases have weak inter-atomic force.

3. These gases are sparingly soluble.

4. These gases are low  boiling points.

Select the correct answer using the code given below

(a)  1 and 3 only       (b)  2 and 4 only

(c)  1, 2 and 4 only   (d)  1, 2, 3 and 4


52. HCl is dissolved in solvent A, the solution is non- conducting towards an electric current. Solvent A can be :-

1. Polar.

2. Non-polar.

3. Organic.

4. More acidic than HCl.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1565

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

(a)  1 and 3 only        (b)  2, 3 and 4 only

(c)  2 only                  (d)  2 and 3 only


53. Rate of chemical reaction is changed by changing which of the following constituents:

1. Pressure

2. Temperature

3. Amount of reactants

4. Surface area of reactants

(a)  1, 2 and 3             (b)  1 and 2 (c)  2, 3 and 4             (d)  2 and 4

54. Consider the following reasons as to why
Nitrogen gas is used in the tyres of airplane?

1. It is lighter than air

2. It is relatively inert compared to air

3. It does not contain water vapor unlike air

Select the correct answer using the code given below.


(a)  1 and 2 only                     (b)  1 and 3 only

(c)  2 and 3 only                     (d)  1, 2 and 3


55. Which of the following best describes the process of fossil fuel formation :-

(a)  Fossil fuels formed millions of years ago in massive deposits during an unusually warm period and are not currently forming.

(b)  Fossil fuels form over hundreds of years from the rapid decay of organic matter in shallow oxygen-
rich ponds and swamps.

(c)  Fossil fuel formation is ongoing and involves the burial and slow transformation of carbonate rocks under high-pressure conditions.

(d)  Fossil fuels form over millions of years from the buried remains of organic matter deposited in low- oxygen aqueous environments.


56. Which of the following is the primary reason for adding calcium carbonate to the reduction process
of iron oxide ores:-

(a)  The  calcium carbonate acts as an oxidizing agent.

(b)  The  calcium carbonate removes silicate waste products.
(c)  The  calcium carbonate acts as a reducing agent. (d)  The  calcium carbonate removes sulfur waste
products.


57. Which of the following is produced in coal based thermal power plants?

1. Fly ash

2. Mercury

3. Sulphur dioxide

(a)  3 only                     (b)  1 and 3 only

(c)  1 only                     (d)  1, 2 and 3


58. Sunscreen is a lotion, spray, gel or other topical product that absorbs or reflects some of the sun's ultraviolet (UV) radiation on  the skin exposed to sunlight and thus helps protect against sunburn. With  reference  to above, Which of the following statements is correct about:

(a)  Sunscreen works by  passing energy from the light to promote an electron from a bonding or non- bonding orbital into one of the empty anti-bonding orbitals.

(b)  Sunscreen works by  creating a layer with index of refraction different from air  that provides a reflection

(c)  Sunscreen works by  reflecting the light and energy from the sun using a moisture layer and sending most of it back instead of letting it warm the skin.

(d)  Sunscreen works by  scattering ultraviolet radiation and dissipating it as heat.


59. Which of the following statements is/are true :-

1. Soaps are sodium or potassium salts of heavier fatty acids.

2. Common salt help in separating soap from the solution after saponification by  decreasing density of Soap.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1565

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1 only                 (b)  2 only

(c)  1 and 2              (d)  None of these


60. Which of the following statements is/are true about Base Solution :-

1. It reacts with metals to produce a metal salt and hydrogen.

2. It gives soapy feel on  fingers.

3. It turns red litmus blue.

4. It is a conductor of electricity.
Select the correct answer using the code given below
(a)  1 and 3 only        (b)  2, 3 and 4 only
(c)  3 and 4 only        (d)  1, 2, 3 and 4


61. Which of the following statements hold good for the given graph?


1. 'A' represents isochoric process


2. 'C'  represent isobaric process

3. 'D'  represents isobaric process (a)  Only  1                 (b)  1 and 3 (c)  2 and 3              (d)  1 and 2

62. Consider the following statements-

1. LPG releases less CO2  per unit of energy than does coal or oil.

2. LPG consists of mainly methane, ethane and hexane.

3. LPG is heavier than air.
4. LPG has very strong smell unlike other natural gases.

Select the correct statements using the code given below

(a)  1 and 4 only          (b)  1 and 3 only

(c)  3 only                      (d)  1 , 2 , 3 and 4


63. Which of the following statements is/are true about Sulfuric Acid  :-

1. Sulphuric acid is a protonating agent.

2. During electrolysis of a dilute aqueous solution of sulfuric acid its concentration decreases.

3. It is used to remove a molecule of water from organic compounds.

4. It is also an oxidizing agent.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1 only                    (b)  1, 2 and 3 only

(c)  1, 3 and 4 only    (d)  1, 2, 3 and 4


64. Which of the following statements is/are true about coal liquefaction?

1. Indirect liquefaction is done by  coal gasification and subsequent conversion of synthesis gas to liquid products

2. Direct liquefaction of coal is done by  catalytic hydrogenation of coal.

(a)  1 only            (b)  Both 1 and 2

(c)  2 only            (d)   Neither 1 nor 2



65. Consider the following statements:

1. Liquid oxygen is used as oxidant in rockets to burn the fuel.

2. A mixture of oxygen and nitrous oxide is used as anesthesia in surgical operations

3. Iron  impurities are removed by  burning in presence of oxygen.

4. Oxygen is mixed with or acetylenc for  welding purposes.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1565

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Which one of the above statements is/are correct? (a)  1, 2 and 3 only   (b)  2, 3 and 4 only
(c)  1, 2 and 4 only   (d)  1, 2, 3 and 4


66. A colligative property depends on  :-

1. Chemical properties of particles in system.

2. Physical properties of particles in system.
3. Number of particles present in system. Select the correct answer using the code given
below.

(a)  1 only           (b)  2 only

(c)  3 only           (d)  1, 2 and 3


67. Consider the following statements regarding hydrogen energy:

1. Hydrogen has highest energy content per unit mass among known fuels

2. It burns to produce water as a by-product, therefore, environmental friendly fuel.

3. Globally, about 96% of hydrogen is produced presently through  electrolysis of water. About 4% hydrogen is produced using hydrocarbons.

4. It is also possible to store it in solid state in the form of metal hydrides, liquid organic hydrides, carbon nano-structures and in chemicals.

Which of the above statements is/are correct? (a)  1, 2 and 3 only    (b)  1, 2 and 4 only
(c)  2, 3 and 4 only    (d)  1, 2, 3 and 4


68. Which of the following are properties of Aerogels

1. Extremely Low Density

2. High  Thermal Conductivity

3. Dessicant

4. Transparent

5. Friability

(a)  1, 2 and 5              (b)  1, 2 and 3
(c)  1, 3 and 5              (d)  1, 2, 4 and 5


69. Oxygen is required by  organisms because it reacts with

(a)  Carbon dioxide to release energy. (b)  Carbon dioxide to store energy. (c) Glucose to store energy.
(d)  Glucose to release energy.


70. Which of the following statements is/are true if a cup of hot chocolate cools from 100°C to 80°C:

1. Rate of motion of the molecules of the liquid will decrease.

2. Valence electrons of the molecules of the liquid will be lost.

3. Positions of the molecules of the liquid will become fixed in crystals.

4. Average distance from adjacent  molecules will increase.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1 only             (b)  1 and 3 only

(c)  2 only             (d)  2 and 4 only


71. Which of the following elements is/are liquid at room temperature.  :-

1. Bromine

2. Argon

3. Radon

4. Mercury

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1 and 4 only       (b)  4 only

(c)  1, 3 and 4 only   (d)  1, 2, 3 and 4


72. Carbohydrates are complex sugar molecules composed of more than two and up to ten sugar molecules are termed as oligosaccharides. Which of the following statements is/are differences between
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1565

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Sugars and Carbohydrates :-

1. Sugars are soluble in water while carbohydrates are insoluble in water.

2. Sugars have a sweet taste while carbohydrates are not sweet.

3. Carbohydrates are readily digested in the body while Sugars have to be broken down into simpler molecules before being digested.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1 and 2 only       (b)  2 and 3 only

(c)  1 and 3 only       (d)  1, 2 and 3


73. Which of the following statements is/are true about Acid  Solution :-

1. It tastes bitter.

2. It feels slippery to the touch

3. It turns red litmus blue.

4. It is a conductor of electricity.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1 and 3 only    (b)  4 only

(c)  3 and 4 only    (d)  1, 2, 3 and 4


74. Which of the following statements is/are correct about an organic liquid?


1. An organic liquid will generally have a specific gravity greater than that of water.

2. Specific gravity is the ratio of density of a substance compared to the density of fresh water at
0 C.

Select the correct answer using the code given below

(a)  1 only                 (b)  2 only

(c)  1 and 2             (d)  None of these


75. In water softening, which of the following processes are performed?
1. Filtration

2. Adding caustic soda

3. Boiling

(a)  1 Only                     (b)  2 only


(c)  1 and 2 only     (d)  1, 2 and 3


76. Almond milk  and Soya milk  are considered good for  the health as they come with high nutritional value.Which of the following statements is/are correct about them :-

1. When compared to Almond milk, the Soya milk comes with more proteins.

2. When compared to Almond milk, the Soya milk delivers more calories.

3. A person who needs more minerals and vitamins should go  for  soya milk  than almond milk.

4. A person having high cholesterol should take soya milk  than almond milk.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  2 and 3 only        (b)  1, 2 and 4 only

(c)  3 and 4 only        (d)  1, 2, 3 and 4


77. Which of the following properties is greater for  a solution than for  the pure solvent :-

1. Freezing point

2. Vapor pressure

3. Temperature

4. Boiling point

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1 and 4 only     (b)  2 and 3 only

(c)  4 only                 (d)  1, 3 and 4 only


78. Allotropic modifications of phosphorus include which of the following :-

1. Red phosphorus.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1565

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

2. Black phosphorus.

3. White phosphorus.

4. Green phosphorus.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1 and 2 only           (b)  2, 3 and 4 only

(c)  1, 2 and 3 only       (d)  1, 2, 3 and 4


79. Graphite is used as a good lubricant.Which of the following is primary reason behind this :-

(a)  Cubic structure and its low  surface energy.

(b)  It is formulated with additives that form chemical bonds with surfaces,

(c)  Its  stable unflocculated dispersions in oil or water.

(d)  Hexagonal structure allows the layers to slide past each other.


80. The  common alloy, babbit metal, which is composed of tin, antimony, and copper, is best known for  its use in:-

1. Magnets

2. Bearings

3. Dental fillings

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1 only              (b)  1 and 2 only

(c)  2 only              (d)  2 and 3 only


81. Lead, at certain contact degrees, is a poisonous substance to animals, including humans then why pencil lead is not/less harmful?

(a)  Pencil lead is not lead at all.

(b)  Pencil lead is a combination of graphite , clay and very small amount of lead which is very less
harmful.

(c)  Only  a long term contact of Pencil lead will be harmful.

(d)  Its  only harmful if it gets inside our body.

82. Tetraethyllead is an organolead compound. It is used as:

(a)  An analgesic, drug used to achieve relief from pain.

(b)  A fire  extinguisher, an active fire  protection device used to extinguish or control small fires.

(c)  An insect repellent, a substance applied to skin, clothing, or other surfaces which discourages insects from landing or climbing on.

(d)  A gasoline additive, increase gasoline's octane rating or act as corrosion inhibitors or lubricants.


83. Why  are fishes not able to survive in distilled water:

(a)  Gills can not produce require oxygen in the distilled water.

(b)  Sound vibrations in distilled water is much more than normal water.
(c)  Minerals in the distilled water are not sufficient. (d)  Concentration inside the fish  is much higher than
distilled water.


84. Deliquescence is a property of a substance. Which of the following statements best describes it?


(a)  The  process by  which a substance absorbs undesirable chemicals from water.

(b)  The  process by  which a substance absorbs moisture from the atmosphere.

(c)  The  process by  which fine particles of one substance are scattered throughout another substance.

(d)  The  process by  which a substance separates into atoms or ions at high temperatures.


85. Consider the following statements regarding
SYNGAS:

1. Syngas or synthesis gas is a mixture of carbon monoxide and hydrogen gases in varying amounts.

2. Syngas can be converted into gasoline through a process called steam reforming.

Which of the above statements is or are correct?
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1565

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

(a)  1 only               (b)  2 only


(c)  Both 1 and 2   (d)  Neither 1 nor 2



86.  Wood Alcohol was once produced chiefly as a byproduct of the destructive distillation of wood. Which of the following statements is/are correct about this?

1. Ethanol is known as Wood Alcohol.

2. It is a colorless liquid.

3. It is a flammable liquid.

4. It ingested in large quantities is metabolized to formic acid, which is poisonous to the central nervous system.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1, 2 and 3 only      (b)  2 and 3 only

(c)  2, 3 and 4 only      (d)  1, 2, 3 and 4


87. According to recent researches  the juice of papaya leaf has been found to be useful in the treatment of   which of the following diseases?

1. Dengue

2. Malaria

3. Tetanus

4. Cancer

(a)  1 and 2      (b)  2, 3 and 4 (c)  1 only         (d)  1, 2 and 4

88. As water solidifies it does one of the following :-

1. Gives off heat

2. Takes in heat

3. Contracts

4. Expands

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1 and 3 only       (b)  1 and 4 only
(c)  2 and 3 only       (d)  2 and 4 only


89. The  hardest substance available on  earth is Diamond.Which of the following statements is the main reason behind this :-

(a)  The  diamond is very hard because it has crystallized at depth into the earth to high pressure.

(b)  Its  hard because it consists of very small atoms
(carbon) that are packed together.

(c)  In the diamond All bonds are of the same strength, and there are no  weak points.

(d)  In diamond each cation attracts all the de- localized electrons and this result in release of energy and the nuclei are bound together by  a strong bond.


90. Consider the following statements about the impact of temperature on  solubility:

1. Generally solubility of solids in liquids increases with increase in temperature.

2. Generally solubility of gases in liquids decreases with increase in temperature.

3. Generally solubility of liquids in liquids decreases with increase in temperature.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.


(a)  1 only                (b)  1 and 2 only

(c)  2 and 3 only    (d)  1, 2 and 3


91. Which of the following pairs is/are correctly matched?

1. Oxalic Acid:  Used in bleaching of leather

2. Acetic Acid:  Used in processing of foods

3. Citric Acid:  Used in washing metals

4. Benzoic Acid:  Used in accumulation batteries

Select the correct answer using the code given below.


(a)  1 and 2 only        (b)  2 and 4 only

(c)  2 and 3 only        (d)  1, 2 and 3 only
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1565

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in


92. Which of the following properties of water is/are related to the presence of hydrogen bonds between water molecules?

1. The  density of ice  is smaller than that of water.

2. Water has a high specific heat capacity.

3. Water is a poor conductor of electricity.

4. Water has a high surface tension.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1, 2 and 3 only   (b)  2, 3 and 4 only

(c)  1, 2 and 4 only   (d)  1, 2, 3 and 4


93. Choose the correct statement among following

1. Smoke is solid in gas

2. Gel  is liquid in solid

(a)  Only  1                 (b)  Only  2

(c)  Both 1 and 2      (d)  None of the above


94. Iron  is a metal that when in contact with water corrodes, and the result of the corrosion process of iron is the formation of Rust. When an iron nail  gets rusted, iron oxide is formed?

(a)  without any change in the weight of the nail

(b)  with decrease in the weight of the nail

(c)  with increase in the weight of the nail

(d)  without any change in colour or weight of the nail


95. When petroleum is refined it is subject to a number of processes including cracking. During the cracking process

(a)  lighter hydrocarbons are combined to form heavier ones

(b)  heavy hydrocarbons are broken up into lighter ones

(c)  lighter hydrocarbons are separated by  distillation

(d)  oxygen is used to burn the heavier hydrocarbons
96. Which of the following are the sources of mercury pollution?

1. Coal based power plants.

2. Cement industries.

3. LED bulbs.

4. Gold  mining.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1 and 3 only         (b)  1, 2 and 4 only

(c)  2, 3 and 4 only     (d)  1 and 2 only


97. Ornaments, objects, or utensils made of brass gets discoloured in air. Which of the following statements is/are true about this :-

(a)  It happens because of attraction of airborne particles to exterior walls.

(b)  Brass gets discoloured in air  because of the presence of Oxygen.It can react with brass and can discolour it.

(c)  Hydrogen Sulphide can tarnish silverware and discolour brass utensils.

(d)  Nitrogen Oxide's corrosiveness to metals such as iron, steel, copper and brass discolor them.


98. Compounds of iodine are used for  which of the following :-

1. As a refrigerant.

2. In photographic film.

3. As an essential part of diet.

4. As an antiseptic.

Select the correct answer using the code given below

(a)  1, 3 and 4 only     (b)  2, 3 and 4 only

(c)  1 and 2 only         (d)  1, 2, 3 and 4


99. Most people aren't getting enough Vitamin D3 , which puts them at increased risk  for  developing serious illnesses.Which of the following statements is/are differences between Vitamin D and Vitamin D3
:-
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1565

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

1. Vitamin D is manufactured by  both plants and animals while Vitamin D3 is particularly found on  the skin of animals as a byproduct of synthesis.

2. Vitamin D2,  one of the forms of vitamin D can be toxic to the body while Vitamin D3 is always good for the body.

3. One can get vitamin D from fortified foods or as pills  while vitamin D3 is only available in the form of pills  or in liquids and rarely found in foods.

4. The  D3 form of the vitamin has a shorter shelf life compared to the D2 form.
Select the correct answer using the code given below

(a)  2 and 3 only          (b)  1, 3 and 4 only

(c)  1, 2 and 3 only      (d)  1, 2, 3 and 4


100. Which of the following is/are primary factors determine whether or not molecular collision leads to a chemical reaction :-

1. Energy of molecules

2. Volume of molecules

3. Mass of molecules

4. Orientation of molecules

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1 and 2 only         (b)  2 and 3 only

(c)  3 and 4 only         (d)  1 and 4 only
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1565

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Q.1     a         b         c         d Q.2     a         b         c         d Q.3     a         b         c         d Q.4     a         b         c         d Q.5     a         b         c         d Q.6     a         b         c         d Q.7     a         b         c         d Q.8     a         b         c         d Q.9     a         b         c         d Q.10   a         b         c         d Q.11   a         b         c         d Q.12   a         b         c         d Q.13   a         b         c         d Q.14   a         b         c         d Q.15   a         b         c         d Q.16   a         b         c         d Q.17   a         b         c         d Q.18   a         b         c         d Q.19   a         b         c         d Q.20   a         b         c         d Q.21   a         b         c         d Q.22   a         b         c         d Q.23   a         b         c         d Q.24   a         b         c         d Q.25   a         b         c         d Q.26   a         b         c         d Q.27   a         b         c         d Q.28   a         b         c         d Q.29   a         b         c         d Q.30   a         b         c         d Q.31   a         b         c         d Q.32   a         b         c         d Q.33   a         b         c         d Q.34   a         b         c         d Q.35   a         b         c         d
Q.36   a         b         c         d Q.37   a         b         c         d Q.38   a         b         c         d Q.39   a         b         c         d Q.40   a         b         c         d Q.41   a         b         c         d Q.42   a         b         c         d Q.43   a         b         c         d Q.44   a         b         c         d Q.45   a         b         c         d Q.46   a         b         c         d Q.47   a         b         c         d Q.48   a         b         c         d Q.49   a         b         c         d Q.50   a         b         c         d Q.51   a         b         c         d Q.52   a         b         c         d Q.53   a         b         c         d Q.54   a         b         c         d Q.55   a         b         c         d Q.56   a         b         c         d Q.57   a         b         c         d Q.58   a         b         c         d Q.59   a         b         c         d Q.60   a         b         c         d Q.61   a         b         c         d Q.62   a         b         c         d Q.63   a         b         c         d Q.64   a         b         c         d Q.65   a         b         c         d Q.66   a         b         c         d Q.67   a         b         c         d Q.68   a         b         c         d Q.69   a         b         c         d Q.70   a         b         c         d
Q.71   a         b         c         d Q.72   a         b         c         d Q.73   a         b         c         d Q.74   a         b         c         d Q.75   a         b         c         d Q.76   a         b         c         d Q.77   a         b         c         d Q.78   a         b         c         d Q.79   a         b         c         d Q.80   a         b         c         d Q.81   a         b         c         d Q.82   a         b         c         d Q.83   a         b         c         d Q.84   a         b         c         d Q.85   a         b         c         d Q.86   a         b         c         d Q.87   a         b         c         d Q.88   a         b         c         d Q.89   a         b         c         d Q.90   a         b         c         d Q.91   a         b         c         d Q.92   a         b         c         d Q.93   a         b         c         d Q.94   a         b         c         d Q.95   a         b         c         d Q.96   a         b         c         d Q.97   a         b         c         d Q.98   a         b         c         d Q.99   a         b         c         d Q.100 a         b         c         d
