VISIONIAS z™
www.visionias.in www.visionias.wordpress.com

ANSWERS & EXPLANATION GENERAL STUIDES (P) 2015 – Test 5 (1554)




Q 1.D

     National Waterway 5 connects Orissa to West Bengal using the stretch on Brahmani River, East Coast Canal,Matai river and Mahanadi River Delta. The 623 km long canal system will handle the traffic of cargo such as coal, fertilizer, cement and iron.

     National Waterway 6 is the proposed waterway in Assam state and will connect  Lakhipur to Bhanga in river Barak. The 121 km long waterway will help in trading between town of Silchar to Mizoram State

Q 2.C

     China is the largest producer of rare earth metals. In fact, it exercises almost monopoly in this area.

     The leading producers of Uranium are Kazakhstan, Canada, Australia, Namibia and Niger.

     Third pair is correct. Australia is a major contributor to world supplies of bauxite and aluminium

Q 3.C

Foot loose industries can be located in a wide variety of places. They are not dependent on any specific raw  material,  weight  losing  or  otherwise.  They  largely  depend  on  component  parts  which  can  be obtained anywhere. Of the given industries only IT industry is a footloose industry. The other industries are generally located near the raw material source.


Q 4.C


Both the statements are true regarding the smelting process. To avoid high oxidation process takes place in low oxygen environment.


Q 5.C


Abor is a major tribe found in Arunachal Pradesh. Gaddis is a migrating/nomadic tribe of Himachal
Pradesh. Lepcha is a prominent tribe of Sikkim. And Dhodia is a tribe of Goa.


Q 6.D


Both the statements are wrong. Kaladan is a river in Myanmar.

The project will include the shipping route from seaport of Kolkata in India to Sittwe seaport in Myanmar via Bay of Bengal. Then, it will include the river boat route from Sittwe seaport to Paletwa jetty via Kaladan river in Myanmar. It will then include road route from Paletwa jetty to North Eastern states in India.


Q 7.C


Both statements are true regarding remote sensing.





1                                                                www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 8.A


Transhumance is a seasonal movement of people with their livestock with fixed summer and winter stations. In India it is practiced by many tribes like Bakarwalas, Gaddis, including the Bhotias of Western Himalayas. Hausa tribe is found in Savanna region of Africa. It leads a settled life in towns and cities


Q 9.D


Molasses is the only by-product obtained in the preparation of sugar through repeated crystallization. Bagasse is a fibrous residue of cane stalk that is obtained after crushing and extraction of juice. Fly Ash is the residual output from the boiler furnace after bagasse has completely burnt out. Press mud, also known as oliver cake or press cake, is the residual output after the filtration of the juice.

Question appears factual but important because all these by-products yield benefit to the industry.


Q 10.D


The Christian population is concentrated in the hill states of north-eastern India; along the western coast around Goa, Kerala; and around Chotanagpur region. Therefore, majority of the Christian population lives in rural areas. Punjab has the highest percentage of its population as Scheduled Castes (32%). Mizoram has the highest percentage of its population as Scheduled Tribes (95%).


Q 11.A


The Diamond Quadrilateral is a project of the Indian railways to establish high speed rail network in India which aims to connect the four metro cities in India, i.e. Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata.

This project is modeled on the lines of Golden Quadrilateral which is a roadway projectbut Diamond
Quadrilateral Project doesnot focus on roadways at all. Hence, Statement 1 is incorrect.

High-speed train on Mumbai-Ahmedabad section will be the first bullet train corridor to be implemented in the country.


Q 12.D


All statements are correct. The Department has been awarded GOLD by the Government of India under
category “Cat-I-Excellence in Government Process Re-engineering” for National Award on e-governance
2014-15. The Project marks a major step in ensuring TDS compliance through the processing of TDS returns and comprehensive data  processing of  TDS statements  using technology driven end-to-end processes.


Q 13.B


It  is  in  news  because   Government  gives  nod  for  Ordinances  to  amend  Citizenship  Act,  1955  & Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996

PIO card holders do not require a visa to visit India for a period of 15 years from the date of issue of the
PIO card.

The statement 3 is wrong because only NRI has  the right to acquisition of agricultural or plantation properties, but OCI  been granted all rights in the economic, financial and education fields in parity with NRIs


Q 14.D


National Highways- 92,851.07 km State Highways- 1,31,899 km Major District Roads- 4,67,763 km

2                                                                www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 15.D


Rural settlements in India can broadly be put into four types:

• Clustered, agglomerated or nucleated

• Semi-clustered or fragmented

• Hamleted

• Dispersed or isolated

Dispersed or isolated settlement pattern in India appears in the form of isolated huts or hamlets of few huts in remote jungles, or on small hills with farms or pasture on the slopes. Extreme dispersion of settlement is often caused by extremely fragmented nature of the terrain and land resource base of habitable areas. Many areas of Meghalaya, Uttaranchal, Himachal Pradesh and Kerala have this type of settlement.

Hence Option-d should be the answer.


Q 16.A


It is in news because, Former Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee and late educationist Madan Mohan
Malviya (posthumously) have been chosen for Bharat Ratna-country’s highest civilian award.

It is India’s highest civilian award given to citizens for their exceptional work for the advancement of art, literature

and science, and public service. In December 2011, government had changed the criteria for including sportsperson for this award thus added category for performance of highest order in any field of human endeavour.


Q 17.D


     Earlier, most of the Iron Steel industries of USA were concentrated in and around Pittsburg. Hence it was called as the Iron and Steel capital of the World. However it gained the name of “Rust bowl of USA” after the Iron and  Steel industry of  USA moved towards the southern state  of Alabama. Pittsburg area is now losing ground.

     India, China, U.S.A, UK and Japan are the important Cotton textile manufacturing countries.  While India, China and USA have good production of raw Cotton, UK and Japan are majorly dependent on imported yarn.


Q 18.D


Option d is incorrect because government policy is prime factor behind location of footloose industries.


Q 19.C


The IT software and services industry

account for almost 2 per cent of India’s GDP.

The  IT  andIT  enabled  business  process  outsourcing  (ITESBPO)  services  are  major  contributor  to
Knowledge based industry.

Footloose industry is a general term for an industry that can be placed and located at any location without effect from factors such as resources or transport. Generally software industries only need human resource and mobile in nature.




3                                                                www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 20.C


All the three statements are correct


Q 21.B


Tertiary activities are categorized into quaternary and quinary activities. The former involves collection, production, processing, and dissemination of information. For example, software developers, tax consultants etc.

Quinary activities focus on creation, re-arrangement, and interpretation of ideas. It pertains to high level decision making. Therefore, it is also called ‘gold collar’ professions. For example, business executives, research scientists etc.


Q 22.C


The committee has suggested cuts in the number of TPDS beneficiaries. It has suggested that TPDS
beneficiaries be reduced to 40 per cent from the current 67 per cent and the rationed grains be priced at
50 per cent of the minimum support price paid to farmers.


Q 23.C


     The Golden Quadrilateral is a highway network connecting many of the major industrial, agricultural and cultural centresof India. Hence Statement 1 is incorrect.

     A quadrilateral of sorts is formed by connecting 4 Metros Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai- Hence Statement 2 is incorrect.

     The GQ project is managed by the National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) under the Ministry of
Road, Transport and Highways


Q 24.D


It is in news because Bangladesh oil spill disaster threatens wildlife in Sundarbans forest

Cleanup and recovery from an oil spill is difficult and depends upon many factors, including the type of oil spilled, the temperature of the water (affecting evaporation and biodegradation), and the types of shorelines and beaches involved.

Methods for cleaning up include

     Bioremediation
     Controlled burning
     Dispersants
     Dredging
     Skimming
     Solidifying
     Vacuum and centrifuge
     Beach Raking


Q 25. D


Q 26.D


A situation when there is a prolonged period of inadequate rainfall marked with mal-distribution of the same over time and space is called Meteorological drought, not Hydrological drought. Also, northern parts of Rajasthan and Haryana are considered to be moderate drought affected areas.


4                                                                www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 27.D


Corals do not live in deeper water because they die due to lack of sufficient amount of sunlight and oxygen. Fresh water is injurious for the growth of corals because of which they live away from the areas of river mouths. Also, Ocean currents and waves are favourable for corals because they bring necessary food supply for the polyps


Q 28.D


All the three statements are correct. They provide details about mechanism of operationalizing the
NIMZs in states.


Q 29.D


Moscow is called as the port of five seas since it connects five seas through rivers and canals. All the given seas are connected to Moscow.


Q 30.B


     Terrain plays a important role in determining the population density. As plain areas have have high population in comparison to the difficult terrain of mountain areas.

     Similarly, extremes of climate discourages the population growth.

     Fertile soil encourages the population growth.

     Availability of water plays important role plays a significant role in determining the population growth. As it is evident that most of the population is concentrated in the river valleys.


Q 31.D


The  Nicaragua  Canalis  a  shipping  route  under  construction  through Nicaragua  (a  Central  American country)  to  connect the  Caribbean  Sea  (and therefore  the  Atlantic Ocean)  with the  Pacific Ocean. Therefore, both the statements are wrong


Q 32.B


In India people migrate from rural to urban area mainly due to poverty, high population pressure on the land (agricultural density), lack of basic facilities in rural areas, like education, health etc. Urbanization is not the cause rather it is a consequence of increased migration


Q 33.A


     A sunrise industry is one that is new or relatively new, is growing fast and is expected to become important in the future. Examples of sunrise industries includeIT(in 2000) now, hydrogen fuel production, shale gas production, space tourism,etc.

     Sunrise industries often represent a new way of approaching an old issue. For example, alternative energy in the form of wind and solar power was a sunrise industry in the replacing coal and other nonrenewable sources of energy.


Q 34.A


     The  census  of  India,  1991  defines  urban  settlements  as  “All  places  which  have  municipality,
corporation, cantonment board or notified town area committee and have a minimum population of
5000 persons, at least 75 per cent of male workers are engaged in non-agricultural pursuits and a density of population of at least 400 persons per square kilometers are urban.

5                                                                www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
     The administrative setup is a criterion for classifying a settlement as urban in some countries. For example, in India, a settlement of any size is classified as urban, if it has a municipality, Cantonment Board or Notified Area Council. Similarly, in Latin American countries, such as Brazil and Bolivia, any administrative centre is considered urban irrespective of its population size.

     Hence, only statement 1 is correct


Q 35.C


National Highway 7 is 2,369 km long road is the longest National Highway of India and one of the major road network between south and north India. The National Highway 7 cross 6 Indian states and connects major Indian cities like Varanasi,Nagpur, Hyderabad,Bangalore and Madurai. Some of the part of NH7  is selected as North-South Corridor and Golden Quadrilateral highway projects.


Q 36.C


Both  statements  are  true.  Rules  of  origin  are  used  to  implement  measures  and  instruments  of commercial and to determine whether imported products shall receive most-favoured-nation (MFN) treatment or preferential treatment.


Q 37.D


In igneous and metamorphic rocks minerals may occur in the cracks, crevices, faults or joints
In sedimentary rocks a number of minerals occur in beds or layers.


Q 38.D


Bering strait separates USA (Alaska) and Russia. Malacca strait separates Malaysia and Indonesia. Cook strait separates North and South islands of New Zealand.


Q 39.B








Q 40.B





Q 41.B


Sector wise share Industrial- 45% Domestic- 22% Agriculture- 18% Commercial- 8%



Masai tribe is one of the major tribes of Savanna regions. In modern times it is found in Kenya, Uganda, and Tanzania. It is mainly a cattle pastoralist tribe. They treat their animals with great respect and never slaughter them. However, they drink milk of their cattle.



Mumbai-Pune Industrial Region : Cotton Textile
Hugli Industrial Region: Jute Industry
Kollam-Thiruvananthapuram Region: Plantation agriculture & Hydropower
Chotanagpur Region: Heavy Metallurgical Industries


Q 42.C


1st statement is correct. Mediterranean climate favors viticulture (production of grapes).  This is the raw material for production of wines.
2nd statement is wrong. Sugarcane grows in tropical countries like Brazil, India, etc. Moreover sugarcane is not the raw material for wine

6                                                                www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 43.D


Durgapur Steel Plant, is  in West Bengal. Hydel power and water is obtained from the Damodar Valley
Corporation(DVC)


Q 44.B


Tropical Evergreen and Semi Evergreen Forests are found mainly in the areas where the annual rainfall is more than 200 cm, with a short dry season


Q 45.C


Markets provide the outlets for manufactured products. Heavy machine, machine tools, heavy chemicals are located near the high demand areas as these are market orientated.

Certain  agriculture  raw  materials  are  limited  by  the  climate,  e.g.  equatorial  climate  rubber  for processing.

India, being a democratic country  aims at bringing about economic growth with balanced regional development. Establishment of iron and steel industry in Bhilai and Rourkela were based on decision to develop backward tribal areas of the country


Q 46.D


Identification of wetlands can be attributed to the following three main factors, viz., (i) When an area is permanently or periodically inundated; (ii) When an area supports hydrophytic vegetation; (iii) When an area has hydric soils that are saturated or flooded for a sufficiently long period to become anaerobic in the upper layers.


Q 47.A


Mukden Triangle is the industrial region in China. It includes the industrial cities of Anshan, Shenyag and
Fushun.

Lorraine is in France.

The Keihanshin industrial region encompassing the cities of Kyōto, Ōsaka and Kōbe is a major industrial
region of Japan.

Kharkiv is a leading industrial region of Ukraine.


Q 48.D


It is in news because, The traditional brass and copper craft of utensil making among the Thatheras of Jandiala  Guru  Punjab  has  got  the  distinction  of  being  inscribed  on  the  Representative  List  of  the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity, UNESCO, 2014.

The craft of the Thatheras of Jandiala Guru constitutes

the traditional techniques of manufacturing brass and copper utensils in Punjab. They are of both Utilitarian and ritualistic value made of copper, brass and kansa. The metals used are recommended by Ayurveda.
The crafting process carried out by the very name of the communit ‘Thatheras’ identical with the name
of the element.

The skill of the Thatheras that have been orally transmitted for generations upon generations so far.



7                                                                www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 49.B


The route of the corridor primarily involves moving freight from India to Iran by ship; from Iran to
Armenia and Georgia by rail and road; and from Georgia to Russia and Europe.


Q 50.B


     In South America, the rail network is the  densest in only two regions, namely, the  Pampas of Argentina and the coffee growing region of Brazil. Only Chile, among the remaining countries has a considerable route length linking coastal centres with the mining sites in the interior. Peru, Bolivia, Ecuador, Colombia and Venezuela have short single-track rail-lines from ports to the interior with no inter-connecting links.

     Africa continent, despite being the second largest, has only 40,000 km of railways with South Africa alone accounting for 18,000 km due to the concentration of gold, diamond and copper mining activities.

     The Suez Canal is constructed in 1869 in Egypt between Port Said in the north and Port Suez in the south linking the Mediterranean Sea and the Red Sea.


Q 51.D


Area wise, Madhya Pradesh geographical area has the largest forest cover in the country

In terms of percentage of forest cover with respect to totalgeographical area, Mizoram has the highest forest cover (90.38%)


Q 52.C


All the three pairs are correctly matched.

Brazil is the largest producer of sugarcane followed by India and China.
The largest producers of tea are the People's Republic of China, India, Kenya, Sri Lanka, and Turkey. Thailand, Indonesia and Malaysia, together account for around 72% of all natural rubber production


Q 53.D


All statements are correct. The totalization agreements remove legal obstacles that prevent a person who  has  earned  benefits  in one  country  from  receiving  those  benefits  while  residing  in the  other country.
It will allow Indian workers stationed in the US to bring back contributions they make to the US social security system on their return to India. Indian IT workers who are in the US for temporary work pay as much as $1 billion towards social security a year but don’t stay long enough to get the benefits.


Q 54.D


Market gardening specializes in the cultivation of high value crops, solely for urban areas. Since it can be practiced only where there is good transportation network therefore it is also called truck farming. It is both labor  and  capital intensive as it requires good irrigation, HYV seeds, pesticides etc. It is well developed in densely populated areas around urban centers. North West Europe, North Eastern USA, and Mediterranean regions have well developed garden marketing.








8                                                                www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 55.D


Brewing is a weight gaining industry thus located near the market. The basic ingredients of beer are water; a starch source
One ton of sugar produces 4 tons of soda

Other inputs such as water is found everywhere

Whereas Cotton and Sugar are weight losing industries thus they must be located near the raw material.


Q 56.D


Mountainous nature of Japan makes large area unsuitable for cultivation (80 % of her land is classed as non-agricultural). Since, there is little pasture in Japan; therefore livestock farming is not practiced on significant scale. Therefore, there is scarcity of meat. The religious tradition in Japan popularizes fishing.


Q 57.A


European Association for Population Studies was established in 1983 for studying population growth. It is a non-profit organization consisting of experts from different fields. Its main purpose is to promote research on population studies in general, with focus on Europe. It’s membership is open to anyone interested in studying European population. It organizes a population conference every two years in different European nations- next conference would be held in Germany in 2016


Q 58.D


Cotton is a “pure” raw material which does not lose weight in the manufacturing process.

so other factors, like, power to drive the looms, labour , capital or market may deter mine the location of the industry. Also, In dry climate, the  cotton-threads will break quickly during spinning, hence not suitable. Instead humid conditions suit it and that’s the reason most important center and near sea. Eg. Mumbai, Lancashire etc.


Q 59.A


     Natural Growth of Populationis the population increased by difference between births and deaths in a particular region between two points of time.

     Natural Growth = Births – Deaths

     Actual Growth of Population : This is = Births – Deaths + In Migration – Out Migration

     Hence, Option-a should be the answer.


Q 60.D


The term "Golden Triangle" refers to the border regions between Thailand, Myanmar and Laos.


Q 61.D


All are correct


Q 62.B


     In India – literacy rate denotes the percentage of population above 7 years of age, who is able to read, write and have the ability to do arithmetic calculations with understanding.

     Hence, Option- b should be the right answer

9                                                                www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 63.B


Cotton is a “pure” raw material which does not lose weight in the manufacturing process


Q 64.C


Cucumber is cultivated in Zaid season


Q 65.A


The population of India according to their economic status is divided into three groups, namely; main workers, marginal workers and non-workers.
Standard Census definition-
Main Worker is a person who works for at least 183 days in a year. Marginal Worker is a person who works for less than 183 days in a year. Hence, Option- a is the correct answer.


Q 66.D

The correct order of cities of Australia from East to West is: Brisbane – Sydney – Canberra - Melbourne – Adelaide – Perth


Q 67.D


Chilli is one of the important spice produced in India. It is a plantation crop.


Q 68.C


Countries through which tropic of Capricorn passes through are as follows in west to east direction: Chile, Argentina, Paraguay, Brazil, Namibia, Botswana, South  Africa, Mozambique, Madagascar  and Australia.


Q 69.B


Make In India is an initiative to transform India into a global manufacturing hub. This prog. is not related to agriculture but manufacturing.


Q 70.C


The term conurbation was coined by Patrick Geddes in 1915 and applied to a large area of urban development that resulted from the merging of originally separate towns or cities. Greater London, Manchester, Chicago and Tokyo are examples.
Megalopolis signifies ‘super- metropolitan’ region extending, as union of conurbations. The urban landscape stretching from Boston in the north to south of Washington in U.S.A. is the best known example of a megalopolis.
Hence, both of the statements hold water.


Q 71.C


Physiological density = total population /net cultivated area

Agricultural density = total agricultural population / net cultivable area
Agricultural population includes cultivators and agricultural labourers and their family members. Hence, both statements are correct

10                                                              www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 72.B


     The working population denotes women and men of the age group – 15 to 59 years.

     Here, it is interesting to note that working group decided by government carry child labours also.

     Hence, Option-b should be the answer


Q 73.D


     New Mangalore Port/ Panambur Port is a deep water all weather port and the only major port of
Karnataka

     NhavaSheva now known as Jawaharlal Nehru Port is the largest container port in India, situated at the mainland of Konkan area across the Navi Mumbai Maharashtra. Jawaharlal Nehru Port is the king port of Arabian Sea at west cost and handle a large volume of international container traffic and domestic cargo traffic.

      The Kandla Port is situated on the Gulf of Kutch, is the first special economic zone in India as well as in Asia


Q 74.B


Romanche Deep is found in Atlantic Ocean


Q 75.B


     The scheme was originally launched as the 2008 Food Parks Scheme (FPS). The objective of this scheme was to raise the processing of perishables in the country from the existing 6% to 20%.

     Land shall be purchased by the SPV and not Govt. Government will help in the funding of the project and non-land part only upto 50% and can have upto 26% shareholder in SPV.


Q 76.D


On the basis of forms or shapes of the settlements, village settlements are defined as T-shaped, double settlements etc. Double settlements are Settlements extending on both sides of a river where there is a bridge or a ferry.

Hence, Option d should be the answer


Q 77.D


All the given pairs are correctly matched.

     Entrepot port acts as mediators between two countries. Singapore, Rotterdam are the important
Entrepot ports.

     Port of  call is where, ships stop for refueling, water and refreshment. Aden, Honolulu are  the examples.

     Tankers ports supports filling and emptying oil tankers. Ex: Kolkata, Vadodara, Cochin etc


Q 78.B


Rice is the main crop






11                                                              www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 79.B


From 1901 to 1921 there was almost stagnant population due to high death rates because of various epidemics, like plague. From 1921 to 1951 there was steady growth, therefore 1921 is also called as population divide. From about 1951 to 1981 there was very high rate of population growth due to improved medical facilities and declining death rates. From 1981 to 2011 there was high growth in absolute terms but with definite signs of declining growth rate from more than 20 % in 2001 to about 17
% in 2011 censuses


Q 80.D


the  length of  higways  or  roads  follow  the  order  :   Panchayti  roads>PWD road>urban roads>  state highway> national highway


Q 81.D


Cape Town, as the seat of Parliament, is the legislative capital. Pretoria, as the seat of the President and Cabinet, is the administrative capital. Bloemfontein, as the seat of the Supreme Court of Appeal, is the judicial capital.The Constitutional Court of South Africa sits in Johannesburg


Q 82.D


Paradwip Portis situated in the Mahanadi delta, about 100 km from Cuttack and not Godavari delta.


Q 83.A


Indian Diaspora is second largest in the world, first being the Chinese Diaspora. Not only People of Indian Origin but NRIs also form part of Indian Diaspora. Mauritius has the largest Indian Diaspora in terms of percentage of local population (~68%). In Singapore Indian Diaspora accounts for only 9.1 % of local population


Q 84.B


Under the internal migration (with in the country), four streams are identified:

1. rural to rural

2. rural to urban

3. urban to urban

4. urban to rural

Females predominate the streams of short distance rural to rural migration in both inter-state and intra- state migration.

Contrary to this, men predominate the rural to urban stream of inter-state migration due to economic reasons.

Hence, only Option-b holds water.


Q 85. A


     The forest area is the area notified and recorded as the forest land irrespective of the existence of trees, while the actual forest cover is the area occupied by forests with canopy.

     While the former is based on the records of the State Revenue Department, the latter is based on aerial photographs and satellite imageries



12                                                              www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 86. D


Fodder crops are crops that are cultivated primarily for animal feed. Sorghum(Ragi), Maize, Gramand Clusterbean (Guar) can be used as fodder crops


Q 87. A


Q 88. B


In Russia, a dense highway network is developed in the industrialised region west of the Urals with Moscow as  the  hub.  Highways are not well developed in the region east of  Urals. The other  two statements are correct.


Q 89. B

Tundra is extreme northern part of with very cold climate having snow for major part of the year. Taigalies in south of the Tundra, winter are long and sever and annual rainfall around 50 cm Mixed forest
belt lies in south of the Taiga in central and western part of the Europe Mediterranean type vegetation
Confined to southern Europe along the Mediterranean sea coast

These are the name given to the type of Vegetation in these areas according to their climate type.


Q 90.B


Cotton is the main cash crop of Egypt. The cotton crop here gets optimum heat, dryness and clear weather. It is known for a superior quality of Cotton.


Q 91.B


Eastern region has population density of 625 persons per sq. km. Central region has population density of 417 persons per sq. km. Southern region has population density of 397 persons per sq. km.
North-eastern region has population density of 176 persons per sq. km


Q 92.C


The 49o North parallel of latitude forms the boundary between Canada and USA. The 38o North parallel was the boundary between North and South Korea prior to Korean war.


Q 93.C


Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania are together known as Baltic states. The three countries lie on the eastern shore of the Baltic sea and geographically connected.


Q 94.D


The number of women and men in a country is an important demographic characteristic. The ratio between the number of women and men in the population is called the Sex Ratio.
In some countries it is calculated as the number of males per thousand females.
In India, the sex ratio is worked out as the number of females per thousand males. The sex ratio is an important information about the status of women in a country. Hence, none of the statements are incorrect.


13                                                              www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 95.D


An urban agglomeration may consist of any one of the following three combinations:

1. a town and its adjoining urban outgrowths,

2. two or more contiguous towns with or without their outgrowths, and
3. a city and one or more adjoining towns with their outgrowths together forming a contiguous spread. Examples of urban outgrowth are railway colonies, university campus, port area, military cantonment,
etc. located within the revenue limits of a village or villages contiguous to the town or city.

Hence, answer should be Option-d


Q 96.D


All are correct


Q 97.D


Both growth and development refer to changes over a period of time. The difference is that growth is quantitative and value neutral. It may have a positive or a negative sign.

Development means a qualitative change which is always value positive. This means that development cannot take place unless there isan increment or addition to the  existing  conditions. Development occurs when positive growth takes place. Yet, positive growth doesnot always lead to development. Development occurs when there is a positive change inquality.

Hence, none of the statements are correct.


Q 98.B


Kiel Canal in Germany connects the North Sea with Baltic Sea. Soo Canal joins Lake Superior with Lake
Huron. Welland Canal connects Lake Erie and Lake Ontario.


Q 99.B


Demographic transition theory can be used to describe and predict the future population of any area. The theory tells us that population of any region changes from high births and high deaths to low births and low deaths as society progresses from rural agrarian and illiterate to urban industrial and literate society. These changes occur in stages which are collectively known as the demographic cycle.

Hence, Option-b should be the answer


Q 100.D

All the given statements are correct. The Zambezi river is a natural political boundary between Zambia and Zimbabwe. The Congo or Zaire river cuts equator twice. The Blue Nile originates in Lake Tana of Ethiopia and the White Nile originates in Lake Victoria.






Copyright © by Vision IAS
All  rights  are  reserved.  No  part  of  this  document  may  be  reproduced,  stored  in  a  retrieval  system  or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without prior permission of Vision IAS

14                                                              www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
