GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1568

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Q.1  :b










Q.2  :a












Q.3  :b


According to Arthashastra, there are three types of conquest, Dharmavijaya – Righteous Conquest, Lobhavijaya – Conquest for  Greed, Asuravijaya – Demoniac Conquest. The  two latter types are generally disapproved of by all sources except the Arthasasthra.





The  Sresthin is a money lender or banker but usually merchants as well. They appear as leading members of wealthy guilds. The
word Sresthin literally means chief, It survived in the north Indian Seth and the Dravidian Chetti and setti.It also means a title of honor held only by  merchants of wealth and consequence.















Alvars:
sanyasam.
Their traditional work (akin to caste system) too differed - reciting Vedha, farmer, potter,cobbler and so on. Some of them were highly learned while some others excelled with their simple devotion though not
learned in any scriptures (Kannappar). Some of them were kings (Pukazch chozar) and some others didn't even have even a house to live  in (Thirumular). They all excelled in their own way - single minded devotion to Shiva.



The  Azhwars came from diverse caste groups and lived between 5th and 9th Century in southern India. They are great devotees of Lord  Vishnu, especially Ranghanatha.
They composed beautiful devotional poetry in his  praise. Their individual compositions were later compiled into a single scripture by the name "Divya Prabhandam".

Yoga literally means the union of the two principal entities. The  origin of yoga is found in yogasutra of patanjali believed to have been written in the second century BC.
By purifying and controlling changes in the mental mechanism, yoga systematically brings about the release of purusha from prakriti. Yogic  techniques control the body, mind and sense organs. Thus this philosophy is also considered a means of achieving freedom or mukti.
This  freedom could be attained by  practising self-control (yama), observation of rules (niyama), fixed postures (asana), breath control (pranayama), choosing an object (pratyahara) and fixing the mind (dharna), concentrating on  the chosen object (dhyana) and complete dissolution of self, merging the mind and the object (Samadhi).
Yoga admits the existence  of God  as a teacher and guide.





Q.4  :a

Explanation:

Q.5  :a











Q.6  :d









Q.7  :c




Explanation: One of the sultans of Delhi in the 14th century, Firoz  Shah Tughluq, was both intrigued and impressed by  an Asokan Pillar  which he found near Delhi, and he had it removed it to the capital. But  no  one could read the inscription on  pillar or explain its purpose.





All the above mentioned options form the part of Panchasiddhantika. Varahamihira summarized in his  Panchasiddhantika the five  siddhantas which includes Paitamaha, Vasishtha, Paulisa, Romaka and Surya.





In North Indian music System there is a form called gat, derived from plucked stringed instrumental technique, and another, called dhun is derived from folk  tunes, neither has text.

The  saintly devotees of Shiva are known as Nayanmar (Nayanar). There are 63 of them. The  activities of these devotees differ, but
the one thing in common is their intense love for  the Lord.
They followed different ways of praying the God  and led different kinds of life  styles – brahmacharyam, grihastam, vanaprastam,

Q.8  :d




Udayagiri and Khandagiri hills  are found near Bhubaneswar, Orissa have a number of finely and ornately carved caves.
It is believed that most of these caves were carved out as residential blocks for  Jain
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1568

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in












Q.9  :c
















Q.10 :d















Q.11 :d
monks during the reign of King  Kharavela. There are five  Jain  caves at Ellora that belong to the 9th and 10th centuries. They all belong to the Digambara sect.
Sittanavasal Caves: 2nd century Jain  complex
in Sittanavasal village in Pudukottai district of Tamil Nadu. It is a rock-cut monastery or temple created by  Jains





Kabir  started as a disciple of Ramanandha but developed his  own eclecticism. He believed in one way to God  and that is well seen in his  kirtans and in his  quiet meditation.
His idea of God  is eclectic, with influences from vaishnaivism, monism, Sufism and even Sunya and Sabda.
The  Muslims Claimed him as Sufi,  the Hindus as Rama Bhakta and the Sikhs incorporated his  songs in Adi Granth.





In Sanchi, Gaya and Bharhut, all the Buddhist sculpture, even the Buddha himself was
never shown, jus  symbolised by  emblems, empty throne, pair of foot prints and pipal tree.
The  Schools of Gandhara which flourished in the lower Kabul valley and near Peshawar and Mathura school which flourished under the Kusana Kings produced the first images of the Buddha.
























Q.13 :c
The  Communal Award was announced by  the
British PM , Ramsay Macdonald, in August
1932.
Gandhi saw the Communal Award as an attack on  Indian unity and nationalism. He advocated that once the depressed classes were treated as a separate political entity, the question of abolishing untouchability would get undermined, while separate electorates would ensure that the untouchables would remain untouchables in perpetuity.
Gandhi demanded that the depressed classes be elected through joint and if possible a wider electorate through universal franchise, while expressing no  objection to the demand for  a larger number of reserved seats. And  to press his  demands, he went on an indefinite fast on  Sept. 1932.





The   GOI  Act  1919, also known as Montagu- Chelmsford Reforms did  not introduce responsible   government   at    the    Centre though   Indians  were   to   have   greater influence  over  there   as   the   number   of Indians in  the Governor-General's executive Council was raised to 3 in a Council of 8. The Indian  members  were  entrusted   with departments  like   that  of   law, Education , labour , Health and Industries.
The  distribution of  seats among the different provinces was  not  made  on   the  basis  of population   but   on     the   basis   of     their importance  like,  for   instance,  Punjab and Bombay were given seats  on   the  basis  of there  military importance  and  commercial importance respectively.





















Q.12 :b
The  aims of launching Individual Satyagraha were- (i) to express people's feeling that they were not interested in the war and they had made no  distinction between Nazism and the double autocracy that ruled India; ii) to show the nationalist patience was not due to weakness; iii) to give another opportunity to the Government to Congress' demands peacefully.
Gandhi decided to initiate a limited Satyagraha on  an individual basis by  a few selected individuals in every locality . The demand of the Satyagrahi would be the freedom of speech against the war through an anti-war declaration. ( 2nd World War). Hence option (c)  is incorrect.


Q.14 :b





During the arrival of Gandhiji in India, the INC was  far    more  active  in   a  political sense because  it had set up branches in  almost all major  towns  &  cities;  the  Swadeshi Movement (1905)  broadened  Congress' appeal in  the middle classes & saw towering leaders like   Tilak, Lajpat  Rai,   Bipin   Chandra Pal-which conveyed  their  message  of   their struggle  at  all-India level. Hence, 1st Statement is incorrect.
Ahmedabad  Mill   Strike  was  Gandhi's  first hunger  strike( Fast unto  Death) to  resolve the issue between  the mill  owners and the workers over the issue of  discontinuation  of the Plague Bonus, wherein the workers demanded  35% increase  in   wages but the
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1568

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in












Q.15 :c



















Q.16 :a
owners were willing to only 20% increase  in wages.Hence, 2nd Statement is correct. Gandhi's       initiatives       of         Champaran, Ahmedabad and Kheda , though marked him as a nationalist leader. But  at the same time
, these were localised struggles (Gujarat) and were  not  carried  out  at  an  all-India level. Hence, 3rd Statement is incorrect.





The  Congress Socialist Party was launched in
1934, to  work within the Congress, to strengthen it, to mould and shape its policies.
Their ideological inspiration came from Marxism and Democratic Socialism and they stood for  anti-Imperialism, nationalism and Socialism, whereas , it was Revolutionary Terrorists who were inspired by  the methods of Russian nihilists and Irish  nationalists. Hence only 3rd statement is incorrect. They stood for  complete independence and Socialism and they advocated Swaraj not for the classes but for  the masses.
responsibility of Indian themselves and should originate from Indian conception of the social , economic and political structure of Indian life.
The  Cripps Mission, 1942, declared that an elected body, charged with the task of framing a new Constitution. Also  the provision shall be made for  the participation of Indian States in the constitution-making body.
The  Wavell Plan , 1945, proposed the reconstitution of the Governor-General's Exeutive Council pending the preparation of
a new Constitution. with the exception of the Governor General and the Commander in Chief ( who would retain his  position as a
War  member) all other members of the Executive council would be nominated from amongst the leaders of political life.  Hence,
3rd statement is incorrect.
The  Cabinet Mission Plan, 1946 most importantly it rejected the demand of Muslim league for  Pakistan and recommended for  a Union of India , consisting of British India and Princely states which should deal with the subjects of Foreign Affairs , Defence and Communications and they should have powers to raise the finances of these subjects.

In  the  early centuries of  Islam, a  group of religious  minded  people  called  the  'Sufis' turned into ascetism & mysticism in  protest against  the  growing materialism of  the Caliphate as  a  religious and  political institution. Hence, Statement 1 is correct.
The    Sufis  were   critical  of    the   dogmatic definitions     &      scholastic     methods      of interpreting  the   Quran  and   'Sunna' (traditions   of    Prophet)   adopted   by     the theologians. Instead they  laid   emphasis  on seeking salvation through intense devotion & love for  God. Hence, Statement 2 is correct. Some  Sufis  initiated  movements  against
radical interpretations  of  sufi   ideals.  They ignored     rituals     &      practised    extreme ascetism, observed celibacy, etc- they were known by  different names like  - " Qalandars',
'Madaris', 'Malangs', ' Haidaris', etc. Because of   their  deliberate  defiance of   sharia they were  known as  'be-sharia' ,  in   contrast  to those  Sufis who complied with the  sharia (ba-sharias). Hence, Statement 3 is incorrect.

Q.18 :b





















Q.19 :b




Khond uprising from 1837 to 1856 were directed against the British, in which tribal of Ghumsar, china-ki-medi, kalahandi and Patna actively participated. The  movement was led by  Chakra Bisoi in the name of young Raja. The  main issue was the attempt by  the government to suppress human sacrifice - Mariah System (Traditional Human Sacrifice practiced by  the Khonds), introduction of new taxes, influx of Zamindars and sahookars into their areas. The British formed a Mariah Agency to counter this movement.
Tirut Singh was leader of Khasi uprising. Hence only statement 3 and 4 are correct and option B is correct.


Q.17 :b





Except 3rd statement, all the statements are correct.
Under August offer 1940, the framing of the new Constitution should be primarily the
College of Fort William was an academy and learning centre of Oriental Studies established by  Lord Wellesley, the then Governor-General of British
India . It aimed at training British officials in Indian languages and in the process it fostered the development of languages such as Bengali and Urdu. Hence, 1st statement is incorrect.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1568

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Charter Act of 1833 proposed the open
Competition in civil  services for  the first time
, but after opposition from court of directors it was negated.And finally it was done in
1854. Hence, 2nd statement is correct.
In 1860, 1866 and 1878 , maximum age of candidates for  civil  services examination was respectively reduced to 22, 21 and finally to
19 years in 1878. Hence, 3rd statement is incorrect.

Q.23 :c


The  average composition of gases by  volume is according to the chart




Component Symbol       Volume


Q.20 :d


The  GOI Act,  1935 proposed an All India Federation consisting of provinces and princely states as units but such a structure but the Federation never came into existence as the princely states did  not join  it. Hence,
1st statement is incorrect.
Dyarchy was abolished in provinces only.Hence, 2nd statement is incorrect.
It extended the communal representation to

Nitrogen      N2               78.084%     99.998% Oxygen       O2              20.947%
Argon          Ar                0.934%
depressed classes ( SCs)  , women and labour (workers) too.Hence, only 3rd statement is correct.
Carbon
Dioxide
CO2            0.033%


Q.21 :a



All the statements are correct except statement 3.

The  Deoband Movement (1866) was organized by  the orthodox section among the Muslim ulema ( Mohammad Qasim Nanotavi and Rashid Ahmed Gangohi) as a revivalist
Neon           Ne               18.2 parts per million



Helium        He               5.2 parts per million



Krypton       Kr                1.1 parts per million
movement with the twin objectives of propagating pure teachings of the Quran and the Hadis among Muslims and keeping alive the spirit of jihad against the foreign rulers. On  the political front , Deoband School
Sulfur dioxide
SO2            1.0 parts per million







Q.22 :d
welcomed the formation of Congress and issued fatwa( religious decree) against Sir Syed Ahmed Khan's Mohammaden Anglo- Oriental Association.
Methane     CH4            2.0 parts per million



Hydrogen    H2               0.5 parts per million Of these the composition of CO2,  water vapour, Methane, Nitogen oxide, etc have variable concentration.

Abundance of elements in earth is different than that in earth's crust.Oxygen is the most abundant element in earth's crust but when considered overall earth, iron the most abundant.
Iron  - 32%, Oxygen- 30%, Silicon - 15%, Magnesium- 14%.
Moreover, around 91 % of earth mass is constituted by  these four elements. Next in line  are Sulpher, Nickel, Calcium and Aluminium.



Q.24 :a






Discovery of many spindles and spindle whorls in the houses of Indus valley civilisation.
Wheat and barley was common to all Harappan areas but few  sites like  Lothal show traces of Rice  cultivation as well. They did  worship male deities and Mother
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1568

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in






Q.25 :d
goddess but temple worship was not practiced.





Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) is the amount of dissolved oxygen needed by aerobic biological organisms in a body of water to break down organic material
present in a given water sample.
It measures only biodegradable waste unlike COD (chemical oxygen demand) that measures both bio  and non bio  degradable. Higher the value of BOD indicates low content of DO in water.
very important part in both the creation and maintenance of human cell  membrane.
In humans, cholesterol serves three main functions. It is used by  certain glands to manufacture steroid or cortisone-like hormones, including sex hormones; it helps the liver to produce bile  acids, which are essential to the digestion of fats; and, most important, it is a main component of cell membranes and structures, a kind of building block for  bodily tissues. Without it, mammalian life  would not be possible.
The  problem with cholesterol arises when the body has too much of it, or has deposits of it in the wrong places.
Hence option D is correct.


Q.26 :c

Importance of pulse crops-

Pulses are leguminous crops. Being leguminous crops, all these crops except Arhar help in restoring soil  fertility by  fixing nitrogen from the air.
Water requirement for  pulses is lower as compared to other crops and hence it helps in conserving soil  moisture for  the next season of cropping.
Pulses can be grown on  residual moisture as a relay crop requiring no-tillage or after- tillage operation.
Reduce soil  erosion by  wind and water. Increase soil  aeration and also improves soil water-holding capacity.
The  ability of pulses to feed the soil  different compounds has the effect of increasing the number and diversity of soil  microbes
Hence, statement 1 is incorrect as it says opposite is true. rest two are correct as seen from above.


Q.27 :d

Cholesterol can both be produced by  the body itself and obtained from food sources. Cholesterol plays an important part in the human body. Its  functions are as follows: Hormone production- Cholesterol plays a part in producing hormones such as estrogen, testosterone, progesterone, aldosterone and cortisone.
Vitamin D production- Vitamin D is produced when the sun’s ultraviolet rays reach the human skin surface.
Bile production- Cholesterol produces bile acids which aid in digestion and vitamin absorption.
Cell  membrane support- Cholesterol plays a
Q.28 :c

Induced seismicity refers to typically
minor earthquakes and tremors that are caused by human activity that alters the stresses and strains on the Earth's crust. Most induced seismicity
is of a low  magnitude. This  may occur due to various causes:

Artificial Lakes
Mining and Extraction activities Waste disposal wells Geothermal Energy
Nuclear Bomb Explosion


Q.29 :d

1. An Earthquake is a tremor producing destructive waves in the Earth's Crust.
2.  Richter Scale is a logarithmic scale that measures the magnitude -- and thus, energy
-- of a quake. The  magnitude increases ten times with each unit increase in Richter value. The  energy increases 31.7 times. It is an objective mathematical scale measured on  the basis of reading in the Seismograph. There is no  upper limit of Richter Scale.
3.  Mercalli intensity Scale measures the impact of an Earthquake based on  empirical observation. It varies from 1 (not felt) to 12 (total destruction).


Q.30 :c

1. Shelter belts: In the coastal and dry regions, rows of trees are planted to check the wind movement to protect soil  cover.
2.  Mulching: The  bare ground between plants is covered with a layer of organic matter like straw. It helps to retain soil  moisture.
3. Contour barriers: Stones, grass, soil  are
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1568

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

used to build barriers along contours. Trenches are made in front of the barriers to collect water.
4. Terrace farming: These are made on  the steep slopes so that flat  surfaces are available to grow crops. They can reduce surface run-off and soil  erosion.
Q.33 :b


Minimum alternate tax (MAT) was introduced for  the ‘zero tax’ companies. It is a form of Direct tax while Service tax is Indirect tax. Biggest source of revenue is corporation tax.


Q.31 :b




Public Debt in India includes only Internal and External Debt incurred by  the Central Government.
Internal Debt includes liabilities incurred by resident units in the Indian economy to other resident units, while External Debt includes liabilities incurred by  residents to non- residents.The major instruments covered under Internal Debt are - Dated Securities, Treasury-Bills, Securities issued to International Financial Institutions, etc. External Debt consists of Multilateral, bilateral, IMF and Rupee debt.
Public account liabilities comprises of small savings collections into NSSF,  PF and bond towards oil, food and fertiliser subsidies among others. These are liabilities on  the government with an interest component, however these are not a part of Public Debt.
Q.34 :d


Statement   1   is    false  because   In    India, although trade  deficit is  a recurrent feature every year , for  three consecutive years from
2001-02, 2002-03 to 2003-04, there  was a surplus on  the current account, to the tune of
0.7,  1.3  and  2.3  percents  of   GDP respectively. This   is   because  that  earnings from  services  and  private  transfers outweighed the trade deficit.
Statement  2  is   false because  The   current account   records   exports   and   imports   in goods and services and transfer payments. Statement 3 is false because the purchase of shares  and  bonds  i.e   Portfolio Investment though a part of  Capital Account but   the income derived from these assets is recorded in  the current account ;  the capital account entry will  just be for  any buying or  selling of the   portfolio  assets   in    the   international capital market.


Q.32 :c


Purchasing Managers' Index (PMI) is an indicator of business activity -- both in the manufacturing and services sectors. It is a survey-based measures that asks the respondents about changes in their perception of some key business variables from the month before. It is calculated separately for  the manufacturing and services sectors and then a composite index is constructed.

A figure above 50 denotes expansion in business activity. Anything below 50 denotes contraction. Hence, option 1 is incorrect.

It is a composite index based on  five  of the individual indexes with the following weights: New  Orders - 0.3, Output - 0.25, Employment - 0.2, Suppliers’ Delivery Times - 0.15, Stock of Items Purchased - 0.1. Hence, it is incorrect.

It is published on  a monthly basis by
Market Research and HSBC.

It collects data only from the private sector.
Q.35 :d






Q.36 :c














Q.37 :a


All the statements are true except 5th statement.





Net neutrality lays down responsibilty on both internet service
provider and government for  not discriminating data in terms of speed and pricing.
It is also related to over the top services such as Whatsapp, Skype, etc.
Gives way to innovation and provide level playing field especially to start-ups.





SIT has been formed with the primary aim of investigating into matters of black money stashed outside India.
Black money bill,  2015 is a money bill as it deals with imposition of taxes on  money which has not been declared; providing for
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1568

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in












Q.38 :b
compliance window.
Benami transaction prohibition (amendment) bill,  2015 deals with benami transactions taking place especially in real estate.

G20 is playing a crucial role in ensuring international cooperation and pressuring tax havens for  disclosing details.
Q.40 :a


District Council in an autonomous district consists of 30 members.
26 are elected on  the basis of adult franchise and 4 are nominated by  the governor.
The  district councils have power to make laws on  specific matters like  land, forest, property, marriage etc. (not all matters) for their territorial jurisdiction subjected to the approval of governor.

































Q.39 :b
The  Universe is full of matter and the attractive force of gravity pulls all matter together.
In 1990s when Hubble Space Telescope made observation about faster acceleration, the theory of Dark Energy was put forward as a possible explanation.  While special
relativity constrains objects in the Universe from moving faster than light with respect to each other when they are in a local, dynamical relationship, it places no theoretical constraint on  the relative motion between two objects that are globally separated and out of causal contact. It is
thus possible for  two objects to become separated in space by  more than the distance light could have travelled, which means that, if the expansion remains constant, the two objects will never come into causal contact.
Red Shift and Blue shift depend on  the relative motion of objects - if they are coming together, the light will show blue shift and if they are receding, it will show red shift. Andromeda, our closest galaxy shows Blue Shift.





Official Language Act (1963), and not the constitution, lays down that English should be mandatorily used for  the purpose of
communication between Union and non-Hindi states.
President has the power to direct a state to officially recognize a language in that state if he is satisfied that a substantial portion of population of state desires so.
Constitution has empowered Parliament to decide any other language also to be used in the proceedings of the SC. However, Parliament has made no  law  till now, so presently only English is being used in the proceedings of the SC. There is no constitutional mandate of imposition of English.

Q.41 :b
























Q.42 :d














Q.43 :a




Art 323A empowers Parliament to provide for establishment of administrative tribunals for centre, states, local bodies, public corporations, and other public authorities. In pursuance of this article Parliament passed the Administrative Tribunals Act.  This  act authorizes the Central Government to establish one Central Administrative tribunal and the state administrative tribunals.
Art 323B empowers the Parliament and state legislatures to establish tribunals for adjudicating disputes over matter other than administrative.
Administrative tribunals created under Article
323-A do  not operate in a hierarchy since there is one for  the centre and one for  each state. While for  tribunals under art 323B hierarchy may be created.





Original jurisdiction of the SC does not include Inter-state water disputes, dispute arising out of pre-constitution treaty, agreement, covenant, sanad etc, recovery of damages by  a state against centre the suit brought by  a citizen against the centre or states.







While the moderates demanded
constitutional reforms and share of Indians in service, extremists demanded Swarajya. Poorna Swaraj was not in picture until the times of Bhagat Singh and Lahore congress session. The  first statement is correct.
The  campaign to boycott Foreign goods during the Swadeshi movement was started by  the Moderates. Extremists wanted to extend this campaign beyond the boycott and in other regions outside Bengal.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1568

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in





Q.44 :b


















Q.45 :b






As   per  the  the  Wavell's plan,  the  Indian representation  in    the   Viceroy's executive council was  not  just  half. It  proposed that except for  governor general and commander in chief, all  the members of executive council to be Indians.
Hindus and  Muslims to  have  equal representation  and  the  league  demanded that all  the Muslim representatives to be its nominees.
It did  not propose for  immediate setting up of constituent assembly. It proposed for  new constitution once the war is won.















Q.48 :d
speed of internet access.
National Telecom Policy, 2012 envisions spread of internet connection to masses. Promotion of Domestic Electronic Manufacturing will decrease cost of production and more internet devices would be available at affordable rates and internet penetration will increase.
Promotion of Mobile and web applications in Indian Languages will make internet usages more accessible to common man.





Cultivation on  mountain slopes without appropriate  land treatment  measures  such as bounding terracing and trenching cause soil  erosion and loss of soil  nutrients
All remaining options can lead to accelerated soil  erosion.














Q.46 :c



















Q.47 :d
The  tribal inhabitants of Chota Nagpur rebelled violently against the high revenue rates between 1820 and 1837.
The  Chuar rebellion was in and around the region of Midnapur in Bengal.
Sanyasi rebellion was in and around east bengal.
Bhill uprising was in Khandesh region of
Maharashtra





The  maximum and minimum strength of the Legislative council has been fixed by  the constitution. The  maximum strength is one third of the strength of the legislative assembly. Minimum is fixed at 40 with some exceptions.
The  actual strength of the council is fixed by the Parliament.
The  propriety of the nomination of
1/6th members to the council by  governor cannot be challenged in any court. Governor can nominate to council, persons
having experience in art, literature, science, social service and cooperative movement.





Digital inclusion is the ability of individuals and groups to access and use information and communication technologies.
NOFN aims to connect all Panchayats to internet.
Shifting from 2G to 3G does not essentially guarantee ‘inclusion’ or spread of new connections; it merely indicates increase in

Q.49 :a




Declaration of area as Sanctuary –When any area comprised within any reserve forest or any part of the territorial waters, which is considered by  the State Government to be of adequate ecological, faunal, geomorphological, natural or zoological significance for  the purpose of protecting, propagating or developing wildlife or its environment, is to be included in a sanctuary,Provided that where any part of
the territorial waters is to be so included, prior concurrence of the Central Government shall be obtained by  the State Government. No alteration of the boundaries of a sanctuary shall be made except on  a resolution passed by  the Legislation of the State.
Activities permitted – The  Chief Wildlife Warden may, on  application, grant to any person a permit to enter or reside in a sanctuary for  all or any of the following purposes, namely:
investigation or study of wildlife and purposes ancillary or incidental thereto;
photography;
scientific research;
tourism; hence, 1st statement is correct.
transaction of lawful business with any person residing in the sanctuary.
The  Chief Wildlife Warden shall be the authority who may regulate, control or prohibit, in keeping with the interests of wildlife, the grazing or movement  of livestock. He  shall take such measures in
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1568

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in






























Q.50 :b





















Q.51 :b
such manner as may be prescribed, for immunisation against communicable
diseases of the livestock kept in or within five kilometres of a sanctuary. Thus , grazing of livestock in the Wildlife Sanctuary is allowed unlike in National Park where it's not permitted.Hence, 2nd statement is correct. Prohibition of entry into sanctuary with weapon – No person shall enter a sanctuary with any weapon except with the previous permission in writing of the Chief Wildlife Warden or the authorised officer. Thus, carrying of weapon is allowed but with prior permission .Hence, 3rd statement is
incorrect.
The  Chief Wildlife Warden shall be the authority who may regulate, control or prohibit, in keeping with the interests of wildlife, the grazing or movement  of livestock. He  shall take such measures in such manner as may be prescribed, for immunisation against communicable
diseases of the livestock kept in or within five kilometres of a sanctuary.





Chlorofluorocarbons are  also  called halocarbons    which    are    nontoxic nonflammable   chemicals    used    in refrigerants,     propellants    and     solvents. Though stable  when  released  they  break apart  and  release  chlorine atoms  in   the stratosphere destroying the ozone layer.
Six main greenhouse gases are: Carbon dioxide (CO2);
Methane (CH4); Nitrous oxide (N2O); Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs); Perfluorocarbons (PFCs); and Sulphur hexafluoride (SF6)
Hence only 3rd  and  4th  statements  are correct and option (b)  is the correct answer.





Acid   rain  occurs  due  to  concentration  of sulphur dioxide and  nitrogen dioxide in  the atmosphere,  which react water molecules in the atmosphere too produce acids, which fall to the earth as acid rain.
Acid   deposition  has  many  harmful effects especially when the  pH   falls below  5.1  for terrestrial systems and below 5.5 for  aquatic systems.
It  contributes to human respiratory diseases such as  bronchitis and  asthma,  which can cause  pre- mature  death.  It  also damages statues, buildings, metals and car finishes.













Q.52 :d


































Q.53 :b



















Q.54 :c
Acid  deposition can damage tree foliage directly  but   the   most   serious  effect  is weakening of  trees  so they be- come more susceptible to other types of  dam- age. The nitric acid and the nitrate salts in  acid deposition can lead to excessive soil  nitrogen levels. Hence only statement  1 and 4 are correct and option (b) is the correct answer.





Black   carbon    is    a   component  of    soot, released during combustion, particularly incomplete combustion of  fossil fuels or biomass.
They  are   released   when  carbon  is    only partially combusted. Hence Statement 1 and
2 are correct.
The  main sources of  black carbon emissions are burning of  biomass in  inefficient cooking stoves, diesel emissions from the transport sector and from generators (especially those without pollution filters), and burning of other fossil  fuels  and   biomass  in   industry  and power production.
Black carbon  is  released as a particle and hence  falls  in   the  category of   particulate matter, not greenhouse gas.
All   particle  emissions  from  a  combustion source are broadly referred to as particulate matter (PM)  and usually delineated by  sizes less than 10 micrometres (PM10) or  less than
2.5  micrometres   (PM2.5). Black carbon are ultrafine  particles  or    PM0.1,   and  pose  a strong health risk. They also strongly absorb light and convert that energy to heat. Hence statement 3 and 4 are also correct.
Option (d)  is the correct answer.





The  Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilisers has decided to remove cap of 35 percent on neem-coated urea. Removing this cap will give impetus to agri sector.
Coating urea with neem has many advantages like  the release of the nitrogen becomes slow and it also helps reducing risk of disease in crops, However, this may increase the prices by  around 5 percent and it will be absorbed by  farmers as it has no subsidy implication.
This  will also help plugging the diversion of urea to non-agricultural uses and help raise the efficiency of fertilizer use.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1568

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in














Q.55 :c
Albedo is the reflective quality of a surface, expressed as the percentage of reflected insolation to incoming insolation.
Arranging them in their decreasing value : Fresh snow (~80-95%), Deserts(~30%), Grasslands(~15-35%), Tropical forests(~15%). The  ocean surface is darker, reflecting only an average of about 10% of insolation.








Q.58 :d
They are generally hard and water percolate in them with great difficulty.








Ocean productivity largely refers to the production of organic matter by "phytoplankton," plants suspended in the ocean, most of which are single-celled.
Temperature inversion is reversal of normal temperature pattern so that air  temperature increases with altitude.
Conditions favorable to temperature inversion: Calm winds will reduce vertical mixing.
Clear skies will increase rate of surface
cooling.
Longer nights will provide greater duration of cooling.
Inversion is more common in winter due to longer nights and Inversions are stronger in winter because of the greater difference in temperature between the cool surface air















Q.59 :c
Phytoplankton.
They are "photoautotrophs," harvesting light to convert inorganic to organic carbon, and they supply this organic carbon to diverse "heterotrophs," organisms that obtain their energy solely from the respiration of organic matter.
Longitudinal variations, the ocean currents, seasonality, depth variation, temperature and salinity all determines the amount of phytoplankton in the ocean waters.










Q.56 :d
and the warmer air  aloft.
A very low  angle of the sun in the sky  (as in winter)
Less daytime heating of air  close to the ground and surface.
Dry  air  instead of saturated air  is favorable to temperature inversion.
Following are the conditions associated with summer solstice (21 June) in Northern Hemisphere:

The  North Pole is tilted towards the sun and its summer time in Northern Hemisphere, whereas South Pole is tilted away from the sun.
In Northern Hemisphere days are longer than the nights.
Along the Arctic Circle a day is 24 hours long and there is no  sunset, whereas along the
1. The   valley of  Narmada is  situated between the  Satpuras  and  the  Vindhyas .  River Narmada flows from east  to  west  in   this valley and  falls into  the  Arabian Sea.  This valley  has   been   formed   due   to   the subsidence of the land mass between the Vindhyas and  the  Satpuras.  Hence all   the statements are correct.


Q.57 :b

Igneous rocks are produced by  the crystallization and solidification of molten magma. Some of the characteristics of igneous rocks include:

These rocks are solidified from molten magma.
These are not fossiliferrous rocks. They are granular and crystalline.
They are generally weathered by  mechanical weathering.








Q.60 :a
Antarctic Circle night is 24 hours long and there is no  sunrise.
All places within the Arctic Circle have 24 hours daylight for  6 months and also experience the midnight sun.





Mercury, Venus Earth and Mars are called the
Inner planets or Terrestrial planets. Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune are called outer planets or Jovian planets.
Inner planets are small in size and have high density, whereas outer planets are larger in size and have a low  density.
Inner planets are relatively hotter than the outer planets.
The  planets closer to the sun than the earth i.e  Mercury and Venus are called the inferior planets.
The  planets located at a distance greater
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1568

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in








Q.61 :a
than the distance of the earth from the sun are called the superior planets. Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune are the superior planets.





The  NCT of Delhi has a special status of being a UT with a Legislative Assembly and Government as per 69th Constitutional Amendment Act,  1991.
Statement a. is correct. While Parliament has the power to legislate on  all matters, State Assembly has been given power to legislate on  State List  and Concurrent LIst except police, public order and land. In case of a dispute, the Central Law  prevails.
Statement b. is incorrect. Both Lt. Governior and Governors are appointed unilaterally by the Centre
Statement c. is incorrect. CM of NCT (Delhi)
is appointed by  the President and not the LG. CM of State is appointed by  the Governor.




















Q.65 :d






Q.66 :d
It is in news because, Former Prime Minister Atal  Bihari Vajpayee and late educationist Madan Mohan Malviya (posthumously) have been chosen for  Bharat Ratna-  country’s highest civilian award.
Bharat Ratna, the country’s highest civilian award instituted in 1954, is given in recognition of exceptional service, performance of the highest order in any field of human endeavour. Any person without distinction of race, occupation, position or sex is eligible for  this award.
The  recommendations for  Bharat Ratna are made by  the Prime Minister himself to the President.






All statements are correct.

Q.62 :c















Q.63 :c


Rabies is perhaps the most well  known disease associated with bats. Along with animals such as dogs, foxes, raccoons, and skunks, bats are one of the primary animals that transmit rabies.
Rabies, especially a set of symptoms of the later stages of an infection, in which the victim has difficulty swallowing, shows panic when presented with liquids to drink and cannot quench its thirst.
Fish  farming is cultivation of fish  in a controlled environment often a coastal or inland pond lake and harvesting when they reach the desired size.
Fish  Ranching - A form of aquaculture in which a population of a fish  species (such as salmon) is held in captivity for  the first stage of their lives, then released, and later harvested as adults when they return from the sea to their freshwater birthplace to spawn.
Fish  farming is the principal form of aquaculture, while other methods may fall under mariculture.

It involves raising fish  commercially in tanks or
Scheme for  Persons Of Indian Origin:
enclosures, usually for  food.



















Q.64 :a
Introduced in 2002.
Eligibility criteria – open to all who can establish that their ancestor until three generations back, were born in India. Citizen from bangladesh, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Nepal, Bhutan, China and sri lanka are not eligible.
A person with PIO card enjoy certain visa benefit while coming to India.
People with PIO card cannot hold constitutional post in India.
PIO card holders enjoy parity with NRIs in economic, financial and educational benefits. They do  not have voting rights.

Q.67 :c




Wildlife Crime Control Bureau  is  a statutory multi-disciplinary body  established   by    the Government  of   India under  the  Ministry of Environment and  Forests,  to  combat organized  wildlife crime in the country.
WCCB has been tasked with functions unders the wildlife (protection) Act,  1972
The  Wildlife Crime Control Bureau  envisages attaining excellence as  intelligence and enforcement agency, matching international standards in   the  field of   wildlife crime intelligence  in   its  core  capabilities, functioning as one team integrated into the intelligence community. It  aims to conserve
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1568

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

the  wildlife wealth  by   proper and  effective intervention into matters related to capacity building of  enforcement agencies in  the field of  wildlife crime  enforcement  and  by providing professional assistance to create deterrence   to  the  organized  wildlife crime nexus.








Q.70 :c
with weight of 10%. The  grants to States will be divided into two, a grant to duly constituted Gram Panchayats and a grant to duly constituted Municipal bodies, on  the basis of rural and urban population.

Q.68 :d


Golden rice  is   a  transgenic with enhanced vitamin  A   content,   producing  nutritionally rich rice to save many lives
Frost resistant tomatoes have been produced by  introducing gene for  anti freeze proteins from polar fish  living in ice  water.
Bt cotton is a genetically modified variety of cotton producing an insecticide.
IR8 and Semi-dwarf IR36  Rice  - The  variety was one of many of the Green
Revolution which replaced many local strains and genetic diversity previously found in rice paddies. It is estimated that over 100,000 local strains were grown in 1960, which have been largely replaced by  hybrid varieties.







Q.71 :b






Q.72 :d





Q.73 :c
As the lake is rich in organic nutrients their will be algal bloom and eutrophication of the lake and hence the algae will deprive the water body of oxygen and fish  will die.





Coral reefs  are  generally found at  shallow salty and mud - free water.





All are true.

Q.69 :c


The  recommendation is to increase the state’s share from the central pool of taxes. This  might affect the fiscal space of the centre. To address this there will be commensurate reductions in the Central Assistance to States (CAS) known as “plan transfers.”
CAS transfers per capita are only mildly progressive as greater central discretion reduced progressivity. Implementing the FFC recommendations would increase progressivity because progressive tax








Q.74 :d





Q.75 :d
Divisble pool, which gets divided between Center and States in India, consists of all taxes, except surcharges and cess levied by central government. Hence option C is correct.





All the statements are true.
transfers would increase, which gives greater discretion and fiscal autonomy to the states. The  FFC transfers have more favorable
impact on  the states which are relatively less developed which is an indication that the FFC transfers are progressive i.e. states with
lower per capita net state domestic product, receive on  average much larger transfers per capita.
The  Finance Commission is also required to recommend on  ‘the measures needed to augment the Consolidated Fund of a State to supplement the resources of the Panchayats and Municipalities in the State on  the basis of the recommendations made by  the Finance Commission of the State’
FFC  has recommended distribution of grants to States for  local bodies using 2011 population data with weight of 90% and area
Manufacturing sector in India is facing following problems:

Regulatory hurdles Access to funding Infrastructure Labour regulations
Disconnect between formal education system and requirement of the employers

Government has launched National Manufacturing
Policy in 2011 to boost the manufacturing sector.


Q.76 :b

Labeling of  environmentally beneficial goods and resources extracted by  more sustainable methods  can help consumers  decide which
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1568

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in


















Q.77 :c
goods  and  services  to  buy  product ecolabelling can  encourage  companies  to develop green  products  and  services  and help consumers select more environmentally beneficial products and services.
Eco-labels are also being used to certify that the fish   bearing  ecolabels  were  caught  by using sustainable  fishing methods  and  also for  timber products to certify and trees were harvested in  accordance  with by  sustainable forest management principles.
Eco   label is  issued by   the  central polution control board (CPCB).





Poly  chlorinated biphenyles are obtained by burning   of    plastics   and   not   agricultural waste.







Q.80 :a
television camera for  scanning and telecasting scenes.
They are used in industries for  detecting minor flaws or holes in metal sheets.





Since a Money Bill can only be introduced by a Minister thus, it is always a government Bill. Hence, 1st statement is correct.
The  Money Bill is one which
contains only matters given in Article 110 of the Constitution. If any other matter is a part of a Bill, then that Bill can't be considered as a  Money Bill. Hence, 2nd statement is correct.
The  final authority to decide on  status of a Bill as Money Bill is the Lok Sabha Speaker, not the President.Hence, 3rd statement is incorrect.

Q.78 :b









Q.79 :c
Polyvarietal   agriculture   is    where   several genetic varities of the same crop are planted polyculture  is   When  different  plants  which mature    at    various   times   are    planted together.





A photocell is a technological application of the photoelectric effect. It is a device whose electrical properties are affected by  light. A photocell converts a change in intensity of

Q.81 :c










Q.82 :d




Collegium system is not mentioned in constitution.
The  government can return some recommendations made by  the collegium, but if they are reiterated it becomes binding on  the government.
illumination into a change in photocurrent. The  photocells, inserted in the door light electric circuit, are used as automatic door opener. A person approaching a doorway may interrupt a light beam which is incident on  a photocell. The  abrupt change in photocurrent may be used to start a motor which opens the door or rings an alarm (burglar alarm)
In burglar alarm, (invisible) ultraviolet light is continuously made to fall  on  a photocell installed at the doorway. A person entering the door interrupts the beam falling on  the photocell. The  abrupt change in photocurrent is used to start an electric bell  ringing.
In fire  alarm, a number of photocells are installed at suitable places in a building. In the event of breaking out of fire, light radiations fall  upon the photocell. This completes the electric circuit through an electric bell  or a siren which starts operating as a warning signal.
Photocells are used in the reproduction of sound in motion pictures and in the
Kepler’s laws of planetary motion state that-

All  planets  in   the  solar system  move in   elliptical orbits with the Sun at one of the focal points

The   radius vector drawn from the sun to a planet sweeps out equal areas in  equal time intervals. This follows from the fact that the force of  gravitation on the planet is  central and hence angular momentum is  conserved. This  law  comes from the observations that planets appear to move slower when they are farther from the sun than when they are nearer.

In   motion  of    an  object  under  the  gravitational influence of  another object the angular momentum and Total mechanical energy is conserved, but linear momentum is not conserved.

Earth is  also tilted on  its axis and while travessing across  its  orbit the  northern  hemisphere  is   tilted towards the sun by  an angle to 23 and half degree.


Q.83 :d
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1568

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Stars twinkle because of  disturbances in  our atmosphere.  Hubble telescope  was placed in space, in  order to gaze  upon the  universe unhindered by   the veil   of  the atmosphere. Stars  do    not   twinkle  when  viewed  from Hubble telescope.
One of  the first achievements of  HST  was to determine the rate at which our universe has been  expanding  i.e.  Hubble Constant.  This requires an accurate measurement of  the distances  of   far    away  galaxies,  which  is almost impossible with ground-based telescopes. This  was one of  the key projects of  the telescope. The   observations  with HST settled the rate of  expansion within ten per cent accuracy.
Another       revolutionary       discovery       in astronomy that HST helped to make was that almost every galaxy contains a black hole in its   centre.   Observations   with  HST    were crucial in  this discovery because of  its ability to  measure  the  speed  of    gas  near  the centres of galaxies.













Q.87 :c











Q.88 :d
are violated by  the private individuals, there are  no    constitutional   remedies   but   only ordinary legal remedies. Therefore, under the current case the aggrieved can’t move to the Supreme Court. Though, he can go  the High Court because  the  writ    jurisdiction  of   the High  Court is wider than that of the Supreme Court, as High  Court can issue writs even for the enforcement of the ordinary rights.





Phytoremediation is a type of bio remediation technique. In this technique plant is used to decontaminate soil  and water. Mycoremediation is technique in which fungi is used to decontaminate the area while mycofiltration is the use of fungi to detoxicate water in soil.


Q.84 :a

















Q.85 :b















Q.86 :b




The  Speaker and Deputy Speaker do  not make and subscribe any separate oath while assuming their office.
Speaker does have the right to vote, but he can cast his  vote only in case of ties to resolve the deadlock.
Deputy Speaker is not sub-ordinate to the speaker and is directly responsible to the Lok Sabha.
Speaker continues to remain in office, till the new Lok Sabha is constituted, even after the dissolution of the Lok Sabha.





Fundamental duties are inspired by  the erstwhile Soviet Constitution. We  have adopted Directive principles from the Irish Constitution.
Fundamental duties are confined only to the citizens of India. Residents is a wider term than citizens.
Fundamental duties can be enforced in court of law  if the Parliament passes a law  in this regard.





The    rights under  Article 19  are  protected against only the state action and not against the  private individual. When the rights that are available against the State’s action only









Q.89 :c


















Q.90 :b
Detrimental health effects of lead are failure of kidneys and brain function and interference in development of Red Blood cells. Lead has no  effect on  lungs or eyes. Byssinosis is known as brown lung disease is caused due to exposure to cotton dust.





Astrosat-1 is India`s first satellite dedicated to astronomy, which will scan the universe in x-ray, ultraviolet and visible light bands. Aditya-1 will be dedicated to solar coronal studies and will contain Visible Emission Line Space Solar Coronagraph -- the main payload to study the coronal dynamics.
GISAT is India’s ‘eye-in-the-sky’ which will be stationed 36,000 km  above to maintain
round-the-clock vigil  and assist state authorities to tackle natural disasters, floods and forest fires and keep a watch over the country`s sensitive borders.





A new technology developed in EU, which involves changing a part of plant genome that could be changed to render it less vulnerable to disease or increase yields or other desirable traits.
Researchers use “molecular scissors” to break apart a genome and then speed up the repair process thus mimicking the natural action which occurs when plants are under attack from diseases.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1568

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in









Q.91 :c




























Q.92 :b
It doesn’t involve wholesome change of plant genome or introduction of other organism’s genes as in GM which is GM’s major criticism. Hence, statement 1 is wrong and statement
2 is correct.





Sonar and Radar work on  the same principle of detecting an object through detection of reflected waves or generated waves ( sound and radio respectively) from the object. SONAR (Sound Navigation and Ranging) uses sound waves and being a mechanical wave travels further in the water. Moreso, in water radio waves are easily absorbed and hence RADAR could not be used for  large distances. Futher, SONAR could be used both in active and passive mode.
RADAR (Radio detection and ranging) are generally used for  aerial detection as radio waves have high penetration in air  whereas sound waves have low  penetration in air. Futher, the speed of radio waves is thousands of times faster than sound waves.
Hence, statement 1 is correct. Statement 2 is correct as range of SONAR will decrease as radio waves are absorbed more easily. Statement 3 is incorrect as sound waves are readily absorbed in air





Clinically, a heat  stroke  occurs only after body temperature crosses 104 degrees F, when excessive metabolism leads to a sharp fall  in blood pressure and oxygen levels, a condition called hypoxia.
“Increase in metabolism primarily puts pressure on  the heart in a very short time. It causes expansion of vessels, a major drop in blood pressure, and hypoxia. Metabolism goes haywire, creating a toxin overload which affects multiple organs
Q.94 :a Q.95 :c Q.96 :d











Q.97 :c


Major difference  between  the  two types  of food  chains  lies  in   the  primary  source  of energy  which in   the  case  of   grazing  food chain comes from living plant biomass while in  the other from the dead organic matter. Both the food chains are found in  terrestrial as well  as aquatic ecosystem.





As   per the  law   of   thermodynamics,   which state  that there is   loss  of   energy  in   each process, with the conversion of  energy from one  form  to  another  or   while  passing   of energy from one productivity level to other energy is  always lost. Thus the  pyramid of energy is always upright.





The  Global Innovation Index 2014 (GII), in its
7th edition this year, is co-published by Cornell University, INSEAD, and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO,  an agency of the United Nations, UN).
The  theme of the 2014 GII, the ‘Human Factor in Innovation’, explores the role of the individuals and teams behind the innovation process. Statistically capturing this human contribution to innovation is a daunting challenge.
India slipped off 10 places to 76th place. India is worst performer among BRICS countries. China - 29, Russia 49, SA – 53, Brazil 61 (each country is moving up places except India).





Titan- USA
K Computer –Japan
Mira  –USA
- See more at: http://indianexpress.com/article/expla ined/explained-toxin-overload-how-heat- kills/#sthash.Kr1b10Ss.dpuf
Juqueen –Germany
Sequoia  -USA

Q.98 :d

Q.93 :a


Lotic  water system and Lentic water system are types of fresh water ecosystem. Lotic water system means moving water system. It includes rivers, creeks, springs and brooks etc.
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Fauna and Flora (CITES):

In order to regulate international trade in endangered species of Wild Life,  the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of wild fauna and flora (CITES)  was signed in March 1973.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1568

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

World Heritage Convention:

India is a member of World Heritage Convention responsible for  listing of World Heritage Sites, which include both Cultural and natural sites. The  World Heritage Convention is a Convention under the aegis of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). Wild Life wing of
the Ministry of Environment and Forests is associated with the conservation of the Natural World Heritage sites.

The  Convention on  Conservation of Migratory Species (CMS)  or Bonn Convention aims to conserve migratory species throughout their range. The Convention came into force in 1979.
India is a signatory to the convention since 1983. International Union for  Conservation of Nature and
Natural Resources - The  IUCN Red List  of Threatened
Species (also known as the IUCN Red List  or Red Data List),  conservation status of plant and animal species.


Q.99 :d

Biomethanation is anaerobic digestion of organic materials which is converted into biogas, a gaseous combustible mixture, of methane (CH4). Biomethanation is a biological treatment method that can be used to recover both nutrients and energy contained in wet biodegradable municipal waste.
Gasification is incomplete combustion which produces combustible gas such as
hydrogen,  synthetic fuels and is a process that converts dry  organic or fossil based carbonaceous materials into carbon monoxide, hydrogen and carbon dioxide at elevated temperature (500-1800C) Pyrolysis uses heat to break down combustible polymeric materials in the absence of oxygen, producing a mixture of combustible gases (primarily methane, complex hydrocarbons, hydrogen, and
carbon monoxide), liquids and solid residues. The  products of pyrolysis process are: (i) a gas mixture; (ii) a liquid (bio-oil/tar); (iii) a solid residue (carbon black).
Incineration technology is complete combustion of waste with the recovery of heat to produce steam that in turn produces power through steam turbines. But Incineration produces dioxins which are POPs (Persistent Organic Pollutants).


Q.100 :b
UN conference in Japan, adopted a treaty that will phase out mercury use by  2020. 110 countries signed this treaty, will come into effect in 90 days. The  treaty sets a phase-out date of 2020 for  a list  of products and gives governments about 15 years to end all mercury mining. Countries need to adopt alternative techs to phase out mercury use.

Mercury is released by  natural processes as well  as thru human use. It is absorbed by  forming deep sea sediment n in lake sediments. This  is then absorbed by  marine life  n thru there it is consumed by humans. Mercury affects the brains n kidneys as found in the Minamata disaster.

East n South-east Asian countries are the biggest emitters of mercury, along with African n Latin American countries.

Mercury is use in variety of electrical appliances, thermometers, barometers, blood pressure monitors. Artisanal n small scale gold production accounts for  highest mercury use.
Coal combustion comes second in mercury use. Coal fired plants need to adopt other techs to stop mercury emissions; fluorescent lamps n bulbs containing more than 5 mg of mercury are banned, mercury mining is banned.

Mercury will be allowed in artisanal and small- scale gold mining, dental filling  are exempt from
2020 ban, though they are encouraged to minimize its use; switches, relays, mercury containing batteries are banned in 2020. Thermometers, Barometers, blood pressure monitors using mercury are banned. Use of mercury in religious n traditional ceremonies is exempt from ban.

Incidentally, the treaty does not focus much on  the emission levels nor does it specify any threshold for emissions. Like in case of coal fired power plants. Mercury is most unregulated metal, though US n EU has placed some control on  its trade. But  China n Japan have not banned the export of the metal, but now with the signing of the treaty an export ban is likely.

Hence, statement 1 is incorrect. Statement 2 & 3 are correct.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1568

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Q.1     a         b         c         d Q.2     a         b         c         d Q.3     a         b         c         d Q.4     a         b         c         d Q.5     a         b         c         d Q.6     a         b         c         d Q.7     a         b         c         d Q.8     a         b         c         d Q.9     a         b         c         d Q.10   a         b         c         d Q.11   a         b         c         d Q.12   a         b         c         d Q.13   a         b         c         d Q.14   a         b         c         d Q.15   a         b         c         d Q.16   a         b         c         d Q.17   a         b         c         d Q.18   a         b         c         d Q.19   a         b         c         d Q.20   a         b         c         d Q.21   a         b         c         d Q.22   a         b         c         d Q.23   a         b         c         d Q.24   a         b         c         d Q.25   a         b         c         d Q.26   a         b         c         d Q.27   a         b         c         d Q.28   a         b         c         d Q.29   a         b         c         d Q.30   a         b         c         d Q.31   a         b         c         d Q.32   a         b         c         d Q.33   a         b         c         d Q.34   a         b         c         d Q.35   a         b         c         d
Q.36   a         b         c         d Q.37   a         b         c         d Q.38   a         b         c         d Q.39   a         b         c         d Q.40   a         b         c         d Q.41   a         b         c         d Q.42   a         b         c         d Q.43   a         b         c         d Q.44   a         b         c         d Q.45   a         b         c         d Q.46   a         b         c         d Q.47   a         b         c         d Q.48   a         b         c         d Q.49   a         b         c         d Q.50   a         b         c         d Q.51   a         b         c         d Q.52   a         b         c         d Q.53   a         b         c         d Q.54   a         b         c         d Q.55   a         b         c         d Q.56   a         b         c         d Q.57   a         b         c         d Q.58   a         b         c         d Q.59   a         b         c         d Q.60   a         b         c         d Q.61   a         b         c         d Q.62   a         b         c         d Q.63   a         b         c         d Q.64   a         b         c         d Q.65   a         b         c         d Q.66   a         b         c         d Q.67   a         b         c         d Q.68   a         b         c         d Q.69   a         b         c         d Q.70   a         b         c         d
Q.71   a         b         c         d Q.72   a         b         c         d Q.73   a         b         c         d Q.74   a         b         c         d Q.75   a         b         c         d Q.76   a         b         c         d Q.77   a         b         c         d Q.78   a         b         c         d Q.79   a         b         c         d Q.80   a         b         c         d Q.81   a         b         c         d Q.82   a         b         c         d Q.83   a         b         c         d Q.84   a         b         c         d Q.85   a         b         c         d Q.86   a         b         c         d Q.87   a         b         c         d Q.88   a         b         c         d Q.89   a         b         c         d Q.90   a         b         c         d Q.91   a         b         c         d Q.92   a         b         c         d Q.93   a         b         c         d Q.94   a         b         c         d Q.95   a         b         c         d Q.96   a         b         c         d Q.97   a         b         c         d Q.98   a         b         c         d Q.99   a         b         c         d Q.100 a         b         c         d
