GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1567

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Q.1  :b
Q.5  :a








Q.2  :c


















Q.3  :c
Gases are poor thermal conductors while liquids have conductivities intermediate between solids and gases.
Thermal Conductivity : Solid > Liquid > Gas





There are three distinct modes of heat transfer: conduction, convection and radiation.
Conduction is the mechanism of transfer of heat between two adjacent parts of a body because of their temperature difference. Convection is a mode of heat transfer by actual motion of matter. It is possible only in fluids.
The  third mechanism for  heat transfer needs no  medium; it is called radiation and the energy so radiated by  electromagnetic
waves is called radiant energy.




















Q.6  :a
This  new numbering system was adopted in
2010, according to which:
All North-South oriented  highways are even numbered, number increasing from east  to west.
All East-West oriented highways are odd numbered, number increasing from north to south.
Three        digit        numbered         highways are secondary routes of  a main highway and suffixes to these like  A, B, C etc indicate very small spin-offs of sub-highways.
Only, the  third statement  is  correct.  Under the  new system  the  new NH  44 becomes single     longest      NH       ,     which     runs from Srinagar to Kanyakumari.





Geotagging  is  the  process of  adding geographical information to various media in the form of metadata.
The  data usually consists of  coordinates  like latitude and longitude, but may even include
Inflation is controlled by  limiting flow  of currency in the economy and/or increasing the output of production.

Purchase of government securities from the public is inflationary as it would infuse more money to the market.

Repayment of public debt will release money in the market and hence increase inflationary trend.


Q.4  :c
bearing, altitude, distance and place names. Geotagging   is    most   commonly  used   for photographs and can help people get a lot  of specific information about where the picture was taken or  the exact location of  a friend who logged on  to a service.
The     irregularities   in    the   construction   of houses under various housing schemes, including  the   Rajiv     Gruhakalpa  scheme, would be known only after geo-tagging was done.
Option A correct

Bani Thani is a famous painting from the Kishangarh School of Painting - of Rajasthani painting style.
It has been labeled as India's "Mona Lisa". The  painting's subject, Bani Thani, was a singer and poet in Kishangarh in the time of king Savant Singh (1748-1764).
It is a totally different style with highly exaggerated features like  long necks, large, almond shaped eyes, and long fingers.
This  style of painting essentially depicts Radha and Krishna as divine lovers, and beautifully portrays their mystical love.
Other themes of Bani Thani paintings include portraits, court scenes, dancing, hunting, music parties, nauka vihar (lovers travelling in a boat), Krishna Lila,  Bhagavata Purana and various other festivals like  Holi,  Diwali, Durga puja, and Dussehra.
Q.7  :c


Discretionary Powers of the Governor.
If  no   party gets an absolute majority, the Governor  can   use   his    discretion   in    the selection of the Chief Minister;
During an emergency he can override the advice of  the  council of  ministers. At  such times, he acts as an agent of  the President and becomes the real ruler of the state;
He  uses his   direction in  submitting a report to the President regarding the affairs of  the state; and
He  can withhold his  assent to a bill  and send it to the President for  his  approval.


He  can   reject the advice of  the  council of minister about  dissolving assembly . Hence
3rd statement is incorrect.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1567

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in









Q.8  :b
If Governor recommend President rule under article 356 ,the decision of  the  Governor  is subjected  to  judicial review.(S R  Bommai
Case 1994).






Pabna agrarian revolt was the result of
unrest caused by  the efforts of the zamindars to enhance rents beyond the legal limits. In May  1873, an agrarian league or combination was formed in Yusufshahi Parganah in Pabna district to resist the demands of the zamindars. The  league organized a rent- strike — the ryots were to refuse to pay the enhanced rents — and challenged the zamindars in the courts. There was very little violence — it only occurred when the zamindars tried to compel the ryots to
submit
to their terms by  force.


























Q.12 :a
having any physiological union. The relationship is unequal in  that  only one individual gets  the  benefit  from  the association while the other remains unaffected.Hence,   1st    and   2nd statements are incorrect.
The   chief benefits  of  this association are shelter, anchorage , transportation and food supply.Hence, only  3rd  statement   is correct.
The  commensal that lives upon the host's body is  called ectocommensal  eg. sucker fish   is   an ectocommensal   as  it     attaches itself to the  body of  shark( host)  . All  the ectocommensals are  small in   size and  not burdensome to the host.
The  commensal that lives inside the host's body  is   called endocommensal  eg.  the harmless protozoan in  the intestinal tract of mammals and  micro-organismsin the  canal system of sponges.


Q.9  :d











Q.10 :b





















Q.11 :c




Some producers (plants) release carbon dioxide and consume oxygen. Consumers add carbon dioxide to the atmosphere through the process of respiration. The  dead organic matter is decomposed by microorganisms and CO2  is released into the atmosphere by  decomposers.





Revenue expenditure is the expenditure incurred for  purposes other than the creation of physical or financial assets of the central government. It generally refers to the day to day expenditure incurred by  the government. Pensions to the judges of the high courts
-part of Non-Plan Revenue Expenditure. Expenditure incurred on  building a  warship- part of Non-Plan Revenue Expenditure( Defence Expenditure).
Assistance given to state governments to meet their plan expenditure falls in both the capital & revenue expenditure.
Loan given to PSUs  is included in the capital expenditure-Hence, option b is the correct answer.





Commensalism is  a relationship between 2 or   more organisms living together without





























Q.13 :d
The  Cholas who succeeded the Pallavas and ruled over South India from the 9th to 13th centuries A.D. created the great temples, the Brihadisvara temples of Thanjavur, Gangaikondacholisvaram, and the Airatesvara temple at Darasuram. The three Chola temples in India are exemplary production in the Dravidian style of temple architecture.
King  Rajaraja Chola constructed the Brihadisvara Temple in 10th century A.D., designed by  the famous architect Sama Varma. The  other two temples, Gangaikondacholisvaram and Airatesvara were also built in the age of Cholas and testify their brilliant achievements in architecture, sculpture, painting, and bronze casting.
Durga Temple is located in Aihole in the state of Karnataka, India. The  temple was built between the 7th and the 8th century by the dynasty of the Chalukyas.
The  Meenakshi Temple, Tanjavur was built by  the Pallava kings





Albedo implies the proportion of the shortwave solar radiation reflected by  a surface.
It is a function of surface colour, angle of incidence, and surface texture etc.
In the visible wavelengths, darker colors
have lower albedos, and lighter colors higher albedos. On  water surfaces, the angle of the
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1567

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

solar rays also affects albedo values. Lower angles produce a greater reflection than do higher angles. In addition, smooth surfaces increase albedo, whereas rougher surfaces reduce it. In general, light surfaces are more reflective than dark surfaces and thus have higher albedo values. Particulates in the atmosphere appear to enhance this albedo impact. Scientists now have evidence that soot and particulate aerosol fallout are significant causes of glacial snow and ice losses across the Himalayas.
On  the Greenland Ice  Sheet, black soot, dust, and particulates accumulate with snow and harden into the ice, darkening the surface. As surface albedo decreases, ice absorbs more insolation, and increased melting causes soot to become even more concentrated and darker. The  stack emissions from Arctic shipping produce similar impacts.








solar power under the Mission from 20 GW















to   100   GW.Hence,    both   1st   and   2nd

Q.14 :a

option 3 is incorrect as home rule movement was not called off.
From now onwards the demand of self- government could not be termed as seditious as attainment of self-government for  Indians now become government policy. So  option 1 is correct.
Congress leaders raised objections against Montague’s statement because in this statement no  time frame was given and the government alone was to decide the nature and timing of advance towards responsible government. So  option 2 is incorrect.












statements are incorrect.
It seeks to promote domestic production of


Q.15 :b

The 3-phased mission is a part of NAPCC and is run under Ministry of New and Renewable Energy.








The Budget 2015-16 has increased target of
critical   raw   materials,   components   and
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1567

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

or Middle-course river features.
While Monadnock, gentle slopes and featureless plains are the characteistics of old  stage or lower-course river features.



products,  as  a  result  to  achieve  grid  tariff















parity by 2022. Hence, only 3rd statement











Q.16 :c

Jatra is folk  dance of Bengal.

Lazim isismcaortriraelcdta. nce of Maharashtra. Yakshagana belongs to Karnatataka.

Q.17 :d

Q.18 :c

statement (2)-  Rainfall may be high but it will be uneven and not consistent.
statement (3)-  Because of  high temperature in   temperate  regions it   may  soil   moisture content in  the soil   decreases So   statement (3)  is correct.


Q.19 :c

The  gorges, V – shaped valleys, waterfalls, rapids and steep spurs are the characteristics of youth stage (these are upper-course river features).
Meander, ox-bow lakes, levees and floodplains are the features of mature stage
Q.20 :d

Only  Statement 2 and  3 are correct.

-            As part of BBBP, ‘Gudda-Guddi’ boards should be displayed in every panchayat office providing the details of number of boys and girls born in a month.

-            Three main objective of BBBP: [i] Prevent female infanticide; [ii] Ensure protection of every girl child; [iii] Ensure Girl Education.

-            Girl child can withdraw 50% of the money from SSY account after reaching age of 18 with no condition attached.






Q.21 :d

Statement 1 is correct as the according to the author, he has evolved this veda by  taking words from rigveda, music from Samveda, gestures from Yajurveda and emotions from the Atharvaveda. That's why it is also known as fifth  veda,

An ancient classification followed in all styles of dance is of Tandava and Lasya, Tandav is the masculine and Lasya is the feminine. So,  statement
3 is also correct.


Q.22 :a

The    declaration  of   emergency due to  the breakdown of  Constitutional machinery in  a State has the following effects:
The   President can assume  to himself all  or any of the functions of the State Government or  he may vest all  or  any of  those functions with the  Governor or   any  other  executive authority.
The   President may dissolve the State Legislative  Assembly  or   put it  under suspension. He  may authorise the Parliament to   make   laws  on     behalf   of    the   State Legislature.
The  President can make any other incidental or  consequential provision necessary to give effect to the object of proclamation.


Q.23 :c
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1567

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

RDF is also known as waste to energy. Basic concept behind it is that by combustion and various other treatments of solid waste fuel can be produced which can be used for many purposes. NGT has given approval to this technique.


Q.24 :a

Myopia or nearsightedness is corrected by  a concave lens. Hypermetropia or farsightedness is just the opposite case where a person cannot focus on  near objects clearly and is treated by  a convex lens.


Q.25 :d

Reducing import duties would decrease prices in domestic country.

Imposing stock limit helps prevent hoarding and makes it punishable offence.

Future trading give rise to speculation and disproportionate variations in agricultural commodities prices.

Q.28 :a




The  GII measures gender inequalities in three important aspects of human development—reproductive health measured by  maternal mortality ratio and adolescent fertility rates; empowerment, measured by proportion of parliamentary seats occupied by  females and proportion
of adult females and males aged 25 years and older with at least some secondary education; and economic status expressed as labour market participation and measured by  labour force participation rate of female and male populations aged 15 years and older.
Components of GII are Maternal mortality ratio Share of seats in parliament
Population with at least some secondary education Participation rate
so option 1, 2, 3 and 4 are correct


Q.26 :c
















Q.27 :d



The   Ilbert Bill  proposed to give Indians the power to try   European offenders in  mofussil (small towns) as they already had the power to do   so in  the  presidency towns. The   bill generated  heated  arguments in   the  Indian press as the racism of both non-official Anglo- Indians and British officials was evident when they united to oppose the bill,  a move which some commentators termed as a “white mutiny”. Hence, 2nd and 3rd statements are incorrect.





There are  four classes  of  soil-forming processes: soil enrichment, removal, translocation, and transformation.
In   soil  enrichment,  organic or   inorganic matter is added to the soil.
In   removal processes,   material is   either eroded away from the soil, or  leached  from the soil   by   seeping water and taken to the ground water.
Translocation describes the movement of materials  upward  or   downward within the soil. Eluviation describes the downward movement of  material,  while illuviation  is the  accumulation of  that  material in   lower layers. Hence both the  statements  are incorrect.
Q.29 :b
























Q.30 :c


Primary pollutants that  are  emitted  directly from identifiable sources are produced both by    natural  events   and  human  activities. There   are   five     primary  pollutants  that together contribute about 90 percent of  the global air  pollution. These are carbon oxides (CO and CO2), Nitrogen oxides, sulfur oxides, volatile organic compounds (mostly hydrocarbons) and suspended particulate matter.  (Nitrogen dioxide  is  also considered a primary pollutant as  well as secondary pollutant)
Secondary pollutants form in the atmosphere through  chemical  and  photochemical reactions from the primary pollutants. Eg: sulfuric  acid,   nitric   acid,   carbonic   acid, Ozone, Peroxyacetalnitrate etc.  Hence option (b) is the correct answer.





The  term smog was coined by  combining the words “smoke” and  “fog” to  describe a considerable  density  of   aerosols and  gas pollutants over an urban area.
Urban    smog    has     three     main    toxic ingredients: nitrogen  oxides,  volatile organic              compounds,               and ozone.  Polycarbonates are not an ingredient of  Smog. Hence option (c) is the correct
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1567

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in









Q.31 :c



































Q.32 :a


















Q.33 :c
answer.
Nitrogen  oxides  and  volatile  organic compounds mostly come from cars and industrial power plants. Ozone forms through a photochemical reaction in the air.





There   was   no     massive    participation    of peasants  in   the  movement. The    Swadeshi movement was just the beginning of peasant participation. It was limited to small areas in Bengal.While it is  argued that the movement was unable to make much headway in mobilizing the peasantry  especially its lower rungs except  in  certain areas, such as the district of Barisal, there can be no  gainsaying the fact that even if the movement was able to mobilize the  peasantry  only in  a limited area that alone would count for  a lot.  This  is so peasant  participation in  the Swadeshi Movement marked  the  very  beginnings  of modem mass politics in  India.Hence, option (c) is incorrect.
It  was during the  Swadeshi movement,  the women for  the first time came out in  large numbers and participated openly.
The   movement largely failed to garner the support of muslims. The  British policy of communalism to turn the muslim against the Swadeshi movement was largely responsible for  this.
Students  came  in   large  numbers  to propagate  and  practice swadeshi and  took the  lead  in   organising  picketing  of   shops selling foreign goods.





Hydrogen has  very  low   volumetric energy density. Therefore, it  requires large space to store it in sufficient quantities.
Hydrogen is  a colourless and odourless gas and  on   combustion produces  a  colourless flame. Therefore, special devices are necessary  to  detect  the  gas  leakage  to ensure safety in public places.
The   production  of   hydrogen  through electrolysis of  water is  a highly energy intensive method. Therefore, for  large-scale use of hydrogen is difficult.
All statements are correct.





1st statement is incorrect-  the decision of the Speaker with regard to money bill is final and in this regard cannot be questioned
















Q.34 :a











Q.35 :c





















Q.36 :c
in any court of law  or in either House of Parliament and even by  the President of India.
2nd statement is incorrect - Money Bill can be introduced only in Lok Sabha on  th erecommendation of the President.
Only 3rd statement is correct i.e. when a money bill is presented to President, President cannot return the bill for  the reconsideration of the house.







Statement   1   and   2   are   correct.   Indian Councils Act  of  1861 sought to give representation to loyalist sections of  Indians, namely the Princes and landholders through nomination.
Statement 3 is  incorrect as the Act  of  1892 introduced only a limited electoral system.





The   fault is  in  between the two major fault systems in  the  Himalayas —  the  Main Boundary  Thrust  and   the   Main     Central Thrust. The   two fault systems  are  100-120 km   apart and run as a linear belt all  along the  Himalayas  from  Kashmir to  Arunachal Pradesh.   In  the  Himalayan region, 90 per cent of the earthquakes occur between these two fault systems.
The   Main   Central fault marks the  boundary between the higher and lesser Himalayan Mountains. The  Lesser Himalayan zone is bounded the  Main   Central  Thrust  (MCT)  in the north and Main  Boundary Thrust (MBT) to the south.
So  option C.





Only  Goldfish and Seahorse are the fishes. Seahorses are fish. They live  in water, breath through gills  and have a swim bladder. However they do  not have caudal
fins  and have a long snake-like tail. They also have a neck and a snout that points down. Shellfish are not a kind of fish, but are simply water-dwelling animals. Many
varieties of shellfish (crustaceans in particular) are actually closely related to insects and arachnids, making up one of the main classes of the phylum Arthropoda.
The Goldfish (Carassius auratus) is a freshwater fish  in the family Cyprinidae of
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1567

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in














Q.37 :b
order Cypriniformes.
Jellyfish are the major non-polyp form of individuals of the phylum Cnidaria. They are typified as free-swimming marine animals consisting of a gelatinous umbrella-shaped bell  and trailing tentacles.
Starfish or sea stars are star-shaped echinoderms belonging to the class Asteroidea.
Q.41 :b


Ozone is  formed throughout the atmosphere   in     a    multi-step   chemical process that  requires sunlight.   Each ozone molecule contains three  atomes  of   oxygen and is  denoted as O3.  90% of the ozone is found in the stratosphere , primarily at the top of the troposphere upto about 50km altitude. In  the Stratosphere, the process begins with the breaking apart of  an oxygen (O2   )  molecule by  ultraviolet radiation from the  sun.  In   the  Troposphere  ,  ozone is
Hydroflorocarbons are not covered under montreal protocol because they are green house gas and not ozone depleting substance. They replaced CFC and HCFC when they were phased out under Montreal.


Q.38 :b

Philips’s curve is used to show the inverse relationship between rate of inflation and rate of unemployment.


Q.39 :b

According to the Archimedes’s Principle when a body is partially or fully immersed into a fluid at rest, the fluid exerts an upward force of buoyancy which is equal to the weight of the displaced fluid. By applying
this principle, we would realize that when the two men are sitting on the boat the water displaced would be more, whereas when they jump into the water the quantity of water displaced would be less, as the volume displace independently by men will be lesser.



Q.40 :c

Among the factors that are contributing to the glacial melt is the emission of black soot due to inefficient burning of fossil fuels. Black soot is essentially composed of tiny black specks. They accumulate on  glaciers, turning them grey. This  attracts more heat from the sun. The  more the black soot accumulates on glaciers, the more rapid is the melting.
The  amount of black carbon or soot, a potential cancer-causing substance, has been gradually increasing over Pune city since 2005, shows a study conducted by  the Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology (IITM).
Soot is a human carcinogenic which is considered second only to carbon dioxide in causing climate change or global warming.







































Q.42 :c
formed   in    a   different  set   of    chemical reactions  involving hydrocarbons and nitrogen-containing gases.Hence,    1st statement is incorrect.
Ozone  helps  in   preventing  damaging  UV rays   from reaching the Earth's surface, to the   benefit  of    both  plants  and animals.Hence, 2nd statement is correct. Ground level ozone (or  tropospheric ozone) is    an  atmospheric  pollutant.  It   is    not emitted   directly  by     car   engines   or    by industrial operations,  but  formed  by  the reaction of sunlight on air  containing hydrocarbons and nitrogen oxides that react  to  form ozone  directly at  the source  of  the  pollution or   many kilometers  down wind. Thus, ozone reacts directly with some hydrocarbons such as aldehydes  and  thus  begins  their  removal from the air, but the products are themselves key components  of  smog.Hence,  3rd statement is correct.
The  total amount of  ozone above the Earth's surface  varies  with location on   time scales that  range  from daily to  seasonal.  These variations are caused by  stratospheric  winds and the chemical production and depleting of ozone layer.Total ozone is generally the lowest  at the  Equator and the highest near  the  Poles  because  of  seasonal wind patterns in the stratosphere (Polar Vortex). Hence, 4th statement is incorrect.





Cadmium (Cd)  is one of the most toxic elements to which humans could be exposed at work or in the environment. The  outbreak of itai-itai disease, which is the most
severe stage of chronic Cd poisoning, occurred in the Cd-polluted Jinzu  River basin in Toyama.
Minamata disease is methylmercury (MeHg) poisoning that occurred in humans who ingested fish  and shellfish contaminated by  MeHg discharged in waste water from a
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1567

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in




























Q.43 :b
chemical plant.
Pink disease is a caused by  exposure to mercury. Babies who developed pink disease were particularly sensitive to mercury. Mercury was a common additive in teething powders and other baby products like  worm medicines and nappy rinses in the first half
of the 20th century. Pink  disease is named after the symptom that causes bright pink colour of the hands and feet. People who survived pink disease in when they were babies may be prone to ongoing health problems.
Wilson's disease or hepatolenticular degeneration is an autosomal recessive genetic disorder in which copper accumulates in tissues; this manifests as neurological or psychiatric symptoms and liver disease. It is treated with medication that reduces copper absorption or removes the excess copper from the body, but occasionally a liver transplant is required.




Q.46 :d














Q.47 :b
foreigners. So  option 3 is incorrect.





Acid  rain formed when oxide of  sulphur and nitrogen  react  with  the  moisture  in atmosphere  in   presence  of   sunlight. (statement 1)
Volcanic eruption  releases   nitrogen  oxides and sulphur oxides which are responsible for acid rain (statement 2).
Lightening produces nitrogen oxides which is responsible for  acid rain. (Statement 3)





Statement 1 is  incorrect as the Minute which was the template for  future education policy of British in India heavily criticized Indian learning  and  suggested   western  scientific and literary education.
Statement 2 is correct as the downward filtration theory envisaged that a small core of      educated     Indians    would    transmit
In May  2011, the Indian Government ratified two UN Conventions - the United Nations Convention against Corruption (UNCAC) and the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (UNTOC)  and its three protocols.

CVC  was established by  an executive resolution of the central government,it is not a constitutional body.


Q.44 :b

MSL Curiosity was a lander that landed on MARS. Messenger was orbiter of Mercury while Chang’e 2 was orbiter of Moon





Q.48 :d
education   to    the    masses    in     regional languages.





Like  light, sound gets reflected at the surface of a solid or liquid and follows the same
laws of reflection.
In  a stethoscope, the sound of  the patient’s heartbeat reaches the doctor’s ear by
multiple reflection of sound.
Megaphones  or   loudhailers,  horns,  musical instruments such as trumpets and shehnaai, are all  designed to send sound in a particular direction without spreading it in all
directions.


Q.45 :a


By 1924 the swarajists position was weakened because of split among swarajists themselves on  communal and Responsivists- Non  responsivists lines. So  option 1 is correct.
Swarajists wanted to join  the legislative assembly but main leadership of Swarajists reiterated their faith in civil  disobedience movement and withdrew from legislature in
1926. They were opposed to idea of doing constructive work alone without joining the legislature. So  option 2 is incorrect. Swarajists defeated Public Safety bill in 1928 which aimed at empowering the government to deport undesirable and subversive

Q.49 :c

Portfolio investment comes under FII and not FDI.


Q.50 :c

The  nominal Exchange rate  adjusted for inflation gives us the real Exchange rate. The real exchange rate measures the prices abroad relative to those at home while the nominal exchange rate measures only the numerical exchange value, and does not say anything about other aspects such as the purchasing power of that currency. Thus when the real exchange rate is more than
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1567

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in




















Q.51 :b
























Q.52 :d
the nominal exchange rate the rupee is said to be overvalued. Thus option 1 is incorrect.
US FED tapering is the gradual reduction in the bond buying program of the US Federal Reserves. This  has led to gradual decrease in supply of dollars in the international markets resulting in depreciation of rupee. Thus option 2 is incorrect.
A deliberate downward adjustment to the value of a country's currency, relative to another currency is known as devaluation. The value of rupee depreciates on  increasing the exchange rate. Thus option 3 is correct.





Except ocean gyre all strengthened the idea of ‘Continental- drift’.
An ocean gyre is a large system of circular ocean currents formed by  global wind patterns and forces created by  Earth’s rotation.
According to the studies on  Palaeo- magnetism, it is possible to find  out the direction and dip  of the earth’s magnetic field during different geological periods.
It has been observed that the pole positions of the present globe are different during the geological past and by  joining these poles a curve is obtained which is known as polar wandering curve. It is seen that the polar wandering curves drawn for  different continents are not parallel or sympathetic, which confirms ‘Continental- drift’
The  performance ends with a mangalam invoking the blessings of the Gods.


Q.54 :d

Joint      electorate    in     place    of     separate electorates  with reservation for  Muslims was proposed    by      Muslim   league     in     Delhi proposals but Jinnah rejected the principle of joint electorate  in  14 point demand and demanded separate  electorate in  14 points demand. So  option (d)  is incorrect.
Jinnah was  concerned  about  safeguarding interests  of   Muslims and  Muslim majority provinces  so  he  demanded  provincial autonomy, residual power for  states, federal constitution  and  One-third  Muslim representation   in    Central   legislative assembly. So  all other options are correct.


Q.55 :a

Ammensalism       is         a      site-specific relationship  in   which  one   population   of organism  is   inhibited   while the  other  is unaffected.Eg. shading out of  certain plants under  tall    trees  .  The    trees  reduce  the available  sunshine  at   ground  level,  and numerous plants cannot find adequate light  in    the   shade.  Hence,  only  shade tolerant plants with lower light requirements can survive as ground cover in the forests. Antibiosis  is   a    type  of  amensalism  in which one organism produces a metabolite that  is    toxic  to  other  organisms   eg. penicillin produces an  antibiotic substance causing death of many bacteria.
Hence, only 1st statement is correct.

Since 2010, Bharat Ratna is given for  "any field of human endeavour." Statement 1 is wrong.

Nelson Mandela was conferred with Bharat Ratna award. Statement 2 is wrong.

C V Raman was the first scientist to be given Bharat
Ratna in 1954 itself. Statement 3 is wrong.

Q.56 :d




It is in news because, The  traditional brass and copper craft of utensil making among the Thatheras of Jandiala Guru Punjab has got the distinction of being inscribed on  the Representative List  of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity, UNESCO,  2014:

Q.53 :b

Alarippu is the invocation song and it literally means
"to  adorn with flowers".

Jatiswaram is the pure dance sequences- nritta, which is performed just after alarippu.

Varnam encompasses both nritta and nriya and is done after shabdam which follows Jatiswaram.
The  craft of the Thatheras of Jandiala Guru constitutes

the traditional techniques of manufacturing brass and copper utensils in Punjab.
They are of both Utilitarian and ritualistic value made of copper, brass and kansa. The  metals used are recommended by Ayurveda.
The  crafting process carried out by  the very
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1567

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

name of the communit ‘Thatheras’ identical with the name of the element.
The  skill  of the Thatheras that have been orally transmitted for  generations upon generations so far.
manufacturing sector, both activities with low productivity. Thus informal nature of work increases the prevalence of disguised unemployment.


Q.57 :d








Q.58 :b




There is no  correlation between optical density and mass density.
Refractive index of Kerosene is 1.44, while that of water is 1.33





Government of India Act 1919 introduced many landmark changes such as Right to vote for  women in provincial legislative councils and Bicameral legislature at centre. Dyarchy was introduced ,not in central government but only in provincial governement.
Q.62 :b

Q.63 :a
















Q.64 :d





Coriolis effect: Effect of the earth’s rotation that acts like  a force to deflect a moving object on  the Earth’s surface to the right in the northern hemisphere and to the left in
the southern hemisphere.
The  Coriolis force is zero right at the equator and becomes a maximum at the poles.
Cyclones are centers of low  pressure and convergence while Anticyclones are centers of high pressure and divergence.


Q.59 :a

(Industry)                    (Location) Guntur                          Tobacco Bhatinda                      Fertilizers
Jaipur                         Gems Industry

Ludhiana                     Bicycle


Q.60 :d

New  Urea Policy-2015

All the statements are correct.


Q.61 :b

Agriculture sector has the worst load of disguised unemployment which is rampant in the sector.

Disguised unemployment exists where part of the labor force is either left without work or is working in a redundant manner where worker productivity is essentially zero. An economy demonstrates
disguised unemployment where productivity is low and where too many workers are filling  too few  jobs. Indian workers fleeing disguised unemployment in agriculture for  a better life  in industry usually end up in the construction sector, which is the biggest source of jobs, or they join  the informal
Most earthquakes are causally related to compressional or tensional stresses built up at the margins of the huge moving lithospheric plates that make up the earth's surface (see lithosphere). The immediate cause of most shallow earthquakes is the sudden release of stress along a fault, or fracture in the earth's crust, resulting in movement of the opposing blocks of rock past one another.
These movements cause vibrations to pass through and around the earth in wave form, just as ripples are generated when a pebble is dropped into water. Volcanic eruptions, rockfalls, landslides, and explosions can also cause a quake, but most of these are of only local extent.

http://www.infoplease.com/encyclopedia/science/ea rthquake-causes-earthquakes.html#ixzz3bVlLulTG











--The most widely accepted explanation of
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1567

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in











how dams cause earthquakes is related to




















the extra water pressure created in the micro-




















cracks and fissures in the ground under and
near a reservoir. When the pressure of the water in the rocks increases, it acts to lubricate faults which are already under
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1567

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in











tectonic strain, but are prevented from
s-triggered-by-dams












Mining leaves voids that generally alter the







slipping by the friction of the rock surfaces.










balance of forces in the rock, many times










http://www.internationalrivers.org/earthquake
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1567

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in










causing rock bursts. These voids may collapse
earthquakes.











http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2007/01/0
70103-mine-quake.html



Q.65 :d

producing seismic waves and in some cases



















reactivate existing faults causing minor
A  coral  is   a simple marine animal with a small,  cylindrical,  sack-like  body  called  a polyp;  it  is  related  to other marine invertebrates,  such as  anemones  and jellyfish.
Corals secrete  calcium carbonate  (CaCO3) from the lower half of their bodies, forming a hard, calcified external skeleton.
Corals  live   in  a  symbiotic relationship with algae.  Corals cannot  photosynthesize, but they  do   obtain  some  of   their  own nourishment. Algae perform photosynthesis and convert solar energy to chemical energy in  the system, providing the coral with about
60% of  its nutrition and assisting the  coral with  the   calcification  process.   In    return, corals  provide  the   algae   with  nutrients. Hence 1st statement is correct.
Coral reefs  are  the  most  diverse  marine ecosystems.
Corals   mostly   thrive   in    warm  tropical oceans,  so  the  difference in   ocean temperature  between  the  western  coasts and eastern coasts of  continents is  critical to their  distribution. Western  coastal  waters tend to be cooler, thereby discouraging coral activity, whereas  eastern  coastal  currents are warmer and thus enhance coral growth. Hence  2nd  and  3rd  statements   are correct.
Corals have  low  genetic  diversity worldwide and long generation  times, which together mean that corals are slow to adapt and    vulnerable   to   changing   conditions. Hence  4th  statement  is  also  correct.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1567

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Option (d) is the correct answer.
However, we  do  not know the exact reasons why this happened.

Q.66 :d

First pair is wrong because Tlawng river originates in Mizoram. Second is also wrong because Feni river originates in Triupra. This  river was also in news with respect water sharing aggreement between India
and Bangladesh. Option D is correct.
1. Tlawng                               Mizoram

2. Feni                                    Triupra

3. Iril                                               Manipur









Q.67 :d

Q.69 :d
























Q.70 :c




As per Article 343 of the Constitution of India, India's official languages shall be Standard Hindi  written in the Devanagari script, and English. These are the official languages of the Union of India, i.e. at the Central Government level.
Article 351. Directive for  development of the Hindi  language It shall be the duty of the Union to promote the spread of the Hindi language, to develop it so that it may serve as a medium of expression for  all the elements of the composite culture of India Article 348 of the Constitution which says that all proceedings in the Supreme Court and high courts shall be done in English.(not hindi)


















Q.68 :b
responsivists were part of swarajists who advocated council entry
swarajists were divided on  communal lines. The  groups formed were responsivists and non-responsivists.
Responsivists advocated cooperation with the government and holding of office wherever possible to protect the so called Hindu interests.
Lala  Lajpat Rai,  Madan Mohan Malviya, N.C. Kelkar are responsivist leaders.
C.R. Das and Motilal Nehru were Non- Responsivists leaders.





The    culture  associated  with the  Harappan civilization is the first known urban culture in India. The  Harappans built the earliest cities complete  with  town  planning,  sanitation, drainage system and broad well-laid roads. They built double  storied  houses  of   burnt- bricks each one of  which had a bathroom, a kitchen  and  a  well. The   walled cities had other important buildings such as the Great Bath, Grannaries and Assembly Halls. Agriculture was the  main occupation of  the Harappans who were living in rural areas. Harappans  knew how to write and  most  of their seals contain some form of  script. But unfortunately no   one has yet been able to decipher that script.
The  main type of wave - motion generated by  an earthquake include:

P waves are longitudinal waves (similar to sound waves) and can travel in solid, liquid and gaseous media.
S waves are transverse waves (similar to Light and other types of electromagnetic waves) and can travel only in solid media. In comparison to primary waves, they are slow in motion.
P and S both waves have short wavelength and high frequency.
L waves are transverse vibrations and confined to the outer skin of the crust. They are also known as surface waves or Rayleigh waves. They have low  velocity, low frequency, and long wavelength.



Q.71 :c

Kalpana Dutt helped Surya Sen in revolutionary activities. Bina Das who shot at point-blank range at the Governor of Bengal while receiving her degree. So  option 1 is incorrect.
Sarojini Naidu along with Manilal Gandhi took the unfinished task on  leading a raid on Dharsana Salt works. So  option 2 is correct. Usha Mehta started an underground radio in Bombay during Quit India Movement. So
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1567

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

option 3 is correct.


Q.72 :d

The  Zero Hour is an informal device not mentioned in the Rule of Procedure that is used by  members to raise matters without any prior notice.

Statement 1. is incorrect. Zero Hour in Lok Sabha is the time gap between the end of Question Hour and the beginning of the agenda of the House on  that day. Thus, its timings are flexible in the Lok Sabha

Statement 2 is incorrect as Zero Hour is used in both
Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha

Thus, all are incorrect.


Q.73 :d

Estuary: A partially enclosed coastal body of water where the salty tidal water mixes with the fresh water of the river. eg. Narmada river makes an estuary.
The  banks of estuarine channels form a favoured location for  human settlements, which use the estuaries for  fishing and commerce.
Estuaries are usually biologically highly productive zones. They also act as a filter for some dissolved constituents in river water; these precipitate in the zone where river water meets seawater.
Major estuaries occur in the Bay  of Bengal. Many estuaries are locations of some of the major seaports. Most of the India’s major estuaries occur on  the east coast. In contrast, the estuaries on  the west coast are smaller.
Delta: A triangular shaped land at the mouth of a river formed from the deposition of silt, sand and small rocks that flow  downstream
in the river. eg. Ganga delta.


Q.74 :d

Q.75 :c

If there will be hike in interest rate by  US Federal Bank, investors from US will withdraw money from emerging markets such India, Brazil, Indonesia etc. hence the currency value of emerging market will depreciate and there will be outflow of the funds as well. Hence both events might occur. As a consequence, stock markets of the emerging economies will also fall.  Hence Option C is correct.


Q.76 :d

Preamble was amended by  42nd Amendment Act,  1976. In Berubari Union case, Supreme Court said that Preamble is not a part of Constitution but later Supreme Court has held in Keshavananda Bharti case that Parliament has the power to amend the Preamble under Article 368.





Q.77 :b

Subsidies that  are  in   the  nature  of programmes  having  direct  effects  on production and  trade,  referred to  as  the "Amber box" and have to be reduced. In  the terminology    used     by       agreement     on agriculture (AoA),  these subsidies are called "Aggregate measure  to  support" or   "AMS". So  statemet 1 is correct.
Measures with minimum impact on  trade can be used freely ("Green Box"   Measures) and include government services such as research, disease control, infrastructure and food security. So  statement 2 is correct.
"Blue Box"   subsidies which includes certain direct  payments  to   farmers  where  the farmers are required to limit production and certain government assistance  programmes to  encourage  agriculture  and  rural development  in    Developing countries are also permitted. So  statement 3 is incorrect

A mulch is a layer of material applied to the surface of an area of soil. Its  purpose is to conserve moisture, to improve the fertility and health of the soil  and to reduce weed growth.
Contour farming consists of rows of rocks placed along the contour of steps. Water runoff captured by  these barriers improves soil  moisture.
Ploughing helps to move the soil  around. As
a consequence it retains more water thereby reducing evaporation.

Q.78 :d




There are generally three types of population pyramids created from age-sex distributions- expansive, constrictive and stationary. Expansive pyramids: These types of pyramids are usually found in populations with very large fertility rates and lower than average life  expectancies. The  age-sex distributions of Latin American and many Third World countries would probably display
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1567

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in
















Q.79 :b
expansive population pyramids. Constrictive pyramids: These pyramids typically reflect populations with a large number of adults and a longer average life expectancy, like  those found in the United States and some European countries. Stationary pyramids: These pyramids usually reflect nations with a very even age/sex distribution. Several European countries fall  under this population model. Hence all three statements are correct.
increase in altitude in the stratosphere. If ozone layer is thin, the air  is cooler, further strengthening polar stratospheric clouds.

3.       The  cooler air  above the Antarctic also stabilizes the vortex over Antarctic. This  vortex is a ring of rapidly circulating air  that confines the ozone depletion increasing its intensity. The  vortex over Antarctic is for  a shorter period. The geographic symmetry about the North Pole is less than about the South Pole. As a result, large-scale weather systems disturb the wind flow, making it less stable over the Arctic region than over the Antarctic continent. These disturbances prevent the temperature in the Arctic stratosphere from being as cold as in the Antarctic stratosphere, and fewer polar stratospheric
Strategic importance-Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep.
clouds are therefore formed.

Cultural distinctiveness - Puducherry, Dadar and
Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu.

Political-administrative consideration—Delhi and
Chandigarh.

Lieutenant Governor is empowered to promulgate ordinance and withdraw it BUT ONLY with the prior permission of the President.


Q.80 :d

Huge increase in coal and fossil fuel based industries increases amount of CO2  in atmosphere which results in increase in ocean acidification.
Q.82 :b

Q.83 :b














Q.84 :d





It  is  news because the Sepahijala sanctuary near Agartala, a major tourist attraction, was closed  to  tourists  after   a  rhino  died  of anthrax.
Anthrax os a disease caused by  the bacteria Bacillus anthracis  and  it   does  not  spread directly from one infected animal or  person to   another   but       by     spores   that   are transported by  clothes or shoes
Eutrophication leads to large plankton, booms and when these blooms collapse and sink to the sea bed the subsequent respiration of bacteria decomposing the algae leads to a decrease in sea water oxygen and increase in CO2  which leads to ocean acidification.
Acid  rain increases acidity of ocean water.


Q.81 :d

Following factors are considered as responsible for greater depletion of ozone over Antarctic.

1.       Antarctic temperature is much colder which strengthens the process of formation of polar stratospheric clouds. These clouds act as the catalyst in the depletion of ozone layer, whereas the wintertime temperatures in the Arctic stratosphere are not persistently low for as many weeks as over Antarctica,
which results in correspondingly less ozone depletion in the
Arctic.

2.       Ozone layer is thin in Antarctic. Ozone absorbs sunlight causing increase in temperature with
Sound unlike light needs a material medium and it can not propagate in vacuum. Eardrum is a thin not thick membrane. Larynx is also known as the voice box.


Q.85 :d

Q.86 :c

Doldrum is the equatorial belt of low  atmospheric pressure where the NE and SE trade winds converge on. Low pressure, variable winds and calm conditions, and the convergence of trade winds are the characteristics of trade winds.


Q.87 :b

A hologram can be viewed only in specific forms of illumination. In hologram, light from object is directly scattered into the recording medium. It relies solely on the optical phenomenon of diffraction and interference of light.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1567

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Q.88 :b





















Q.89 :d


It is  in  news because  Government gives nod for   Ordinances  to  amend   Citizenship  Act,
1955  &   Arbitration   and   Conciliation  Act,
1996. Also,  PIO card scheme has been withdrawn and now all  PIO  cards deemed to be OCI cards.
The   statement 3 is  wrong because  OCI  card holder have also been granted  all  rights  in the economic, financial and education fields in  parity with NRIs  except, the right to acquisition of agricultural or plantation properties.
OCIs  are entitled to a multipurpose, multiple entry,  lifelong visa  allowing them  to  visit India at any time, for  any length of  time and for  any purpose.(statement 2)





Q.93 :a
cooperation movement. So  option 4 is incorrect.





Gandhi gave ultimatum of 31 January to accept 11 demands made by  him. But government has not responded to these demands so finally Gandhi launched civil disobedience from 12th March 1930. So option 1 is correct.
C. Rajagoapalachari was congress leader in Tamil-Nadu so he led march to break salt law in Tamil Nadu. So  option 2 is incorrect.
No-Chowkidari tax campaign in zamindari areas organised. So  option 3 is correct. Muslim participation in Non-cooperation movement was more because at that time Khilafat issue was dominating national politics.  So  option 4 is incorrect.

Q.90 :c


Brahmo Samaj took no  definite stand on   the doctrine of karma and transmigration of soul. So  option 1 is incorrect.
Brahmo Samaj believed in monotheism and

Q.94 :c


located




Hill                                   State where







Q.91 :c
denounced Idol  worship. So  option 2 is correct.
Satyarth Prakash was published by
Dayanand Saraswati. So  option 3 is incorrect.
1. Tura Hills                                     Meghalaya
2. Blue Mountains                   Mizoram
3. Laimatol Range                    Manipur
4. Mikir Hills                                      Assam
5. Abor  Hills                                    Arunachal
Pradesh

Homeopathy comes under ambit of Ministry of AYUSH and is one of the important components of unconventional medicinal systems but it is not a part of Traditional Medicine systems of India like
Ayurveda and Yoga.


Q.92 :a



Congress supported Khilafat issue and Hindu and Muslim leader worked together in support of Khilafat issue. Even Gandhi was president of All India Khilafat conference. So option (1)  and (3)  are correct.
Muslims considered Khalifa (Sultan of Turkey) as their religious leader and they wanted a favourable treatment for  turkey after the 1st world war. Even they demanded that Khalifa’s control over sacred places should be retained and Khalifa should left with sufficient territories. So  option 2 is correct.
Background for  non-cooperation movement was prepared during Khilafat movement so Khilafat movement started before Non-
Q.95 :b

The IMF’s fundamental mission is to
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1567

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in










ensure the stability of the international
economy and the economies of member



















monetary system. It does so in three
countries; lending to countries with



















ways: keeping track of the global
balance of payments difficulties; and
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1567

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in










giving practical help to members.
experiencing actual or potential balance of




















A core responsibility of the IMF is to
payments problems. This financial



















provide loans to member countries
assistance enables countries to rebuild
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1567

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in










their international reserves, stabilize their
economic growth, while undertaking



















currencies, continue paying for imports,
policies to correct underlying problems.



















and restore conditions for strong
Unlike development banks, the IMF does
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1567

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Q.99 :c








not lend for specific projects.
1st statement is incorrect as the disbursement out of the fund is made at the discretion of the Prime Minister, and in accordance with the Prime Minister’s directions.
2nd statement is incorrect as the PMNRF
is audited by  an independent auditor, outside the Government.






Only 3rd statement is correct-  According




Q.96 :d

India’s ‘Parrot Lady’ is to return home, after
Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper handed
over to his  counterpart, Narendra Modi,  the 800-year- old  Indian sandstone sculpture of a woman holding a parrot.

The  Parrot Lady is what is known as a naayika, or heroine. She has a parrot on  her back. She is just one of many erotic stone ladies that were created to adorn the Khajuraho temples


Q.97 :a

The  population of India according to their economic status is divided into three groups, namely; main workers, marginal workers and non-workers.

Standard Census definition-

Main  Worker is a person who works for  at least 183 days in a year.

Marginal Worker is a person who works for  less than
183 days in a year.

Hence, Option- a is the correct answer.







to the rules of the Prime Minister’s National













Relief Fund and the tax exemption granted to


Q.98 :b


High  temperature is not a necessary precondition for  rain to take place. Except that all three are the conditios that are necessary. which includes saturated air, presence of hygroscopic nuclei in the air  and the temperature of the air  must fall  below the dew point.


donors, the fund can be used to provide relief
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1567

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in







only to the citizens of India.




























The PMNRF website (pmnrf.gov.in) says













“contributions wherein the donor mentions that
the amount is meant for the foreign citizens/calamities abroad, are not accepted in the fund. PMNRF accepts only voluntary contributions by individuals and institutions and
contributions flowing out of budgetary sources or
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1567

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in








from the balance sheets of the Public Sector Undertakings are not accepted.The fund was setup  in  the  year  1948  to  assist  relief work .




Q.100 :a
India notified in  Feb 2015, each employee of the  government of   India  or   any  state/UT government staff using e-mail services of GoI will be provided two e-mail IDs,  one based on designation for  use in  official communication and the other based on  name for  both official and  personal communication. Not   only  will the  employees be barred  from using email services   provided   by    any   other   service provider for  official communication,  but they also cannot provide details of  the GoI  email account to private e-mail service providers.
In a separate  policy on  use of IT resources in GoI    organizations   notified  simultaneously, the government has empowered NIC to block content over the  internet that  is  in contravention  of   provisions  of   the  IT  Act,
2000, or  which may pose a security threat to the network.

Under the e-mail policy of the government of
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1567

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Q.1     a         b         c         d Q.2     a         b         c         d Q.3     a         b         c         d Q.4     a         b         c         d Q.5     a         b         c         d Q.6     a         b         c         d Q.7     a         b         c         d Q.8     a         b         c         d Q.9     a         b         c         d Q.10   a         b         c         d Q.11   a         b         c         d Q.12   a         b         c         d Q.13   a         b         c         d Q.14   a         b         c         d Q.15   a         b         c         d Q.16   a         b         c         d Q.17   a         b         c         d Q.18   a         b         c         d Q.19   a         b         c         d Q.20   a         b         c         d Q.21   a         b         c         d Q.22   a         b         c         d Q.23   a         b         c         d Q.24   a         b         c         d Q.25   a         b         c         d Q.26   a         b         c         d Q.27   a         b         c         d Q.28   a         b         c         d Q.29   a         b         c         d Q.30   a         b         c         d Q.31   a         b         c         d Q.32   a         b         c         d Q.33   a         b         c         d Q.34   a         b         c         d Q.35   a         b         c         d
Q.36   a         b         c         d Q.37   a         b         c         d Q.38   a         b         c         d Q.39   a         b         c         d Q.40   a         b         c         d Q.41   a         b         c         d Q.42   a         b         c         d Q.43   a         b         c         d Q.44   a         b         c         d Q.45   a         b         c         d Q.46   a         b         c         d Q.47   a         b         c         d Q.48   a         b         c         d Q.49   a         b         c         d Q.50   a         b         c         d Q.51   a         b         c         d Q.52   a         b         c         d Q.53   a         b         c         d Q.54   a         b         c         d Q.55   a         b         c         d Q.56   a         b         c         d Q.57   a         b         c         d Q.58   a         b         c         d Q.59   a         b         c         d Q.60   a         b         c         d Q.61   a         b         c         d Q.62   a         b         c         d Q.63   a         b         c         d Q.64   a         b         c         d Q.65   a         b         c         d Q.66   a         b         c         d Q.67   a         b         c         d Q.68   a         b         c         d Q.69   a         b         c         d Q.70   a         b         c         d
Q.71   a         b         c         d Q.72   a         b         c         d Q.73   a         b         c         d Q.74   a         b         c         d Q.75   a         b         c         d Q.76   a         b         c         d Q.77   a         b         c         d Q.78   a         b         c         d Q.79   a         b         c         d Q.80   a         b         c         d Q.81   a         b         c         d Q.82   a         b         c         d Q.83   a         b         c         d Q.84   a         b         c         d Q.85   a         b         c         d Q.86   a         b         c         d Q.87   a         b         c         d Q.88   a         b         c         d Q.89   a         b         c         d Q.90   a         b         c         d Q.91   a         b         c         d Q.92   a         b         c         d Q.93   a         b         c         d Q.94   a         b         c         d Q.95   a         b         c         d Q.96   a         b         c         d Q.97   a         b         c         d Q.98   a         b         c         d Q.99   a         b         c         d Q.100 a         b         c         d
