GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1551

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in


Q.1

Consider the following statements.

1. Andhra Pradesh was the First state to establish PRI in India

2. Elections to PRIs are conducted by  ECI on  the recommendation of Governor. Choose the correct answer from the codes given below.
(a)  1 only                   (b)  2 only

(c)  Both 1 and 2       (d)  None


Q.2

Which of the following statements are incorrect with regard to Elections?

1. The  Model Code of conduct comes into force as soon as the schedule of the elections is announced by  the
Election Commission.

2. Delimitation Commission is appointed by  Election Commission to determine the geographical size of the constituencies based on  their population.

3. Seats are reserved in Lok Sabha for  Scheduled Caste(SC), Scheduled Tribes(ST) and Other Backward
Castes(OBC)State wise on  the basis of their population ratio. Select the correct answer from the codes given below:
(a)  Both 1&2                 (b)  Only  1 (c)  Only  2                   (d)  1 2,&  3

Q.3

Consider the following statements regarding the views of Supreme court regarding section 6A of DPSE  Act

1. Section 6A violates of Article 14 of constitution.

2. The  protection under Section 6A has propensity of shielding the corrupt

Which of these is/are correct? (a)  1 only               (b)  2 only (c)  1 and 2            (d)  None

Q.4

Consider the following statements regarding the 74th amendment act -

1. It gave statutory status to the municipalities.

2. The  act lays down that four-fifths of the members of a municipality should be elected by  the elected members of the district panchayat and municipalities in the district from amongst themselves.

3. District Planning Committee is voluntary under the Act.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1551

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

4. Metropolitan Planning Committee is mandatory under the Act. Which of the given statements are true-
(a)  Only  1, 2 and 3         (b)  Only  1 and 2 (c)  Only  3                        (d)  None

Q.5

Consider the following statements regarding the removal of chairperson of UPSC-

1. President can refer the matter to the Supreme Court for  an enquiry.

2. Under the provisions of the Constitution, the advice tendered by  the Supreme Court in this regard is not binding on  the president.

3. During the course of enquiry by  the Supreme Court, the president has to suspend the chairman or the member of UPSC.

Which of the above statements are correct- (a)  Only  1 and 2         (b)  Only  2 and 3
(c)  All                                   (d)  None


Q.6

Consider the following statements.

1. The  office of Solicitor General is a constitutional one.

2. The  Attorney General of India is a member of central cabinet. Choose the correct answer from the codes given below.
(a)  1 only                  (b)  2 only

(c)  Both 1 and 2      (d)  None


Q.7

Assertion (A): Multiplicity of Authorities in urban Areas has added to the problems of Citizens.

Reason (R): New  special purpose agencies have been created for  urban functions. In the context of  the above two statements, which one of  the following is correct? (a) Both A and R are true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b)  Both A and R are true but R is not a correct explanation of A (c)  A is true but R is false
(d)  A is false but R is true


Q.8
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1551

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Which of the following functions are performed  by  Gram Sabha?

1. A vigilance Commission is constituted in order to keep a watch on  the Panchayats.

2. Beneficiaries of various Government Programmes are identified.

3. Budget and programmes of village are framed.

4. Public related problems are discussed.

Select the correct answer using the Codes given below: (a)  1, 2, 3            (b)  2, 3, 4
(c)  1, 3 and 4       (d)  1, 2, and 4


Q.9

Consider the following statements-

1. Centre can delegate its legislative powers to the states.

2. A single state cannot request the Parliament to make a law  on  a state subject. Which of the given statements are correct-
(a)  Only  1         (b)  Only  2 (c)  Both            (d)  None

Q.10

Consider the following statements.

1. The  original jurisdiction of SC is confined to federal dispute cases.

2. Appellate jurisdiction of SC includes only civil  and constitutional matters. Choose the correct answer from the codes given below.
(a)  1 only                   (b)  2 only

(c)  Both 1 and 2       (d)  None


Q.11

Consider the following statements regarding CAG.

1. He  is appointed by  the president for  a term of 5 years or 65 years of age whichever is earlier.

2. The  CAG has no  control over the issue of money from the consolidated fund of India.

3. The  salary and service condition of CAG shall be determined by  the president.

4. The  CAG can be removed only on  the grounds of proved misbehaviour or incapacity. Which of the statements is/are correct?
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1551

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

(a)  1 and 3          (b)  2 and 4

(c)  1, 2 and 3       (d)  1, 2, 3 and 4


Q.12

Which of the following is not correct about the Estimates Committee of the parliament?

1. It has been described as ‘continuous economy committee’

2. A minister cannot be elected as the member of the committee

3. Rajya Sabha has no  representation in this committee

4. The  chairman of the committee is invariably from the ruling party

Codes:

(a)  1 only                       (b)  2 and 4

(c)  All of the above     (d)  None of the above


Q.13

Which of these statements regarding the Parliament is correct:

(a)  Lok Sabha elects its speaker and deputy speaker while Rajya Sabha elects its chairman and deputy chairman.

(b)  It can regulate the organization and jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and high courts. (c)  Parliament can impeach the president for  his/her misconduct.
(d)  Defeat of the money bill in the parliament leads to the resignation of the government.


Q.14

Consider the following statements related to Finance commission:

1. It is a statutory body.

2. Finance Commission also has a advisory role which is not binding on  the government.

3. It is expected to be quasi-judicial in nature.

4. Vijay  Kelkar is the chairman of 14th Finance commission. Which of the  statements given above is/are incorrect:
(a)  1 and 3                    (b)  1 and 4 (c)  2 and 4                    (d)  2 and 3

Q.15

What among these shall be considered part of the state as per the definition of state under article 12?
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1551

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

1. Statutory and not statutory authorities like  SAIL, ONGC,  and LIC etc.

2. Supreme court of India.

3. Municipalities, Panchayats.

4. District boards, improvement trusts

5. Private body or an agency working as an instrument of state

Codes:

(a)  1, 2 and 3               (b)  1, and 3

(c)  1, 2, 3 and 4           (d)  1, 2, 3, 4, and 5


Q.16

Appointment of the Central Vigilance Commissioner is recommended by  a committee consisting of:

(a)      Prime Minister, Speaker of Lok Sabha, Deputy Chairperson of Rajya Sabha, Home Minister, Leader of
Opposition in both the houses of parliament

(b)    Prime Minister, Home Minister, Leader of opposition in Lok Sabha

(c)     Prime Minister, Speaker of Lok Sabha, Home Minister, Leader of Opposition in Lok Sabha

(d)    Prime Minister, Chairperson of Rajya Sabha, Speaker of Lok Sabha, Chief Justice of India


Q.17

Consider the following statements regarding qualification and disqualification criteria of municipality elections  -

1. In some states, persons having more than two children are disqualified from contesting elections.

2. Licensed planners and architects have been disqualified from contesting elections in some states.

3. In some states contesting for  more than two seats is not allowed.

4. A person holding office of Profit is not allowed for  contesting elections. Which of the above statements are true-
(a)  Only  1 and 4           (b)  Only  1, 3 and 4 (c)  Only  2 and 4           (d)  All

Q.18

Which of the following statements is/are correct about asymmetries found in Indian federal system?

1. Universal asymmetry can be seen wherein on  a common factor, different states are considered different

2. Specific asymmetry can  be seen wherein a certain state has been adopted and has been given some flavour which is unique to that state

3. Administrative asymmetry can be seen wherein two specific group of states have been given unique consideration in the federation
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1551

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

4. Special asymmetry can be seen as the case where in a federal system we  have Union Territories and even in those UT, we  have special UT of Delhi and Puducherry

(a)  1, 2, 3, 4    (b)  1, 3, 4 (c)  2, 4             (d)  1 only

Q.19

Consider the following statements-

1. If the Rajya Sabha declares that it is necessary in the national interest that Parliament should make laws on  a matter in the State List,  then the Parliament becomes competent to make laws on  that matter.

2. Such a resolution must be supported by  two-thirds members of the total strength of the house.

3. The  resolution transfers the powers in the hands of Centre permanently.

4. This  provision does not restrict the power of a state legislature to make laws on  the same matter. Which of the above statements are correct-
(a)  Only  1 , 2 and 3       (b)  Only  1 and 4 (c)  Only  1 , 3 and 4       (d)  All

Q.20

Consider the following statements relating to the recent move of Supreme Court to constitute ‘Social Justice
Bench’.

1. Social Justice Bench to exclusively hear cases related to women, children and underprivileged.

2. The  apex court set up the special bench in lieu  of the specialized approach needed for  dealing with such social issues.

3. Given the huge pendency in cases, the Social Justice Bench will take only pending cases to ensure just &
quick disposal of cases .

Select the correct statement from the codes given below. (a)  1&2            (b)  2&3
(c)  1&3            (d)  1,2&3.


Q.21

Consider the following statements with respect to national emergency.

1. The  centre can give executive directions to a state on  certain matters

2. The  constitution becomes unitary rather than federal, in action

3. Parliament can make permanent laws on  subjects in the state list

4. All the fundamental rights stay suspended. Which of following statements are incorrect?
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1551

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

(a)  1 and 3                 (b)  2 and 3

(c)  1, 2 and 3              (d)  1, 3 and 4


Q.22

Consider the following statements related to the advisory jurisdiction of supreme court of India.

1. If asked, Supreme Court must provide its opinion on  law  or fact of public importance which has arisen or likely to arise.

2. SC opinion on  advisory jurisdiction is not binding on  the government.

3. ‘2G spectrum case verdict and the mandatory auctioning of natural resources across all sectors in 2012’ will come under advisory jurisdiction.

Which of the following statements are true? (a)  1 and 2                 (b)  2 and 3
(c)  2 only                     (d)  None


Q.23

Consider the following statements with reference  to anti-Hijacking Bill 2014

1. Draft bill proposes to amend the Anti-Hijacking Act,  1982

2. Bill seeking stringent punishment including death penalty for  hijackers

3. According to the bill,  A hostile plane could also be shot down if there is evidence that it could be used as a missile to hit  a vital installation.

Which of these is/are correct? (a)  1and 2        (b)  1 and 3
(c)  2 and 3       (d)  1, 2 and 3


Q.24

Which of the followings are the powers of the Election commission of India?

1. To act as a court for  settling disputes related to granting of recognition to political parties and allotment of election symbols to them.

2. To determine the code of conduct to be observed by  the parties and the candidates at the time of election.

3. To advise the president whether elections can be held in a state under president’s rule in order to extend the period of emergency after one year.

4. To register political parties for  the purpose of elections and grant them the status of national or state parties on  the basis of their poll  performance.

Select the correct answer from the codes given below: (a)  1 and 2                    (b)  2 and 3
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1551

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

(c)  1, 2 and 4                 (d)  1, 2, 3 and 4


Q.25

Consider the following statements regarding lapsing of the bill on  dissolution of Lok Sabha

1. A bill passed by  the Lok-Sabha but pending in the Rajya Sabha lapses.

2. A bill not passed by  the two houses due to disagreement and if the president has notified the holding of the joint sitting before the dissolution of the Lok Sabha does not lapse.

3. A bill passed by  both houses but pending assent of the president does not lapse.

4. A bill passed by  both the houses but returned by  the president for  reconsideration of Houses does not lapse. Which of these statement/s is/are correct?
(a)  1 and 2           (b)  1, 2 and 3

(c)  3 and 4           (d)  All of the above


Q.26

Consider the following Statements regarding the working of Federal & Unitary System of Indian Political System. Which one of them is incorrect  ?
(a)  Dual Polity i.e. Union at Centre & States at the periphery( regional & local level) represent a Federal system in India.

(b)  Power to initiate an amendment to the Constitution lies only with the Centre is a testimony to the fact that
India has a Strong Centre.

(c)  Rigid  Constitution makes way for  both Centre & State Govt. to amend those provisions which are concerned with the federal structure.

(d)  There is single constitution for  the Centre & all the States in India


Q.27

Which of the following features are a necessary characteristic of a parliamentary form of government?

(a)  Membership of Legislature of the ministers, Universal Suffrage, Judiciary as a guarantor of Citizens’ rights, Independent election body

(b)  Membership of legislature of the ministers, An integrated and independent judiciary, Sovereign parliament, Independent Supreme audit institution(SAI), Constitutionally guaranteed citizens’ rights

(c)  Membership of legislature of the ministers, Dual executive, More than two political parties, Collective responsibility

(d)  None of the above.


Q.28

Which of the following statements are correct?
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1551

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

1. The  Estimates committee consists exclusively of the Members of the House of People.
2. A Cut  Motion cannot raise a matter of privilege.
3. The  payments from the Public Account of India do  not require legislative appropriation.
4. The  CAG certifies the net proceeds of any tax. (a)  1, 2, 3     (b)  2, 3, 4
(c)  1, 3, 4     (d)  1, 2, 3, 4


Q.29

Which one of the Following statements regarding the levying, collecting and distribution of Income Tax  is correct?

1. The  Union levies, collects and distributes the proceeds of Income Tax  between itself and the States.

2. The  Union levies, collects and keeps all the proceeds of income tax to itself.

3. The  Union levies and collects the tax but all the proceeds are distributed among the States. Select the correct answer using the Codes given below:
(a)  1 only  (b)  2 only

(c)  3 only  (d)  None of these


Q.30

Who  among the following are appointed by  the President by  warrant under his  hand and seal-

1. CAG

2. Commissioner for  Linguistic Minorities

3. Members of National Commission for  STs

4. Members of National Commission for  SCs

Which is the correct option-

(a)  1, 3 and 4 only       (b)  1 only

(c)  1 and 2 only           (d)  All


Q.31

Consider the following statement with respect to parliamentary form of government

1. It ensures harmonious relationship between the legislative and executive organs of government

2. It is against the principle of separation of powers

3. Generally parliamentary form of government is more stable than presidential form of government. Which of these is/are correct?
(a)  1 and 3        (b)  1 and 2
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1551

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

(c)  2 and 3        (d)  1, 2 and 3


Q.32

Consider the following statements about the nature of Federalism in India:

1. Federalism is not a part of ‘basic structure ‘ of the Indian Constitution.

2. Constitution describes India as a ‘Union of States’ & not Federation

3. India cannot be considered a Federation in a true sense because the States don’t enjoy the right to secede . Which of the following statements is/are correct?
(a)  Only  2                (b)  1 and 3

(c)  2 and 3              (d)  1, 2 and 3


Q.33

As per the anti defection law, a member of a house belonging to any political party does not get disqualified from being a member of the house if:

(a)  If a nominated member of the house joins any political party after expiry of six  months from his  date of joining the house.

(b)  If he abstains from voting in such house contrary to any direction issued by  the party

(c)  If a member after being elected as the presiding officer of the house, voluntarily gives up the membership of his  party or rejoins it.

(d)  If an independent member joins a political party after such elections.


Q.34

Consider the following statements related to residuary powers:

1. It means all matters which are not in any of the three lists i.e. concurrent list, state list  and union list.

2. Both the centre and states have the residuary powers. However in case of conflict law  of centre  will supersede the state laws.

3. Cyber laws are an example of residuary power.

4. Article 253 deals with residuary powers. Which of the following statements are correct: (a)  1, 2 and 4                (b)  2 and 3
(c)  1, 2 and 3                (d)  1 and 3


Q.35

Which of the following are statutory bodies?

1. Planning commission(Now Disbanded)
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1551

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

2. National Development Council

3. CBI

4. National Human Rights Commission Choose the answer from the codes below: (a)  3 and 4               (b)  2 and 4
(c)  2, 3 and 4            (d)  4 only


Q.36

consider the following statements regarding the election commission.

1. Chief election commissioner can be removed from the office in the similar manner as the judge of the
Supreme court.

2. The  constitution has not debarred the retiring election commissioners from any further appointment by  the government.

3. The  budget of Election Commission is drawn on  the consolidated fund of India.

4. The  condition of service and tenure of office of the election commissioners is determined by  the Parliament. Choose the correct option
(a)  1, 2 and 3          (b)  2, 3 and 4

(c)  1, 2 and 4          (d)  1, 2, 3 and 4


Q.37

Which of the following states has no  Panchayati Raj  institution at all ? (a)  Assam        (b)  Tripura
(c)  Nagaland   (d)  Kerela


Q.38

Consider the following statements regarding ad-hoc judges in Supreme Court-

1. President can appoint ad-hoc judge with the consultation of Chief justice of India, for  a temporary period.

2. The  judge so appointed should be qualified for  appointment as a judge of the Supreme Court or High  Court. Which of the above statements are incorrect?
(a)  Only  1                 (b)  Only  2 (c)  Both                     (d)  None

Q.39

Consider the following statements-
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1551

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

1. Laws of the Parliament are applicable to the Indian citizens and their property in any part of the world.

2. The  laws made by  a state legislature are never applicable outside the state. Which of the above statements are true-
(a)  Only  1             (b)  Only  2 (c)  Both                 (d)  None

Q.40

Which of the Following are the provisions of 73rd constitution amendment Act with respect to Panchayati Raj?

1. Indirect election of chairperson at the Intermediate Level and District level

2. Direct elections of members at all level.

3. Direct elections of chairpersons at the village level. Select the correct answer using the Codes given below: (a)  1, 2, 3       (b)  1 and 2
(c)  2 and 3     (d)  1and 3


Q.41

Mandal Panchayats were recommended by- (a)  Ashok Mehta Committee
(b)  Vengal Rao Committee

(c)  Balwantrai Mehta Committee

(d)  Narasimhan Committee


Q.42

Consider the following statements-

1. The  appointment, posting and promotion of district judges in a state are made by  the high court.

2. Appointment of persons (other than district judges) to the judicial service of a state are made by  the governor of the state after consultation with the State Public Service Commission.

3. The  expression ‘judicial service’ means a service consisting exclusively of persons intended to fill the post of other civil  judicial posts inferior to the post of district judge, but not the district judge.

4. The  control over district courts and other subordinate courts including the posting, promotion and leave of persons belonging to the judicial service of a state and holding any post inferior to the post of district judge is vested in the high court.

Which of the above statements are true- (a)  Only  1, 3 and 4          (b)  Only  2 and 3
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1551

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

(c)  Only  4                         (d)   All of the above


Q.43

Consider the following statements:

1. When the president’s rule is imposed in a state the parliament becomes empowered to make laws with respect to any matter in the state list  in relation to that state.

2. These laws become inoperative on  the expiration of six  months after emergency has ceased to operate.

3. Such a law  can be repealed or altered or re-enacted by  the state legislature. Which of these statements are correct?
(a)  1 only                    (b)  2 only

(c)  1 and 2                 (d)  1 and 3


Q.44

Consider the following statement with respect to National Judicial appointment  commission bill:

1. It provides for  the procedure to be followed by  the NJAC for  recommending persons for  appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court, High  Courts and subordinate courts.

2. It shall recommend the senior most judge of the Supreme Court for  appointment as Chief Justice of India.

3. It shall not recommend a person for  appointment if any of its members do  not agree to such recommendation.

4. NJAC has no  role in transfer of Chief Justices and other judges of the High  Court. Which of the  statements given above is/are correct ?
(a)  2, 3 and 4                (b)  1, 2 and 4 (c)  Only  2                      (d)  2 and 3

Q.45

Which of the following statements is incorrect:

(a)  During national emergency centre can make a law  on  state matter.

(b)  Centre can make laws on  any state matter if Rajya Sabha passes such a resolution.

(c)  To implement international agreements centre can make a law  on  state matter however states must be consulted before such agreements.

(d)  When the President’s rule is imposed in a state, the Parliament becomes empowered to make laws with respect to any matter in the State List  and such laws continues to be operative even after the president’s rule.


Q.46

Which of the following reports are presented by  the President in the Parliament-
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1551

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

1. Report by  National Commission for  SCs

2. Report by  National Commission for  STs

3. Report by  National Commission for  linguistic minorities

4. Audit reports by  CAG

Which option is correct in this regard-

(a)  Only  1 , 2 and 4                (b)  Only  3 and 4 (c)  All                                                 (d)  Only  4

Q.47

Consider the statements regarding the current position /status of NRI Voters in India during elections.

1. An overseas elector(NRI) is a person who is a citizen of India , eligible to be a registered voter but who has not acquired citizenship of any other country .

2. An NRI settled in foreign land can become an elector in electoral roll in India.

3. NRI's  can  vote  during elections  in India provided they are  physically present at the time of voting.

4. In the recent 2014 elections, the NRIs voted for  the first time through ‘Proxy Voting’ mechanism. Which of the above statements are correct?
(a)  1,2&4                  (b)  1,2 &3 (c)  1&4                          (d)  3&4

Q.48

Consider following two statements related to removal of UPSC chairman:

1. President can remove the chairman or any other member of UPSC for  misbehaviour only after an enquiry by
Supreme Court.

2. The  term misbehaviour is not defined in the constitution and is the discretion of the SC enquiry committee. Which if the statements given above is/are correct?
(a)  Only  1                   (b)  Only  2 (c)  Both                       (d)  None

Q.49

The  Parliament can make laws on  any matter in the State List  for  implementing the international treaties, agreements or conventions  only if-

(a)  State legislature passes a resolution with absolute majority. (b)  President recommends the same.
(c)  Rajya Sabha passes a resolution with simple majority.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1551

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

(d)  No permission is required from states


Q.50

Which of the following is incorrect with respect to child labour? (a)  There is complete legal prohibition on  child labour in India. (b)  majority of child labour Is employed in agriculture.
(c)  adolescents aged 14-18 years can work in hazardous occupations. (d)  India has largest number of child labour in the world.

Q.51

Consider the following statements.

1. Large size of country

2. Socio-cultural diversity

3. Efficient Governance

4. National Unity

5. Curbing of regional autonomy

Which of the above are the reasons for  selecting a federal structure in India? (a)  1 and 2 only             (b)  1, 2 and 3
(c)  1, 2, 3 and 4              (d)  All of the above


Q.52

Which of the following statements is/are true under Indian Constitution?

1. Parliament can impose restriction on  the freedom of trade and commerce between the states.

2. Parliament can impose restriction on  the freedom of trade and commerce within a state.

3. The  state legislature can impose tax on  goods imported from a particular state. Select the correct answer using the code given below
(a)  1 and 2 only           (b)  1 and 3 only

(c)  2 and 3 only           (d)  3 only


Q.53

Consider the following statements

1. The  Election Commission of India revises the election expenditure ceiling for  candidates for  parliamentary elections.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1551

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

2. Tribunals for  the adjudication of election disputes established under Art.  323B are excluded from the jurisdiction of all courts.

Which of the above statements is/are correct- (a)  1 only                        (b)  2 only
(c)  Both 1 and 2            (d)  None is correct


Q.54

Consider the following statements.

1. The  right to make ‘extra-territorial legislation’ lies with the Parliament only.

2. The  laws of the Parliament are not applicable to Indian citizens and their property abroad. Choose the correct answer from the codes given below.
(a)  1 only                      (b)  2 only

(c)  Both 1 and 2          (d)  None


Q.55

Which of the following statements are correct

1)  Part XI of the Indian constitution defines the power distribution between the federal government (the Centre)
and the States in India

2)  This  part is divided between legislative, administrative powers & financial powers

3)  Residual residual powers remain with the Centre in Indian Constitution, as with the Canadian federal government.

(a)  1 only   (b)  2 & 3 (c) 1 & 3     (d)  1, 2 & 3

Q.56

Which of these government schemes have been implemented to tackle the problems of malnutrition?

1. Udisha

2. Mission Indradhanush

3. National Charter for  Children

4. Kishori Shakti Yojana

5. Mid day meal scheme

6. Working women’s hostel scheme

7. Integrated child development services scheme.

8. Mission Poorna Shakti
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1551

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Chose from the following options

(a)  1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 7            (b)  3, 5 and 7

(c)  2, 5, 7 and 8                     (d)  4, 5, 6,7and 8


Q.57

CIC ruled that 6 national political parties come under RTI Act because

1. Bringing political parties under RTI will reduce corruption in political system

2. They have been substantially financed by  the Central government. Which of these is/are correct?
(a)  1 only                       (b)  2 only

(c)  1 and 2 only           (d)  None


Q.58

Consider the following two statements related to Joint  state public service commission:

1. The  Constitution has no  provision for  the establishment of a Joint  State Public Service Commission (JSPSC)  for two or more states.

2. While the UPSC and the SPSC  are created directly by  the constitution, a JSPSC can be created by  an act of
Parliament on  the request of the state legislatures concerned. Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
(a)  Only  1                     (b)  Only  2 (c)  Both                         (d)  None

Q.59

Which of the following are Federal features?

1. Dual Polity

2. Integrated Judiciary

3. Single citizenship

4. Written Constitution

Choose the correct answer from the codes given below. (a)  1 only                     (b)  1 and 4
(c)  1, 2 and 3              (d)  1, 2 and 4


Q.60

Which of the following provisions are indicator of a strong central government in India:
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1551

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

1. The  Parliament is empowered to ‘form a new State by  separation of territory from any State or by  uniting two or more States.

2. Emergency provisions

3. Central government has many revenue sources and the States are mostly dependent on  the grants and financial assistance from the centre.

4. States cannot remove officers belonging to the All India services.

Articles 33 and 34 authorise the Parliament to protect persons in the service of the union or a state in respect of any action taken by  them during martial law  to maintain or restore order Select the correct answer from the codes given below:

(a)  1, 2 and 3               (b)  1, 3 and 4

(c)  2, 4 and 5               (d)  1, 2, 3, 4 and 5


Q.61

Consider the following statements with respect to the Commissioner for  Linguistic Minorities.

1. He/she is appointed by  the President of India.

2. At the Central level, the Commissioner falls under the Ministry of Home Affairs. Choose the correct answer from the codes given below.
(a)  1 only                   (b)  2 only

(c)  Both 1 and 2       (d)  None


Q.62

The  “Doctrine of Immunity of Instrumentalities” refers to:

(a)  the immunity enjoyed by  the Election Commission through Constitutional Provisions. (b)  the administrative relations between the Centre & the States in the federal set-up.
(c)  State and Central Governments have immunity from paying taxes imposed by  the other. (d)  the independence being enjoyed by  CAG through Constitutional provisions.

Q.63

Which of the following features of Indian constitution is not an aberration to its federal nature? (a)  Absence of dual citizenship
(b)  Independent judiciary

(c)  All India services

(d)  Unequal representation of states in council of state


Q.64
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1551

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

With  regards to different form of election systems, which of the following are correctly matched to their description?

1.  Party List  Proportional Representation System – entire country is considered as single constituency with people voting by  political parties and candidates elected in ratio of votes polled for  each party
2. List  system – some members of house are elected by  single transferrable voting system and some by party list  proportional representation system
3.  Single transferrable voting system – A person for  getting elected essentially gets more than half of the votes and top two candidates contest again in case of condition not getting fulfilled
4. Two  ballot system – order of choice system where a candidate should get more than half of the votes in first preference for  being elected

Codes:

(a)  1, 2, 3, 4   (b)  1 only

(c)  2, 3, 4       (d)  2, 3


Q.65

Which of the following are compulsory provisions under 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act?

1. Giving representation to members of the Parliament (both the Houses) and the state legislature (both the
Houses) in the panchayats at different levels falling within their constituencies.

2. 21 years to be the minimum age for  contesting elections to panchayats.

3. Establishment of a State Election Commission for  conducting elections to the panchayats.

4. Reservation of seats (both members and chairpersons) for  backward classes in panchayats at all the three levels.

5. Granting powers and authority to the panchayats to enable them to function as institutions of self- government.

Which of the given statements are correct

(a)  2 and 3                 (b)  1, 3 and 4 (c)  All                                  (d)  1, 4 and 5

Q.66

Consider the following statements about Appeals by  Special Leave in the Supreme Court:

1. The  Supreme Court can grant special leave to appeal from a judgement by  any court or tribunal in the country

2. It is a discretionary power.

3. It must be related to constitutional matters only

Which of these is/are true?

(a)  2 Only                                    (b)  3 Only

(c)   1 and 2 Only                     (d)  2 and 3 Only
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1551

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Q.67

Consider the following statements regarding Article 323 A and 323 B:

1. While 323A contemplates establishment of tribunals for  public service matters only, Article 323B
contemplates establishment of tribunals for  certain other matters such as taxation,land reforms etc.

2. While Tribunals under 323A can be established both by  parliament and state legislatures, tribunals under
323B can be established only by  the Parliament.

3. Under article 323A , only one tribunal for  the centre and one for  each state or two or more states may be established i.e. there is no  hierarchy of tribunals, whereas under article 323B, a hierarchy of tribunals may be created.

Which of the above statements is/are correct? (a)  1 and 2          (b)  2 and 3
(c)  1 and 3          (d)  1, 2 and 3


Q.68

Which of the following features are a necessary characteristic of a federal polity?

(a)  Citizens’ rights, Supremacy of the constitution, Independent judiciary, Residuary powers in states, Equality of representation in the council of states

(b)  Distribution of powers, Written constitution,  Judicial Supremacy,  Due process of law, Indestructibility of states

(c)  Dual Government, Distribution of powers, Bicameralism, Independent  judiciary, Role of States in
Constitutional amendment

(d)  None of the above





Q.69

Grants in aid is provided to the states for: (a) Improving the Centre-State relationship (b)  Improving the development of rural area (c)  Reducing the regional imbalance
(d)  Implementing various development programmes and rehabilitation


Q.70

Which is there in constitution with respect to election commission? (a)  the qualification of members of election commission
(b)  The  term of member of election commission

(c)  The  President has to provide staff to election commission staff, as may be necessary for  the discharge of the
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1551

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

functions conferred on  the Election Commission

(d)  Election of judges of Supreme court come under jurisdiction of election commission


Q.71

Who  among the following is not a member of the Panchayat Samiti? (a)  Members of the Union Parliament belonging to that area
(b)  Elected members of the State Legislative belonging to that area

(c)  Sarpanchas of all the Panchayats

(d)  All of the above are members


Q.72

Consider the following statements about Election Commission in India.

1. Election Commission of India is a  non-permanent Constitutional Body.

2. The  Secretariat of the Commission has an independent budget, which is finalised  by  the Cabinet.

3. The  Commission ensures inner party democracy in the  functioning of registered political parties by  insisting upon them to hold their organizational elections at periodic intervals.

4. The  decisions of the Commission cannot be challenged in the High  Court and the Supreme Court of the India by  virtue of it being a Constitutional body.

Select the incorrect statements from the codes given below: (a)  Only  1               (b)  1 and 2
(c)  3 and 4.           (d)  1, 2 and 4


Q.73

Which of the following are the aims of the Panchayati Raj  System?

1. To instil a sense of self confidence among the rural People

2. To develop the habit of democratic living

3. To secure the foundations of Indian Democracy

4. To infuse the regional feeling among the people Select the correct answer using the codes given below- (a)  1, 2, 3, 4     (b)  1, 2, 3
(c)  2, 3, 4         (d)  1, 3, 4


Q.74

Which of the following statements about the election commission are not correct:
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1551

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

1. Qualifications of the election commissioner are not prescribed in the constitution.

2. Term of the office of the election commissioner are not specified in the constitution

3. Election commissioner is not debarred from taking any roles after retirement from this position.

4. Constitution prescribes that election commission should be a three member body

Chose from the following options: (a)  1, 2 and 3             (b)  1, 2 and 4 (c)  2 only                    (d)  4 only

Q.75

Which of the following is/  are true with respect to Electioneering

1. A proposer of any candidate can also be a candidate for  the same constituency

2. The  nomination of a candidate cannot be rejected by  the Returning Officer for  suppressing or giving false information in the affidavit

3. Even if a candidate is contesting from two constituencies, one oath is sufficient. (a)  1 and 2   (b)  2 and 3
(c)  1 and 3   (d)  1, 2 and 3


Q.76

Assertion (A): The  Directorates of local bodies in States supervise the working of municipal corporations. Reason(R): The  State Governments need to exercise control over all the local bodies.
In the context of the above two statements, which one of the following is correct? (a)  Both A and R are true and R is the correct explanation of A
(b)  Both A and R are true but R is not a correct explanation of A (c)  A is true but R is false
(d)  A is false but R is true


Q.77

Which of the following is not in the list  of the 29 functional items placed in the purview of panchayats-

1. Fuel & Fodder

2. PDS

3. Libraries

4. Education

(a)  1 & 2 only  (b)  2 & 3
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1551

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

(c)  3 & 4          (d)  None of the above


Q.78

Consider the following statements.

1. High  court can issue the writs for  both fundamental rights and legal rights.

2. Territorial jurisdiction of SC for  issuing the writs is wider than HC. Choose the correct answer from the codes given below.
(a)  1 only                    (b)  2 only

(c)  Both 1 and 2        (d)  None


Q.79

Public Accounts committee has been in news recently. Which of the following is/are correct about Public
Accounts committee?

1. It strength is of not more than 22 members from Lok Sabha

2. As per the current convention, the chairman is appointed from the opposition

3. One of the 22 members shall be a minister in the government

4. Its  recommendations are binding on  the ministries

(a)  1, 2, 3, 4   (b)  2, 3, 4 (c)  1, 3           (d)  2 only

Q.80

Which of the following are voluntary provisions under the PRI Act?

1. Organisation of Gram Sabha in a village or group of villages.

2. Giving representation to members of the Parliament (both the Houses) and the state legislature (both the
Houses) in the panchayats at different levels falling within their constituencies.

3.  Providing reservation of seats (both members and chairpersons) for  backward classes in panchayats at any level.

4. Granting powers and authority to the panchayats to enable them to function as institutions of self- government (in  brief, making them autonomous bodies).

(a)  2 and 4               (b)  2 and 3

(c)  2, 3 and 4            (d)  All  of the above


Q.81

Consider the following statements regarding FIRST PAST THE POST SYSTEM (FPTP)  in India.

1. In this method every party gets seat in the legislature in the proportion to the percentage of votes that it
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1551

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

gets.

2. In this system voters vote for  the candidate & not for  the Party.

3. In this election method the winning candidate is one who gets majority of the votes. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
(a)  ONLY 1        (b)  ONLY 2 (c)  1&2                 (d)  2&3.

Q.82

In 42nd amendment act, which of the following subject was transferred from state to concurrent list- (a)  Education
(b)  Local Self  Government

(c)  Agriculture

(d)  Irrigation


Q.83

Consider the following statements with reference to Lok Adalats:

1. No appeal lies against the order of the Lok Adalat

2. Resolution of disputes by  settlement by  the Lok Adalats has been given statutory recognition by  the Legal
Services Act,  1987.

3. The  procedural laws and the Evidence Act are not strictly followed while assessing  the merits of the claim by the Lok Adalat

Which of the above statements are correct? (a)  1, 2                   (b)  2, 3
(c)  1, 3                   (d)  1, 2, 3


Q.84

Which of the following statements are correct with regards to Political Parties?

1. The  word ‘political party’ is not mentioned in the Constitution.

2. A political party  shall be treated as recognised political party in a State if it has more than 6%  polled valid votes or the party has either returned at least one MP to every 25 members or one MLA to every 30 members of assembly elections or any fraction of that number from the state.

3. Aam Admi  Party(AAP) is latest

4. National Party recognised by  Election Commission after the December 2013 Delhi election. Select the correct answer from the codes given below:
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1551

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

(a)  Both 1 and 2               (b)  Only  1

(c)  Only  2                           (d)  1, 2 and 3


Q.85

Which of the given below electoral reforms were made prior to 1996?

1. The  minimum gap between the last day of withdrawl and the polling date has been reduced to 14 days.

2. The  facility to opt to vote through proxy was provided to the service voters belonging to the armed forces.

3. Provision was made to facilitate the use of electronic voting machines in elections. Which of the above is/are correct?
(a)  Only  2                     (b)  1 and 2 (c)  only 3                     (d)  2 and 3

Q.86

According to supreme court ruling on  freebies which of the following statement is correct

1. Freebies promised by  political parties in their election manifestos shake the roots of free and fair  polls

2. The  promise of freebies in election manifestos by  political parties do  not come under “corrupt practices” and
“electoral offences” defined in the Representation of the People Act

3. Freebies are directly related to the Directive Principles. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
(a)  1 and 2            (b)  2 and 3

(c)   1 and 3           (d)  1, 2 and 3


Q.87

Consider the following statements regarding Comptroller & Auditor General In India. Which of the following are
incorrect?

(a)  CAG doesn’t have powers to audit any private sector companies under Companies act.

(b)  Supreme Court of India has expanded the scope of jurisdiction of CAG recently where he  got the right to audit the receipts of private sector companies that share revenue with the government for  use of spectrum.

(c)  The  CAG is removed from office in like  manner and on  the like  grounds as a judge of either High  Court or
Supreme Court of India.

(d)  CAG is appointed by  the President of India.


Q.88

Which of the following is a source of income of the Gram Panchayats ? (a)  Income Tax             (b)  Sales Tax
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1551

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

(c)  Professional Tax   (d)  Levy  Duties


Q.89

Consider the following statements about Joint  Sitting of the parliament -

1. Provision of joint sitting is not applicable to Money bill and Constitutional Amendment Bill as in both cases Lok
Sabha has overriding powers

2. Chairman of Rajya Sabha does not preside over a joint sitting as he is not member of either House of
Parliament

3. No new amendments can be proposed at a joint sitting. Which of the above statements is/are correct -
(a)  1, 2 and 3             (b)  2 and 3 only

(c)  2 only                    (d)  1 and 3 only


Q.90

With  reference to membership of the Finance Commission, consider the following statements:

1. State Finance commission is appointed every five  years or at such earlier time when the governor considers necessary.

2 The  reports of State Finance Commissions are submitted to National Finance Commission so that it may suggest ways to augment the consolidated fund of state.

3. Chairman of 13th National Finance Commission was Vijay  Kelkar. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
(a)  1, 2 only   (b)  1, 3 only

(c)  3 only        (d)  1 only


Q.91

Gerrymandering is a term generally used for:

(a)  Situations when event of one country have a ripple effect on  the surrounding countries

(b)  Falsifying the result of elections in any manner, for  example booth capturing or ballot rigging

(c)  Deliberate change in the boundaries of a constituency in a manner such that a political advantage for particular party gets established

(d)  None of the above


Q.92

The  Supreme Court hears appeals against the judgement in a criminal proceeding of a high court if the high court—

1. has on  appeal reversed an order of acquittal of an accused person and sentenced him to death;
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1551

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

2. has taken before itself any case from any subordinate court and convicted the accused person and sentenced him to death

3. certifies that the case is a fit one for  appeal to the Supreme Court

Which of the above are correct? (a)  1 and 2               (b)  1 and 3
(c)  2 and 3               (d)  1, 2 and 3


Q.93

Which among the following statements are incorrect?

1. The  office of the CAG is modeled upon that of the Auditor-General under the Government of India Act,
1919.
2. CAG, being a civil  servant is subject to the provision of Pleasure doctrine under Article 310 in the matters of his  removal.
3. The  independence of the CAG is ensured by  making the tenure of his  office amendable only by  special majority.
4.  Article 74 endows the Prime Minister with the power to advise the President. (a)  1, 2, 3     (b)  2, 3, 4
(c)  1, 3, 4     (d)  1, 2, 3, 4


Q.94

Inter State Council enshrined in article 263 of constitution consists of following:

(a)  Prime Minister, Chief Ministers of all the states and UT with legislatures, administrators of other UTs,  six central ministers including Home Minister nominated by  PM

(b)  Prime Minister, Chief Ministers of all the states and UT with legislatures, administrators of other UTs,  two minsters from each state, six  central ministers including Home Minister nominated by  PM

(c)  Prime Minister, Chief Ministers of all the states and UT with legislatures, administrators of other UTs, members of Planning Commission, six  central ministers including Home Minister nominated by  PM

(d)  Prime Minister, Chief Ministers of all the states and UT with legislatures, administrators of other UTs, members of Planning commission, Home Minister of every state, six  central ministers including Home Minister nominated by  PM


Q.95

Consider the following statements.

1. The  Chief Justice of HC is appointed after consulting CJI and Governor of the state concerned.

2. Order of impeachment for  the removal of SC judge is passed by  President on  his/her discretion. Choose the correct answer from the codes given below.
(a)  1 only                      (b)  2 only

(c)  Both 1 and 2          (d)  None
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1551

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Q.96

Consider the following statements in the context of judicial review:

1. The  phrase ‘judicial review’ is nowhere mentioned in the Indian Constitution

2. Scope of judicial review in India is equivalent to what exists in USA.

3. It shows the judicial supremacy in our country.

4. Judicial review and judicial activism are mutually exclusive. Which of the  statements given above is/are incorrect:
(a)  1 and 4                      (b)  2, 3 and 4 (c)  2 and 3                      (d)  Only  3

Q.97

1. The  chief election commissioner and the two other election commissioners have equal powers but in case of difference of opinion amongst the Chief Election Commissioner and/or two other election commissioners, the matter is decided by  chief election commissioner.

2. They hold office for  a term of five  years or until they attain the age of 65 years, whichever is earlier. Which of the given statements are NOT  correct-
(a)  Only  1          (b)  Only  2 (c)  Both             (d)  None

Q.98

Consider the following statements

1. The  Constitution authorises the Parliament to appoint any other seat/seats of the Supreme Court in addition to Delhi.

2. Supreme Court has power to punish for  contempt of high courts as well.

3. The  Indian Constitution provides for  ‘due process of law’. Identify the correct statements from the options below
(a)  3 Only                             (b)  1 and 2 Only

(c)   2 Only                           (d)  1 and 3 Only


Q.99
Administrative accountability is established in government organizations by: (a)  Executive    (b)  Legislature

(c)  Judiciary     (d)  All of the above
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1551

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Q.100

Read the following two statements about municipalities in the context of 74th amendment:

1. Reservation of SCs  and STs  in the proportion of their population in the municipal area

2. One third of the seats will be reserved for  women, excluding the number of seats reserved for  SC and ST
women

Which of the statements given above is/are correct? (a)  Only  1                (b)  Only  2
(c)  Both                    (d)  None
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1551

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Q.1    a        b        c        d Q.2    a        b        c        d Q.3    a        b        c        d Q.4    a        b        c        d Q.5    a        b        c        d Q.6    a        b        c        d Q.7    a        b        c        d Q.8    a        b        c        d Q.9    a        b        c        d Q.10  a        b        c        d Q.11  a        b        c        d Q.12  a        b        c        d Q.13  a        b        c        d Q.14  a        b        c        d Q.15  a        b        c        d Q.16  a        b        c        d Q.17  a        b        c        d Q.18  a        b        c        d Q.19  a        b        c        d Q.20  a        b        c        d Q.21  a        b        c        d Q.22  a        b        c        d Q.23  a        b        c        d Q.24  a        b        c        d Q.25  a        b        c        d Q.26  a        b        c        d Q.27  a        b        c        d Q.28  a        b        c        d Q.29  a        b        c        d Q.30  a        b        c        d Q.31  a        b        c        d Q.32  a        b        c        d Q.33  a        b        c        d Q.34  a        b        c        d Q.35  a        b        c        d
Q.36  a        b        c        d Q.37  a        b        c        d Q.38  a        b        c        d Q.39  a        b        c        d Q.40  a        b        c        d Q.41  a        b        c        d Q.42  a        b        c        d Q.43  a        b        c        d Q.44  a        b        c        d Q.45  a        b        c        d Q.46  a        b        c        d Q.47  a        b        c        d Q.48  a        b        c        d Q.49  a        b        c        d Q.50  a        b        c        d Q.51  a        b        c        d Q.52  a        b        c        d Q.53  a        b        c        d Q.54  a        b        c        d Q.55  a        b        c        d Q.56  a        b        c        d Q.57  a        b        c        d Q.58  a        b        c        d Q.59  a        b        c        d Q.60  a        b        c        d Q.61  a        b        c        d Q.62  a        b        c        d Q.63  a        b        c        d Q.64  a        b        c        d Q.65  a        b        c        d Q.66  a        b        c        d Q.67  a        b        c        d Q.68  a        b        c        d Q.69  a        b        c        d Q.70  a        b        c        d
Q.71  a        b        c        d Q.72  a        b        c        d Q.73  a        b        c        d Q.74  a        b        c        d Q.75  a        b        c        d Q.76  a        b        c        d Q.77  a        b        c        d Q.78  a        b        c        d Q.79  a        b        c        d Q.80  a        b        c        d Q.81  a        b        c        d Q.82  a        b        c        d Q.83  a        b        c        d Q.84  a        b        c        d Q.85  a        b        c        d Q.86  a        b        c        d Q.87  a        b        c        d Q.88  a        b        c        d Q.89  a        b        c        d Q.90  a        b        c        d Q.91  a        b        c        d Q.92  a        b        c        d Q.93  a        b        c        d Q.94  a        b        c        d Q.95  a        b        c        d Q.96  a        b        c        d Q.97  a        b        c        d Q.98  a        b        c        d Q.99  a        b        c        d Q.100 a        b        c        d
