GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1569

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Q.1  :c
In Odisha school of architecture, the Shikhara which is also known as deul, is vertical until the top and then it suddenly curves sharply inwards.

The  ground plan of the main temple known as jagamohana is almost sqaure in shape. the most unique feature of this school is that exterior walls of the temples of this school are lavishly decorated through inticrate carvings but interior walls are plain. hence statement 3 is incorrect.

There is no  use of stone pillars in this school rather iron girders were used to support roof, hence statement 4 is also incorrect.


Hence option c is correct. Q.2  :d
Chola kingdom which is also known as Cholamandalam, was situated to the north-east of the territory of the Pandyas, between the Pennar and the Velar rivers. Their chief center of political power was at Uraiyur. One of the main sources of
the wealth of the kingdom was trade in cotton cloth. Chola king named Elara conquered Sri Lanka and ruled it for  nearly 50 years.
Harrapan people knew the use of wheel but not spoked rather they used solid wheels in carts.

4th statment is also correct, there were no  temples have been found at any Harrapan site, however, they used to worship mother goddesses.

Hence option a is correct.


Q.6  :d

All statements are correct.


Q.7  :b

Nalanda became a great centre of  learning during    Harsha’s    reign.    Students     from different parts  of   the  world came  here  to imbibe learning.
It   was  supported  by   the  revenues of   200 villages.
Although this huge  monastic-educational establishment   was  primarily a  centre  for learning  of   Mahayana Buddhism, yet  the curriculum included secular subjects as well. Grammar, logic, epistemology and sciences were taught here.



Romans set up two regiments at Muziris in Chera Kingdom not in Chola Kingdom. Hence statement 4 is incorrect and option d is correct.

Q.3  :c

Both statements  are  correct regarding Pre- Historic  rock  Paintings  of   Bhimbetka. Bhimbetka  is   excellent  example   of develoment of art and rock paintings.


Q.4  :d

Different styles of Hindustani music are Dhrupad, Dhamar, Thumri, Khayal, Sadra and Tappa.


Q.5  :a

During chalcolithic period, in Maharashtra, people buried their dead under the floor of their house in north-south position along with copper objects. However, Harrapan people buried the dead in separate cemetries.

Second statement is correct. - Harrapan people in
Gujrat produced rice and domesticated elephants.
Q.8  :c





















Q.9  :d


Pietra  dura  is   a  decorative art  that  used precious  and  semi  precious  stones  -   cut, fitted and  polished to  create  designs  and images.  Used the  most  during Shah  Jahan period.
The  arabesque is a form of artistic decoration consisting of  "surface decorations based  on rhythmic  linear  patterns   of    scrolling and interlacing  foliage,  tendrils"  or   plain  lines, often combined with other elements.
As  among the Muslims the representation  of living beings was taboo by  way of decoration or    ornamentation,   they   introduced geometrical and arabesque patterns, ornamental     writing    and    formal representation of plant and floral life.





Orissa, on  the eastern sea coast, is the home of Odissi, one of the many forms of Indian classical dance. Sensuous and lyrical, Odissi is a dance of love and passion touching on the divine and the human, the sublime and the mundane. The  Natya Shastra mentions many regional varieties, such as the south- eastern style known as the Odhra
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1569

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in










Q.10 :a
Magadha which can be identified as the earliest precursor of present day Odissi. Archaeological evidence  of  this dance  form dating back to the 2nd century B.C.  is  found in   the  caves  of   Udayagiri  and  Khandagiri near Bhubaneshwar.





Correct answer is a
B refers to Boorugu in kuchipudi
C refers to Ilakiattam in Kathakali
D refers to Karanas in general. Most prominent in Bharatnatyam

















Q.14 :b
favour of Anglicists i.e. the government resources to be spent on  teaching western sciences and literature through the medium of English language alone, through his
famous Macaulay Minute in 1835. Hence, 2nd statement is incorrect.
Wood's Despatch of 1854, also known as Magna Carta of English Education in india , was the first comprehensive plan for  the spread of education and asked the Government to assume the responsibility for education of the masses. Hence, only 3rd statement is correct.

Q.11 :d











Q.12 :b


















Q.13 :c


As an answer to Lord  Birkenhead's challenge given to Indian politicians to produce an agreed constitution, an All Parties
Conference met in Feb.1928 and appointed a sub-committee under the chairmanship of Motilal Nehru to draft a Constitution, and
thus Nehru Report came up .





Madame H.P.  Blavatsky and Colonel M.S. Olcott founded the Theosophical Society in the United States in 1875, were inspired by Indian culture and thought. The  Society, in
1882, shifted their headquarters in to Adyar( Madras), accepted the hindu beliefs in reincarnation and karma and drew
inspiration from the philosophy of Upanishads, samkhya, yoga and vedanta schools of thought. The  Theosophical Movement came to be allied with Hindu renaissance. Hence, both statements are wrong.





The  first humble beginnings with respect to education were made by  the Charter Act of
1813, which directed the East India Company to sanction one lakh rupees annually to encourage learned Indians and promoting of modern sciences and not oriental knowledge. Hence, 1st statement is incorrect.
However, there arose a debate among the members within the General Committee on Public Instruction  , popularly known as Orientalist-Anglicist controversy, with respect to government spending on  education on which subjects and medium of instruction. It was Lord  Macaulay , who settled this row  in

























Q.15 :c


















Q.16 :a
Dr. Ambedkar thought that separate electorate might help in empowerment of lower classes. But  according to Gandhiji, this might have created a permanent chasm between upper classes and lower classes. So Gandhiji opposed this idea of separate electorate and in opposition of the communal award he started fast unto death which
forced Ambedkar to sign Poona Pact with him and let go  his  demand of separate electorate
, paving way for  unstead , reservation of seats for  the Depressed Classes in general constituencies. Hence, 1st statement is correct and 2nd statement is incorrect.
Dr. Ambedkar was not opposed to
partition. Ambedkar, in his  treatise Thoughts on  Pakistan (1941), held that a Pakistan with peaceful transfer of population is desirable for a strong India with national feeling. Hence, 3rd statement is incorrect.





statements  1, 2 and 3 are correct regarding Deccan    riots    of     1875.    In     1867   the government  raised  land revenue  by   nearly
50%  and   the   situation   worsened   by    a succession   of    bad  harvests.  Initially the movement was peaceful with peasants resorting to social boycott of  outside moneylenders. Later the  movement turned into riots and the peasants attacked moneylender houses and shops. They seized and  publicly burnt debt  bonds and  deeds during   the   riots.   Ryotwari  system    was followed in Deccan during 1870s.





In the Zamindari system, the Zamindars
were vested with ownership of land and they collected revenue from the Peasants.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1569

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

In the Ryotwari system, land ownership was vested with Peasants and revenue was directly collected from them.
In the Mahalwari system, village committee was responsible for  tax collection and the land ownership was vested with the village community
because they wanted to expose the weakness of legislative councils and use councils for  political struggle to arouse popular enthusiasm. So  option (b) is correct.


Q.17 :d



























Q.18 :c























Q.19 :b




British subjects  in  1873 had been exempted from trial by  Indian magistrates, and in cases involving death  or  transportation they could only be tried by  a high court.
Ilbert  Bill  proposed by   Lord   Ripon  in   1883 sought to allow senior Indian magistrates to preside over cases  involving British subjects in India.
This   proposal as embodied in  the  Ilbert  Bill provoked furious protests, especially among the  Calcutta  (Kolkata) European  business community and the Bengal indigo planters, and there  was covert sympathy from many officials.
Indian National Congress was not yet formed during     the     controversy.     The        bitter controversy surrounding the  measure deepened  antagonism between British and Indians and was a prelude to the formation of the  Indian National  Congress  the  following year.





As an answer to the Lord  Birkenhead’s challenge to Indian politicians to produce an agreed Constitution was accepted by
all Indian political parties and therefore was called an,  All Parties Conference at Delhi in January 1928. The  conference was attended by  all the  important parties including Indian National Congress, All India Muslim League, National Liberal Federation, Hindu Mahasabha, Central Sikh  League etc .Hence,
1st Statement is correct.
Nehru report included the  points
like   Dominion status  for  India ; Rejection of separate electorate; 19 Fundamental rights which include universal adult franchise as a fundamental right.Hence, 3rd Statement is correct.
Q.20 :b




















Q.21 :d

























Q.22 :c


Ground Source Heat Pumps (GSHP’s) use the earth's relatively constant temperature between at a depth of 20 feet to provide heating, cooling, and hot water for  homes and commercial buildings.
GSHP  harvests heat absorbed at the Earth's surface from solar energy. It uses the earth
as a heat source (in  the winter) or a heat sink
(in  the summer).
GHP’s  is effective in all kind of climate zones or can be deployed anywhere in India.
The  basic principle on  which the GSHP  works is "refrigeration cycle". The  refrigerant
carries the heat from one "space" to another. So  option B correct.





The  demand of the Satyagraha was the total remission of land revenue due to failed crops and not to reduce the untimely increase of land revenue. Hence, 1st statement is incorrect.
Gandhiji did  not undertake any fasting in Kheda, rather he asked the farmers to withhold the revenue payments. Gandhi undertook fast unto death in Ahmedabad Mill Strike and later on  the issue of Communal Award..Hence, 2nd Statement is incorrect. The government never agreed to the demands and reduced the revenues. The government was not willing to openly concede the peasants' demands. However ther they issued secret instructions directing that revenue should be recovered only from the peasants who afford to pay it.Hence, 3rd Statement is incorrect.





Kharai Camels- are an eco-tonal breed, as they survive in a dry  land ecosystem as well as in a coastal ecosystem, and can easily swim in deep sea.They are the only camels who can swim and who have adapted to the
After sudden withdrawal of Non-cooperation movement , two groups were formed, swarajists and no-changers. no-changers favoured constructive work. Swarajists wanted to join  legislative councils
extreme climate of Rann and shallow seas and high salinity.Gujarat(Rann of Kutch) is the only home to this breed of camel. They feed and digest on  mangoves, saline trees
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1569

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in























Q.23 :a



















Q.24 :c
and shrubs.The growth of industrial activities in the coastal areas of Kutch has minimized the availability of camel food and water sources. Salinity has increased throughout the region. Thus, the socioeconomic
condition of Kharai camel breeders ( Maaldhari Community) in Kutch is under threat.
As per latest counting, the state has 6,200 camels out of which around 2,200 are found in areas such as Lakhpat, Abdasa, Mundra and Bhachau in Kutch whereas the remaining are seen in South Gujarat near Aliya  Bet.
As the breeds having less than 10,000 population are identified as endangered, it can get special recognition and care. Hence, option (c)  is the correct answer.





More than  70  per  cent  of   all   the  species recorded are animals, while plants (including algae, fungi, bryophytes, gymnosperms and angiosperms) comprise no  more than 22 per cent of the total.
Among animals, insects are the most species- rich taxonomic group, making up more than
70 per cent of  the total. That means, out of every  10  animals  on    this  planet,  7  are insects.
The   number of  fungi species  in  the  world is more than the combined total of  the species of fishes, amphibians, reptiles and mammals. All statements are correct so option A










Q.26 :c























Q.27 :c
During   a    ‘positive   IOD’,     the    eastern equatorial   Indian  Ocean   off    Sumatra   in Indonesia becomes colder than normal while the western tropical part of  the ocean near the African coast becomes unusually warm. An  IOD  can counter or  worsen an El  Nino’s impact on  the monsoon.





Labrador Current is a cold current of North
Atlantic ocean.
Canary Current is a cold water Current, which flows along the western coast of Northern Africa
Kuroshio (or  Kuro  Siwo) Current of Pacific is similar to the gulf  stream of Atlantic.
The  Cold  Oyashio (or  Oya Siwo) Current (similar to Labrador current) is also known as Kurile current  & it flows through the Bering Strait in a southerly direction.
Peru Current, also known as the Humboldt Current is a cold current, which flows along the west coast of South America.
Agulhas Current (Warm Current) is a branch of the south equatorial current, which flows along the eastern coast of Madagascar.





Geostrophic winds: Air under the influence of both the pressure gradient force and Coriolis force tends  to  move  parallel  to  isobars  in conditions where friction is low  (1000 meters above the surface of  the Earth) and isobars are straight.
Geostrophic winds  come  about  because
GST will subsume the indirect taxes for  Goods and Services produced in India - not those imported into India. Customs duty, although an indirect tax, is imposed on  goods imported, not manufctured. Corporation tax is a direct tax. Entertainment tax is levied at state and local level. The  state component of the tax has been subsumed in the GST while local component has not.





Q.25 :d

All the statements are correct
pressure   gradient  force  and  Coriolis force come  into balance  after  the  air   begins to move.
A   geostrophic wind flows parallel to  the isobars.
In  this model of  wind flow   in  the  Northern Hemisphere, wind begins  as  a  flow   of   air perpendicular to  the   isobars  under  the primary  influence  of   the  pressure  gradient force  (PGF).   As  the movement begins, the Coriolis force  (CF)   begins to influence the moving air  causing it to deflect to the right of its path. This   deflection continues until the pressure gradient force and Coriolis force are opposite and in balance with each other.

The   Indian Ocean Dipole (IOD)  is  defined by the  difference in   sea  surface temperature between two areas (or  poles, hence a dipole)
– a western pole in  the Arabian Sea (western Indian Ocean) and  an  eastern  pole in   the eastern Indian Ocean south of Indonesia.





Q.28 :b
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1569

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Lifting air  masses cool adiabatically (by  expansion) to reach the dew-point temperature. Moisture in the saturated air  then can condense and form clouds, and perhaps precipitation. Four principal lifting mechanisms operate in the atmosphere:

■ Convergent lifting—air flows toward an area  of low pressure

■ Convectional lifting—air is stimulated by  local surface heating

■ Orographic lifting—air is forced over a barrier such as a mountain range

■ Frontal lifting—air is displaced upward along the leading edges of contrasting air  masses


Q.29 :d

A similar council can also be established in a state having scheduled tribe but not scheduled areas, therein if the president so directs.

The  governor is empowered to direct that any particular act of the parliament or the state legislature doesnot apply to a scheduled area.





Q.30 :c

The  constitution is the source for   enabling or barring a candidate from becoming CM.

Normally, a non-member can be CM for  a maximum of six  months only if he/she is eligible for  contesting an election. It is mentioned in article 164.

The  law  is that the disqualification continues for  six years from the date of release not from the date of conviction.



Q.31 :b





Q.32 :c












Q.33 :b























Q.34 :b
confidence of Lok Sabha in the government. Hence, the government has to resign.





NASA plans to send solar-powered airships to explore Venus’ atmosphere and to eventually establish a  permanent  human  colony in   a floating cloud city above the Earth’s nearest planetary  neighbor.  NASA’s    High    Altitude Venus Operational Concept (HAVOC)  mission aims  to  explore the  atmosphere  of   Venus instead of exploring the surface.





The  Convention on  the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW),  adopted in 1979 by  the UN General Assembly, is often described as an international bill of rights for  women.
Under this convention, States parties agree to take all appropriate measures, including legislation and temporary special measures, so that women can enjoy all their human rights and fundamental freedoms. Countries that have signed the Convention are legally bound to put its provisions into practice. The Convention is the only human rights treaty which affirms the reproductive rights of women and targets culture and tradition as influential forces shaping gender roles and family relations.





Post of  king was hereditary  but he did   not enjoy unlimited power. And  there is also evidence of  some election body (assembly) like  samiti.
Widow remarriage was allowed as mentioned in   Rig   Veda. There  is   no   instance of   child marriage.
We   find   most hymns devoted to Indra and
Agni.

Amendments to a bill can be introduced at the stage of second reading only. During the first reading the bill is introduced while during the third reading the whole bill is voted upon.
It is not mandatory for  every bill to be referred to a parliamentary committee during second reading. House may or may not refer the bill to the committee.
A private member bill does not require permission of President.
Defeat of money bill indicates loss of

Q.35 :d

Digital India has 3 focus areas:

1.  Digital Infrastructure to all Citizens
2.  Governance and Service on  demand
3.  Digital Empowerment of all Citizens

Digital India is an Umbrella mission which has subsumed under it various earlier programmes like NeGP, ESDM Pollicy, National Optic Fibre Network,
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1569

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

etc.
More Information  -

It seeks to promote 9 pillars of growth including
Electronics Manufacturing and IT for  Jobs


Q.36 :d

The  civil  disobedience movement with no
Nutrient              Disease                      Symptoms
Nitrogen (N)              Red leaf of cotton         1. Nitrogen deficien respiration.2. Plant poorly and is light g colour.3. Lower leav yellow.
Magnesium (Mg)      Sand drown disease in  First older then you
rent, no  tax campaings encouraged the peasant movements.Hence, 1st Statement is correct.
The  economic depression of 1930 brought
tobacco
leaves becomes mo chlorotic then reddis and margins of leav upward.
agricultural prices crashing down. High  rents
Molybdenum (Mo)   Whiptail disease  of
Melon plants exhibit
and taxes gave impetus for  peasant movements.Hence, 2nd Statement is correct.
cauliflower.
yellowing and stunti they fail  to set fruit.
The  formation of congress ministries
Copper (Cu)               Dieback of citrus           Chlorosis symptoms
















Q.37 :b
provided for  greater civil  liberties and various agrarian legislation. This  encouraged the peasant movements.Hence, 3rd Statement is correct.
The  outbreak of second world war made the government to launch severe repression against left leaders and kisan sabha leaders. And  hitler's attack on  Soviet union made the communists to take pro-war stand. This acted as a setback for  the peasant movements. Hence, 4th Statement is incorrect.






Q.39 :b
, stone fruit, dieback twinges in summer






Podsolization is associated  with humid cold mid-latitude      climates       &        coniferous vegetation.  Cold   &  humid  climate  is   most favorable for  podsolization. Siliceous (sandy) materials with poor reserves  of  weatherable minerals favor the operation of  podsolization as  they help in   easy  percolation of   water. Hence 1st statement is incorrect. Laterization is  pedogenic process common
Particulate Matter are tiny particles in the air  that reduce visibility and cause the air  to appear hazy when levels are elevated. They are able to travel deeply into the respiratory tract, reaching the lungs. Exposure to fine particles can cause short-term health effects such as eye, nose, throat and lung irritation, coughing, sneezing, runny nose and shortness of breath. There are outdoor and indoor sources of fine particles. Outside, fine particles primarily come from vehicle exhausts, burning of fuels such as wood, construction dust, etc. Fine particles also form from the reaction of gases or droplets in the atmosphere from sources such as power plants. Because fine particles can be carried long distances from their source, events such as wildfires or volcanic eruptions can raise fine particle concentrations hundreds of miles from the event. Outdoor air  levels of fine particles increase during periods of stagnant air  (very little wind and air mixing), when the particles are not carried away by wind.


Q.38 :d

All pairs are correctly matched. Hence Option D is correct.



















Q.40 :b
to soils found in tropical & subtropical environments.   Hence   2nd   statement    is correct
Calcification     occurs     when evapotranspiration exceeds precipitation causing the upward movement of  dissolved alkaline   salts   from   groundwater   and   is common in  the prairie grasslands. Hence 3rd statement is correct
Gleization     is       a     pedogenic    process associated  with poor drainage. This   process involves the accumulations of organic matter in  upper layers of  soil. Hence 4th statement is incorrect.
Hence option (b) is the correct answer.





It decreases with increase in latitude. At the Equator, a circumference of 40,077 km  is to be covered in 24 hrs. Hence the speed is calculated to be about 1660 km/hr, but it decreases as we  move towards the Poles. At
450latitude, the earth spins at the rate of
about 1,120 kilometers per hour. At the poles, the movement is very little.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1569

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Q.41 :a

Mountains in Karnataka are gently sloping, compared to the steep slopes of the Ghats in Maharashtra and Kerala.


Q.42 :c

Most of the erosion in Chambal valley is in form of gully erosion.


Q.43 :b
barriers to imports.

Government’s subsidies are given to local firms that cannot compete against foreign imports. These subsidies aim to protect local jobs, and to help local firms to adjust to the world markets.

Export subsidies are used by  governments to increase exports. Exporters are paid a percentage of the value of their exports. It increases the amount of trade and help local producers.


Q.47 :b







Q.44 :b
Second statement is wrong. Patkai Bum forms the international boundary between Arunachal Pradesh and Myanmar.
Grievances based on  non implementation of
Directive Principles cannot be challenged in Court.

All these different Acts are to give effect to different DPSPs mentioned in constitution like  right to work,equal pay for  equal work,protection of interests of workers etc.
Plants are in continuous struggle against heat, dry air, excessive evaporation and prolonged droughts.

Trees with small broad leaves are widely spaced and never very tall.The absence of shade is a distinct feature of Mediterranean lands.

Conditions in Mediterranean do  not suit grass, because most of the rain comes in cool season when growth is slow.


Q.45 :c

MFN status essentially means normal trade among member countries and doesn’t ask for  special treatment to any country.

In WTO, there is no  way of enforcing the verdict of the dispute settlement body.

Special Safeguard Mechanisms (SSMs) are set of provisions through which a WTO member country can temporarily impose higher than bound tariff rates on  the import of a particular agricultural product if there is a sudden surge in imports of that product into the country. The  SSM provisions are available to all developing and least developed country members of the WTO.


Q.46 :c

Import Quotas are imposed to reduce the quantity and thus protect the domestic producers.

Administrative Barriers means countries use administrative rules regarding food safety, environmental standards etc. as a way to introduce


Q.48 :c

Power to issue writs is a method of protecting fundamental rights of the people. It has no  relation with the maintenance of federal features. Adjudication of disputes is directly related with federal feature of the constitution. Power of judicial review in specific cases may preserve the federal feature.


Q.49 :d

Question hour is the first hour of sitting session of both lok  sabha and rajya sabha. Zero hour starts at mid noon (12pm) in which members of parliament raises important question. Filbustering is a political tool used for  delaying a specific legislation on  being put to vote by  means of extension of debate.


Q.50 :d

All the statements are correct.

Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code led to nondiscrimination of homosexuality .
Lord  Macaulay drafted Indian Penal Code,1860 and introduced it in 1861.The credit for  drafting the IPC, 1860, including the controversial Section 377 goes to him.Thus the British drafted Section 377 of the IPC, while replacing a tolerant Indian attitude towards sexuality with a highly oppressive one.
Sexual orientation is a ground analogous to sex and that discrimination on  the basis of
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1569

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in


















Q.51 :a
sexual orientation is not permitted by  Article
15. Section 377 of IPC also violates the constitutional protections embodied in Articles14 and 21. It makes it an unreasonable classification as it unfairly targets the homosexuals or gay community, thus infringing their right under article 14. It also unreasonably and unjustly infringes upon the right of privacy which is sine qua non to article 21, under its expanded scope. IPC is in concurrent list  so can be amended by  State governtments with consent of President.
·           World Heritage Convention:

India is a member of World Heritage Convention responsible for  listing of World Heritage Sites, which include both Cultural and natural sites. The  World Heritage Convention is a Convention under the aegis of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). Wild Life wing of
the Ministry of Environment and Forests is associated with the conservation of the Natural World Heritage sites.

·           The  Convention on  Conservation of Migratory Species (CMS)  or Bonn Convention aims to conserve migratory species throughout their range. The Convention came into force in 1979. India is a signatory to the convention since 1983.
Currency notes and coins are therefore called fiat money. They do  not have  intrinsic value like  a gold or silver coin. They are also called  legal tendersas they cannot be refused by  any citizen of the country for  settlement of any kind of transaction. Cheques drawn on  savings or current accounts, however , can be refused by  anyone as a mode of payment. Hence, demand deposits are not legal tenders.

Currency that a government has declared to be legal tender, but is not backed by a physical commodity. The value of fiat money is derived from the relationship between supply and demand rather than the value of the material that the money is made of.


Q.52 :c

Sonar and Radar work on  the same principle of detecting an object through echo. SONAR (Sound Navigation and Ranging) uses sound waves as in water radio waves are easily absorbed but sound waves can travel far.
RADAR (Radio detection and ranging) is used for  aerial detection as radio waves have high penetration in air  whereas sound waves have low  penetration in air.

Hence, statement 1 is correct. Statement 2 is correct as range of SONAR will decrease as radio waves are absorbed more easily. Statement 3 is incorrect as sound waves are reading absorbed in air


Q.53 :d

·           Convention on  International Trade in
Endangered Species of Fauna and Flora (CITES):

In order to regulate international trade in endangered species of Wild Life,  the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of wild fauna and flora (CITES)  was signed in March 1973.

·           International Union for  Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources - The  IUCN Red List  of Threatened Species (also known as the IUCN Red
List  or Red Data List),  conservation status of plant and animal species


Q.54 :d

speculative demand for  money can be written as

M=(Rmax-R)/(R-Rmin)
where R is the market rate of interest and Rmax and Rmin are the upper and lower limits of   R, both positive constants. It is evident from equation that
as R decreases from Rmax to Rmin, the value of   M
increases from 0 to  ∞.
Hence 2nd statement is correct.

Similarly 1st statement is also correct. Another way to understnd is -

to grasp why bond prices move opposite to interest rates is to consider zero-coupon bonds, which don't pay coupons but derive their value from the difference between the purchase price and the par value paid at maturity.

if a zero-coupon bond is trading at $950 and has a par value of $1,000 (paid at maturity in one year), the bond's rate of return at the present time is approximately 5.26% ((1000-950) / 950 = 5.26%).

If current interest rates were to rise, giving newly issued bonds a yield of 10%, then the zero-coupon bond yielding 5.26% would not only be less attractive, it wouldn't be in demand at all.  Who wants a 5.26% yield when they can get 10%? To attract demand, the price of the pre-existing zero- coupon bond would have to decrease enough to
match the same return yielded by  prevailing interest rates.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1569

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

in it goes as unreported income .so statement 3rd is also correct.

Q.55 :d





































Q.56 :d
·           Biomethanation is anaerobic digestion of organic materials which is converted into biogas, a gaseous combustible mixture, of methane (CH4). Biomethanation is a biological treatment method that can be used to recover both nutrients and energy contained in wet biodegradable municipal waste.
·           Gasification is incomplete combustion which produces combustible gas such as hydrogen, synthetic fuels and is a process that converts dry  organic or fossil based carbonaceous materials into carbon monoxide, hydrogen and carbon dioxide at elevated temperature (500-1800C)
·           Pyrolysis uses heat to break down combustible polymeric materials in the absence of oxygen, producing a mixture of combustible gases (primarily methane, complex hydrocarbons, hydrogen, and
carbon monoxide), liquids and solid residues. The  products of pyrolysis process are: (i) a gas mixture; (ii) a liquid (bio-oil/tar); (iii) a solid residue (carbon black).
·           Incineration technology is complete combustion of waste with the recovery of heat to produce steam that in turn produces power through steam turbines. But Incineration produces dioxins which are POPs (Persistent Organic Pollutants)




Q.57 :a


The  MEIS has replaced five  existing schemes: Focus Products Scheme, Market-linked Focus Products Scheme, Focus Market Scheme, Agriculture Infrastructure Incentive Scrips and Vishesh Krishi Grameen Udyog Yojana (VKGUY).



Q.58 :d

The  Global Innovation Index 2014 (GII), in its 7th edition this year, is co-published by  Cornell University, INSEAD, and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO,  an agency of the United Nations, UN)

The  theme of the 2014 GII, the ‘Human Factor in Innovation’, explores the role of the individuals and teams behind the innovation process. Statistically capturing this human contribution to innovation is a daunting challenge.
India slipped off 10 places to 76th place. India
is worst performer among BRICS countries. China -29, Russia 49, SA – 53, Brazil 61 (each country is moving up places except India

All the statements are correct.

While calculating national output ,the assumption made is that the bulk of the commodities and services produced are exchanged for money.India,where agriculture is carried on  a subsistence basis ,a considerable portion of the output does not come to the market for  sale.At present ,there is no  proper method of finding out the amount consumed at home or bartered away with producers.So 1st statement is correct.

A very large number of producers carry on production at family level or on  a very small scale.They are so illiterate that they dont maintain regular accounts.As relatively high proportion of the economy being in Unorganised sector,margin of
error in the estimation increases.So statement 2nd is correct.

A significant part of the economy operates as hidden or subterranean economy and the income generated
Q.59 :d


Unlike National Investment Fund (NIF), Special National Investment Fund is a fund maintained outside the Consolidated Fund of India to transfer the shares of certain listed loss making central public sector enterprises (CPSEs) which were found to be non-compliant with the Rule that minimum
10% of the shares issued be held by  the public (which means non-promoter entities) to be eligible to remain listed on  stock exchanges of the country. Presently, NIF is part of public accounts. Hence statement 1 is incorrect.



In structure, it mimics the original concept of National Investment Fund(NIF) created for  receiving the disinvestment proceeds of central public sector enterprises. The  difference stems from the fact that only shares are transferred here and not receipts
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1569

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

from the sale of shares of CPSEs. Further special NIF is aimed only at loss making CPSEs. Hence statement 2 is correct.

The  Special NIF would be managed by  independent professional fund managers as was originally the case with NIF. Hence statement 3 is correct. The shares so transferred to the fund will be sold in the capital market gradually over a period of 5 years by the fund managers. The  funds realized from the sale of shares would be used for  social sector schemes of the Government. Hence statement 4 is incorrect.



Hence option d is correct. Q.60 :a
Cut  in CRR and SLR affects the supply side of the banks, thus leading to decrease in base rate. Hence they are directly related to base rate. Hence option (a)  is incorrect.

Cut  in repo rate affects the demand side and thus lead to decrease in base rate. Thus, it is also directly proportional to base rate.

Open market operations are carried out by  RBI for selling and re-selling of government bonds to monitor liquidity.

Cut  in repo rate will lead to monetary transmission only if bank decreases the base rate.


Q.61 :a

Q.63 :c















Q.64 :c




In India, the Dryland farming is largely confined to the regions having annual rainfall less than 75 cm.
It is in West Bengal, farmers grow three crops of rice annually called ‘aus’, ‘aman’ and ‘boro’.
Assam accounts for  about 53.2 per cent of the total cropped area and contributes more than half of total production of tea in the country.





Pulses are the legume crops which increase the natural fertility of soils through nitrogen fixation. The  cultivation of pulses in India is largely concentrated in the drylands of Deccan and central plateaus and northwestern parts of the country.
Fruits and vegetables are majorly grown during Zaid season (April-June).
About 2,33,000 hectares across the country was used for  floriculture, producing
17,29,000 metric tonnes (MT) of loose flowers and 76,732 lakh cut flowers. Andhra Pradesh leads in loose flowers production with 2,24,410 MT cultivated over 34,850 hectares, followed by  Karnataka at 2,07,500
MT cultivated in 29,700 hectares and Tamil Nadu with 3,12,970 MT grown in 28,700 hectares.


















Q.62 :b
El Nino  Modoki — which causes  warm moist conditions in  the Central Pacific and dry  cold conditions in Eastern and western pacific.
A  more  familiar phenomenon,  El  Nino, was found to suppress  cyclone formation in  the Arabian Sea.
The  number of  cyclones per year show significant   differences   indicating   those   El Nino  Modoki years  are conducive for  cyclone formation over Arabian Sea while El  Nino   is conducive  for    cyclones  over  the   Bay    of Bengal.
All statements correct, option A
Q.65 :c

Both the statements are correct. Tectonic lakes are formed due to fractures and faults in the earth’s crust. On  the other hand, crater lakes are formed when the craters and calderas of volcanoes are filled with water.

bhojtal is an unique man-made wetland, characteristic of the Central Indian Plateau region. During the in tervening 900 years the ecosystem has stabilized and presently it represents a near natural wetland.


Q.66 :b

Easterly Jet  streams steers the tropical cyclone in India so Statement 1 is wrong. Statement 2 and 3 are correct.


Hence correct option is (b)
A strait is a naturally formed, narrow,
typically navigable waterway that connects two larger bodies of water. Straits are the converse of isthmuses. That is,  while a strait lies between two land masses and connects two larger bodies of water, an isthmus lies between two bodies of water
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1569

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

and connects two larger land masses. Artificial waterways are Canals.

A bay is a body of water connected to an ocean
or lake, formed by  an indentation of the shoreline. A
large bay may be called a gulf  or a sea.

Bays can exist as the estuary of a river. Bays may be nested in each other; for  example, James Bay  is an arm of Hudson Bay. Some large bays, such as
the Bay  of Bengal and the Hudson Bay, have varied marine geology.


Q.67 :c

Algae and cyanobacteria are autoprophic , they prepare their own food but zooplankton donot.

Organisms are divided into autotrophs and heterotrophs according to their energy pathways. Autotrophs are those organisms that are able to make energy-containing organic molecules from inorganic raw material by  using basic energy sources such as sunlight.

Plants are the prime example of autotrophs, using photosynthesis. All other organisms must make use of food that comes from other organisms in the form of fats, carbohydrates and proteins. These
organisms which feed on  others are called heterotrophs.
commercially exploited besides, of course, the mulberry silk.  Muga silk,  the golden silk  of assam is the exclusive product of India.


Q.71 :c

Sugarcane is the main raw material for  making sugar and south India having more favorable conditions i.e. The  production of sugarcane per hectare is higher, the sucrose content is higher in the tropical variety
of sugarcane grown in south India apart from that crushing season in south India is longer than in north India provides better output.

In south India most of the mills have modern machinery and most of the mills in Peninsular India are in cooperative sector, where profit maximization is not the sole objective and can be seen as a reason for  shifting the sugar industry.

Cheap and abundant supply of power is available in south India is not the reason behind this shift.


Q.72 :b

Keibul Lamjao National Park, which is located amid the Loktak Lake in Bishnupur district in Manipur, is known for  the floating decomposed plant materials called ‘Phumdis’ and it is the only floating park in the world and this is included under Ramsar site.


Q.68 :d





Q.69 :a




All are true. Hence answer is option (d)
Phawngpui National Park is located in the blue mountains of Mizoram is habitat for  species like  the mountain goat, tiger, leopard, leopard cat, serow, Asiatic black bear, and langur and bird species like blyth’s tragopan, falcon, sunbird, dark-rumped swift, hume’s pheasant, hornbills and grey sibia.

Nameri National Park , Assam consists of mainly
This  writ  is issued by  the court to enquire into the legality of claim of a person to a public office. Hence, it prevents illegal usurpation of public office. The
writ  can be issued only in case of a substantive public office of permanent character. Therefore, it is not applicable to a ministerial post. Further, this writ can’t be issued against members of higher judiciary, who only be removed through impeachment procedure.


Q.70 :b

Non-mulberry silk,  otherwise known as Vanya silk
are abundantly found in remote regions, hilltops and in forest interiors of Burma, China, India, Korea and parts of equatorial Africa and South- East Asia.

Vanya Silk includes Tasar, Eri and Muga silks. India is the only country producing all the three vanya silks
semi-evergreen and moist deciduous forest Established as an elephant reserve, today it is home to several other endangered species like  tigers, leopards, dholes and Himalayan black bears. Other common animal species that are found in Nameri National Park are pygmy hog, gaur, wild  boar, sloth bear, capped langur and Indian giant squirrel.

The  Balphakram National Park, Meghalayaalso comprising the Garo Hills,  is home to a rich variety of flora and fauna. The  national park is home to water buffalo, red panda, elephant and eight species of cats.


Q.73 :a

PCI is a statutory quasi-judicial authority mandated by  the Parliament to preserve the freedom of the press and maintain and improve the standards of
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1569

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

newspapers and the news agencies in India.

Press Trust of India (PTI) is India’s largest news agency. It is a non-profit sharing cooperative owned by  the country’s newspapers with a mandate to provide efficient and unbiased news to all the subscribers.

The  PCI has rendered its opinion from time-to-time
to Law  Commission and also to Election Commission on  issue of Paid News etc.

NAM News Network uses English, French, Spanish and Arabic for  exchange of News among its member countries.


Q.74 :c

The  concept of Sevottam is related to reforms, performances and public grievances and comes from the Hindi  words “Seva” and “Uttam” and means excellence in service delivery.

The  Shram Suvidha Portal was launched in the Pt. Deen Dayal Upadhyay Shramev Jayate programme
in 2014. This  portal will facilitate ease of reporting at one place or various Labour Laws, consolidated information of Labour Inspection and its enforcement. This  initiative will bring together all multiple labor enforcement agencies on  a common platform.

eBiz  is to avail 14 Government of India Services through online single window portal.

"Sagarmala Project" has been launched with an objective of modernizing the ports along India's coastline and achieving rapid expansion of port capacity and development of inland and coastal Navigation.

Udaan scheme is for  youth of Jammu & Kashmir to provide skills and provide employ-ability with the help of National Skill Development Council (NSDC).


Q.75 :c

Disciplinary action can be only by  Centre but transfers, promotion and other controls lies in the hands of state. So  option 1 is correct.

New  All India service may be created only when Rajya Sabha passes a resolution by  majority of 2/3 rd  of members resent and voting. So  option 2 is wrong.

Creation of all India services affects the interests of states this is the reason because of which constitution made provision that prior permission of
Rjaya sabha is required before the creation of All
India Services.


Q.76 :b

Zonal councils are statutory bodies and chairman is union home minister. So  option 1 and 2 are wrong.

Scheduled areas has certain specific features, need so special power are given to governor to take care of  them such that he can make rules for  scheduled areas,  he is   empowered to  direct that  an  act  of parliament does not apply to a schedule area.  So option 3 is correct


Q.77 :a

- First statement  is  incorrect as the term threatened in   IUCN   Red  List   includes  Critically Endangered, Endangered as well  as vulnerable species.

-  According to recently published IUCN  Red List  for
2014, India added 15 more species to threatened category;  however,  since  China added  37  more species which made India to come down one spot to
7th   position. But   if  we   analyse the  rise in  species
under this head  since 2008, there  is  almost  50% increase in  the number of  species under threatened category  due  to  modern  research  tools  used  for species exploration and deforestation.

-  SOS  is  a funding initiative under the guidance of IUCN  and  funding from World Bank and  Global Environment  Facility,  which  focuses  on   the conservation and protection of  threatened species, their habitat and the communities which depend on them. It was launched in October, 2014.

- Last statement  is  also correct as the given species are threatened and they are from India.


Q.78 :b

Dissolving a substance in a liquid lowers its freezing point and elevates its boiling point.


Q.79 :a




Temporary hardness is a type of water hardness caused by  the presence of dissolved bicarbonate minerals (calcium bicarbonate and magnesium bicarbonate). Permanent hardness is hardness (mineral content) that cannot be removed by  boiling.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1569

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in















Q.80 :a
Hard drinking water is generally not harmful to one's health, but can pose serious problems in industrial settings, where water hardness is monitored to avoid costly breakdowns in boilers, cooling towers, and other equipment that handles water. In domestic settings, hard water is often indicated by  a lack of suds formation when soap is agitated in water.
Statements 3 and 4 are also correct but these are conventions that have developed in this regard. These are not provided for  in the Constitution.


Q.86 :c

Citizenship (Amendment) Act 2015 was passed by the Parliament in March, 2015.

The  Act provides for  Persons of Indian Origin cardholders to be considered as Overseas citizen of India cardholders.
Therefore, both will now get life-long visa.
Earlier, PIO cardholders were  entitled to visa
1. Tungsten disulfide
2. Graphite


Q.81 :b

Rust is composed of iron oxides. In colloquial usage, the term is applied to red oxides, formed by  the reaction of iron and oxygen in the presence of water or air  moisture.


Q.82 :c

This  is the concept of relative motion that as the















Q.87 :b
free entry into India for  15 years.
The  Act provides that where a person renounces their overseas citizenship, their minor child shall also cease to be an Overseas Citizen of India.
The  Act also provides that any person who is/has been a citizen of Pakistan or Bangladesh or any other country which is notified by  the central government will be ineligible to apply for  Overseas Citizenship of India.
earth rotates on  its axis from west to east the sun appears to rise from east and set in west


Q.83 :d

the displacement of a body is the shortest distance between the final and initial positions of the body. If the body is travelling along a straight line, the distance = displacement. In all other cases it is less than the distance.


Q.84 :b

The  Supreme Court is authorized to grant in its discretion special leave to appeal from any judgment in any matter passed by  any court or tribunal in the country (except military tribunal and court martial). Therefore, options (a)  and (c)  are incorrect. SLP cannot be claimed as a matter of right. This  power of Supreme Court falls under Appellate jurisdiction.


Q.85 :b

Constitution lays down only two qualifications for  the appointment of a person as a governor. These are:

1. He  should be a citizen of India.

2. He  should have completed the age of 35 years.

Pyramid of Energy is always upright but for  an oceanic ecosystem Pyramid of Biomass is inverted as biomass increase at higher trophic levels from phytoplankton to zooplankton.

Leaching is the process of extracting minerals from a solid by  dissolving them in a liquid, either in nature
or through an industrial process. In agriculture, leaching refers to the loss of water-soluble plant nutrients from the soil, due to rain and irrigation leaching/geochemistry of soil

The  Montreal Protocol is an international treaty designed to protect the ozone layer by  phasing out the production of numerous substances responsible for  ozone layer depletion.


Q.88 :b

IGMSY –a conditional Maternity Benefit Scheme, under this, a cash of 4000 will be provided directly to woman 19 years and above for  the first two live
births subject to woman fulfilling some predefined criteria–this is to emphasize institutional delivery.

‘SABLA’ aims at empowering adolescent girls of
11-18 years by  improvement in their nutritional and health status and upgrading various skills like  home skills, life  skills and vocational skills and mainstream out of school girls into formal and non-formal
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1569

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

education.

National Mission for  Empowerment of woman has following components:

--Economic empowerment for  woman.

--Progressive elimination of violence against woman.

--Social empowerment of woman with particular emphasis on  health and education.

--Gender mainstreaming of programmes, policies and institutional arrangements.

Nirbhaya fund is to support initiatives by  the government and the NGOs  working towards protecting the dignity and ensuring safety of women in India.(press release 26 April 2013).

ICDS is a welfare scheme of government of India which provides food, preschool education, and primary healthcare to children less than 6 years of age and for  their mothers.


Q.89 :b

Compulsory Licensing is provided in the TRIPS agreement which allows a government to temporarily override a patent to meet a public health crisis.

Parallel Importation is another safeguard which allows importation of drugs from another country where they are sold at a lower price to meet a public health crisis.

DIPP deals with following legislations:

The  Patent Act,  1970(finally amended in 2005) through the patent Offices at Kolkata Head Quarter at Mumbai, Chennai and Delhi.

The  Designs Act,  2000 through the patents Offices at
Kolkata, Mumbai, Chennai and Delhi.

The  Trade Marks Act,  1999 through the Trade Marks Registry at Mumbai (HQ)  Chennai, Delhi, Kolkata and Ahmadabad.

The  Geographical Indications Of Goods (Registration and protection) Act,  1999 through the Geographical Indications Registry at Chennai.


Q.90 :a

In the Indian context, Social Security is a comprehensive approach designed to prevent deprivation, assure the individual of a basic
minimum income for  himself and his  dependents and to protect the individual from any uncertainties.

One Rank One Pension scheme doesn’t increase pension coverage but it is to address existing anomalies in pension provisions for  retired defence personnel.

Mission Indradhanush is to to fully  immunize more than 89 lakh children who are either unvaccinated or partially vaccinated.

Atal  Pension Yojana: Under the scheme,  a pension of
Rs.1,000 to Rs.5000 will be provided to people over
60 years of age .The focus is on  all those not covererd under any other social security program.Government will contribute 50% of the total contribution for  five  years,up to a maximum of Rs.1000 per annum.

Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti  Bima Yojana: It provides life  insurance worth Rs.2 lakhs at 90 paise per day in event of death due to any reason (amounts to
Rs.330 per annum.)for the people in the age group of 18-50 years.

Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana is a Flagship outcome-based skill  training scheme of the newly created Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship.


Q.91 :b

Q.92 :b

Industrial Gas Emission are bigger contributor than automobile/transport emission.

Carbon dioxide is the major contributor in Green house effect.


Q.93 :d

Interspecific interactions arise from the interaction of populations of two different species. They could be beneficial, detrimental or neutral (neither harm nor benefit) to one of the species or both.

Laying eggs merely does not harm the other in direct way. so not parasitic in true sense. Female anopheles though harms humans by sucking blood they do  not live  on  human body for  long period of time as well  as can survive without it. Hence, not a parasite. Foetous does not harm mother directly and in fact is a conscious choice.
Head louse lives on  human body as well  as harms humans so it is a parasite in true sense.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1569

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Table 13.1 : Population Interactions







Species A            Species B            Name of
Interaction







+                             +                             Mutualism







–                              –                              Competition







+                             –                              Predation







+                             –                              Parasitism







+                             0                       Commensalism







–                              0                       Amensalism







Q.94 :c

Wetlands are areas of standing water that support
aquatic plants. Marshes, swamps, and bogs are all considered wetlands. Wetlands have the highest species diversity of all ecosystems. Many species  of amphibians, reptiles, birds (such as ducks and waders), and furbearers can be found in the wetlands.

The  characteristics of a river or stream change during the journey from the source to the mouth. The temperature is cooler at the source than it is at the mouth. The  water is also clearer, has higher oxygen levels, and freshwater fish  such as trout and heterotrophs can be found there. Towards the middle part of the stream/river, the width increases, as does species diversity—numerous aquatic green plants and algae can be found. Toward the mouth of the river/stream, the water becomes murky from all the sediments that it has picked up upstream, decreasing the amount of light that can penetrate through the water. Since there is less light, there is less diversity of flora, and because of the lower oxygen levels, fish  that require less oxygen, such as catfish and carp, can be found.


Q.95 :b

FDI reduces cost of production if the labor market is cheaper and the regulations are less restrictive in domestic market. FDI opens local industries to outer world and hence exchange of technologies and best practices. A Foreign direct investment (FDI) is an investment in a business by  an investor from another country for  which the foreign investor has control over the company purchased jn domestic country.


Q.96 :c

The  major components of the scheme are feeder separation; strengthening of sub- transmission and distribution network; Metering at all levels (input points, feeders and distribution transformers).So option 1 is incorrect
Rural Electrification Corporation (REC) is the Nodal Agency for  operationalization of this Scheme.
So  option 2 is incorrect
Till march 2014, 96.7% of villages have been electrified. So  option 3 is correct.


Q.97 :c

Alkaline soils are soils (mostly clay soils) with a high pH (> 9)  and a poor soil  structure and a low infiltration capacity.

The  causes of soil  alkalinity are natural or they can
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1569

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

be man-made. The  natural development is due to the presence soil  minerals producing sodium carbonate upon whethering. The  man-made development is due to the application of irrigation water (surface or ground water) contaning a relatively high proportion of sodium bicarbonates).

Soil alkalinity is associated with the presence of sodium carbonates (Na2CO3) in the soil, either as a result of natural mineralization of the soil  particles or brought in by  irrigation and/or floodwater.

Alkalinity problems are more pronounced in clay soils than in loamy, silty or sandy soils. Hence 3rd statement is incorrect.

Alkaline soils with solid CaCO3 can be reclaimed with grass cultures, ensuring the incorporation of much acidifying organic material into the soil, and leaching of the excess sodium. Deep ploughing and incorporating the calcareous subsoil into the topsoil also helps. It is also possible to  reclaim them by adding like  pyrite and gypsum (calcium sulphate, CaSO4)


Q.98 :c

Q.99 :c

GRIHA is a rating tool developed by  TERI to tackle the problem of rapid urbanization, resource requirement, sustainable use of resources and environmental balance.It is a tool to facilitate design, construction and operation of green buildings that measures “greenness” of a building in India

It was adopted as national rating system for  green buildings by  Government of India in 2007. It evaluates building over its complete life  cycle, from pre to post construction, with respect to a national benchmark.

Indira Paryavaran Bhavan, MOEF building in delhi, has the largest rooftop solar-powered panel in the country. It is India’s first ‘Net  Zero Building’ which produces its own energy and doesn’t require outside power supply.


Q.100 :c

According of the forest survey of India report
2014-15, forest cover of India increased by  5871 km. sq. Of this increase West Bengal alone accounts for
64%, while north-eastern states like  Nagaland, Tripura, Manipur and Arunachal Pradesh has recorded decline in forest cover. Main  reasons attributed for  this are increase of commercial plantation, shade trees in tea garden, afforestation and coppice growth (dense growth of small trees).
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1569

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Q.1     a         b         c         d Q.2     a         b         c         d Q.3     a         b         c         d Q.4     a         b         c         d Q.5     a         b         c         d Q.6     a         b         c         d Q.7     a         b         c         d Q.8     a         b         c         d Q.9     a         b         c         d Q.10   a         b         c         d Q.11   a         b         c         d Q.12   a         b         c         d Q.13   a         b         c         d Q.14   a         b         c         d Q.15   a         b         c         d Q.16   a         b         c         d Q.17   a         b         c         d Q.18   a         b         c         d Q.19   a         b         c         d Q.20   a         b         c         d Q.21   a         b         c         d Q.22   a         b         c         d Q.23   a         b         c         d Q.24   a         b         c         d Q.25   a         b         c         d Q.26   a         b         c         d Q.27   a         b         c         d Q.28   a         b         c         d Q.29   a         b         c         d Q.30   a         b         c         d Q.31   a         b         c         d Q.32   a         b         c         d Q.33   a         b         c         d Q.34   a         b         c         d Q.35   a         b         c         d
Q.36   a         b         c         d Q.37   a         b         c         d Q.38   a         b         c         d Q.39   a         b         c         d Q.40   a         b         c         d Q.41   a         b         c         d Q.42   a         b         c         d Q.43   a         b         c         d Q.44   a         b         c         d Q.45   a         b         c         d Q.46   a         b         c         d Q.47   a         b         c         d Q.48   a         b         c         d Q.49   a         b         c         d Q.50   a         b         c         d Q.51   a         b         c         d Q.52   a         b         c         d Q.53   a         b         c         d Q.54   a         b         c         d Q.55   a         b         c         d Q.56   a         b         c         d Q.57   a         b         c         d Q.58   a         b         c         d Q.59   a         b         c         d Q.60   a         b         c         d Q.61   a         b         c         d Q.62   a         b         c         d Q.63   a         b         c         d Q.64   a         b         c         d Q.65   a         b         c         d Q.66   a         b         c         d Q.67   a         b         c         d Q.68   a         b         c         d Q.69   a         b         c         d Q.70   a         b         c         d
Q.71   a         b         c         d Q.72   a         b         c         d Q.73   a         b         c         d Q.74   a         b         c         d Q.75   a         b         c         d Q.76   a         b         c         d Q.77   a         b         c         d Q.78   a         b         c         d Q.79   a         b         c         d Q.80   a         b         c         d Q.81   a         b         c         d Q.82   a         b         c         d Q.83   a         b         c         d Q.84   a         b         c         d Q.85   a         b         c         d Q.86   a         b         c         d Q.87   a         b         c         d Q.88   a         b         c         d Q.89   a         b         c         d Q.90   a         b         c         d Q.91   a         b         c         d Q.92   a         b         c         d Q.93   a         b         c         d Q.94   a         b         c         d Q.95   a         b         c         d Q.96   a         b         c         d Q.97   a         b         c         d Q.98   a         b         c         d Q.99   a         b         c         d Q.100 a         b         c         d
