VISIONIAS z™
www.visionias.in www.visionias.wordpress.com

ANSWERS & EXPLANATION  GENERAL STUIDES (P) 2015 – Test 12 (1561)



Q 1.B
o  The  National  Early  Childhood  Care  and  Education  (ECCE)  Policy  is  being  implemented   by  Ministry of  Women and Child Development.  Hence, 1st Statement  is correct.
o  The   vision   of   the   National   ECCE   Policy   is   to   promote   inclusive,   equitable   and   contextualized opportunities  for promoting  optimal  development  and active  learning  capacity  of all children  below 6 years of age.
o  The Policy focus is on early preschool  learning  for every child below six years. Hence, 2nd Statement  is incorrect.
o  This ECCE policy will cover all early childhood  care and education  programmes  and related services  in
public,  private  and voluntary  sectors  in all settings  across  regions.  These  services  include  anganwadis (AWC), creches, play schools, preschools, nursery schools, kindergartens,  preparatory schools, balwadis, and home-based care.
Some of the mandatory provisions of this policy are :
o  Separate space for cooking nutritionally balanced meals and nap time for children.
o  Caregiver and student ratio of 1:20 for children between three-six years and 1:10 for under three years.
o  The curriculum  framework  mandated  by the policy  provides  the broad  guidelines  to develop  age and developmentally-appropriate curriculum  suited  to local  needs  and  focussed  on non-formal  preschool learning as against rote learning.
o  Child  centric  curriculum  transacted  in  mother  tongue/vernacular language. Hence,  3rd  Statement   is correct.

Q 2.C
o  Disguised  unemployment exists where part of the labour force is either left without work or is working in a redundant manner where worker productivity is essentially zero. In agriculture sector in India due to small landholdings  lots of people work on small-small  farms which needs few people only. So disguised unemployment exists in agriculture sector. Whereas, if in an economy there is surplus workforce in one sector and there is short supply of workforce in the other sector then it is known as Structural Unemployment. Hence statements  1st is incorrect  and 2nd statement  is correct.
o  Frictional  Unemployment is one, which  is always  present  in the economy  and result  from temporary transitions made by workers and employers or from workers and employers having inconsistent or incomplete information. Hence 3rd statement  is incorrect.

Q 3.A
o  Kasturba  Gandhi  Balika  Vidyalaya  Scheme launched  in July  2004,  for setting  up residential  schools  at upper primary level for girls belonging predominantly  to the SC, ST, OBC and minority  communities.
o  The scheme  is being implemented  in educationally  backward  blocks  of the country  where the female rural literacy  is below  the national  average  and gender  gap in literacy  is above  the national  average. KGBVs will be set up in those EBBs that do not have residential schools for elementary education of girls under any other scheme of Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment  and Ministry of Tribal Affair.
o  The scheme provides for a minimum reservation of 75% of the seats for girls belonging to SC, ST, OBC or minority  communities  and  priority  for  the  remaining  25%,  is  accorded  to  girls  from  families  below poverty       line.      Hence,       only      1st       statement       is      incorrect,       rest       all      are      correct. Target Beneficiaries:
     Out of school girls who are unable to complete Upper Primary education in difficult area.
     Adolescent girls who are unable to go regular school (upper primary level).
1                                       www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
     Younger girls of migratory population  in difficult areas / scattered habitation that do not qualify for a school.

Q 4.A
    Frictional  unemployment:
Unemployment  that is always  present  in the economy,  resulting  from temporary  transitions  made  by workers  and employers  or from workers  and employers  having inconsistent  or incomplete information.There will  always  be some  frictional  unemployment  in an economy  because  information isn't perfect and it takes time to find work.
    Classical  unemployment : Unemployment  occurs  when  there  are people  who  are willing  and able to
work but don't have a job.It is one of the main types of unemployment.  It occurs when the real wages for  workers  in an  economy  are  too  high,  meaning  that  firms  are  unwilling  to  employ  every  person looking for a job. As a result, some of the economy's  pool of labour is not used. When economic output falls,  as  measured   by  the  gross  domestic   product   (GDP),   the  business   cycle  is  low  and  cyclical unemployment  will rise.
    Structural  unemployment:
A longer-lasting form of unemployment  caused by fundamental shifts in an economy. Structural unemployment  occurs for a number of reasons workers may lack the requisite job skills, or they may live far from regions where jobs are available but are unable to move there. Or they may simply be unwilling to work because existing wage levels are too low. So while jobs are available, there is a serious mismatch between what companies need and what workers can offer. Structural unemployment  is exacerbated by extraneous factors such as technology, competition and government policy.
    Unemployment trap  is high social security  benefits  to the unemployed,  this erodes the motivation  to
take up a job.

Q 5.C
o  The account may be opened by the guardian in the name of a girl child till she attains the age of ten years and on attaining  age of 10 years, the girl child may herself operate the account.  Hence , 1st Statement is incorrect.
o  Up to 50 per cent of the accumulated amount can be withdrawn after the account holder turns 18 and rest after the girls attain 21 years. Hence, 2nd Statement  is incorrect.
o  The clarifications in the Budget now make it clear that the entire maturity amount of the Sukanya
Samriddhi Scheme and the interest earned are non-taxable. Hence, 3rd Statement  is correct.

Q 6.C
o  Recently US and China, the two largest emitters, signed an agreement on climate change whereby China agreed to peak its emissions by 2030 and the US agreed that it would emit 26 percent to 28 percent less carbon in 2025 than it did in 2005.
o  India has moved from a carbon subsidization regime to one of significant carbon taxation  regime from a negative price to a positive price on carbon emissions. Hence 1st statement  is correct.
o  The recent measures by the Government of India to decontrol diesel prices while at the same time increasing  excise duty on petrol and diesel periodically to match the declining global prices reflects a proactive stance towards climate change. Hence 2nd statement  is correct.
o  The coal cess was doubled from Rs 50 per ton to Rs 100 per ton. Hence 3rd statement  is correct. In
2014-15 budget, it is proposed that the coal cess could further increase from 100 per tonne to  200 per tonne.
o  The Green Energy Pact has been signed with Germany which aims at synchronising electricity produced from renewable sources with conventional power stations in the grid. Hence 4th statement  is incorrect.

Q 7.D
o  India accounts for the largest number of maternal deaths in the world.
o  India's Maternal Mortality ratio between 2010 â€“ 2012 was 178 per 1,00,000 live births.
o  All the options given above are considered as the main reasons for the higher level of MMR existence in
India.
2                                       www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 8.B
o  When it comes to public debt, India is forcing financial firms to lend to the government such as through the statutory liquidity ratio for banks and investment guidelines for other financial firms. This method of capturing resources is known as ‘financial repression’.
o  Government uses funds generated from the securities held under the statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) requirement to fund its fiscal deficit. Financial repression on the asset side of the balance sheet is created by high SLR requirement that forces banks to hold government securities. (option 2)
o  Similarly priority sector lending (PSL) requirement forces resource deployment in less efficient ways. (option 3)
o  Financial repression on the liability side has arisen from high inflation since 2007, leading to negative real interest rates, and a sharp reduction in households’ financial savings.
o  Option 1 and 4 do not result in preemption of capital by the government and thus do not reflect this phenomenon.

Q 9.D

All the statements are correct.
o  Question lists down the four pillars of the smart cities listed in the concept note viz.
o  Institutional Infrastructure (including  Governance),
o  Physical Infrastructure,
o  Economic Infrastructure and
o  Social Infrastructure.
o  Four statements are component of each pillar respectively.

Q 10.B
o  Mother and Child Tracking system (MCTS) is a name-based tracking of pregnant  women so that adequate and timely feedback may be given to the health workers who may, in turn, ensure that pregnant women receive adequate Ante-natal and Post-natal care besides encouraging institutional deliveries.
o  The system also aims to track the new-borns so that timely and complete immunisation may be ensured to them. MCTS has been implemented in all the States / UTs. It covers mothers from conception till 42 days after delivery. The infants are covered up to five years of age.
o  The Mother and Child Tracking system in under National  E-governance Plan (NeGP).

Q 11.C
o  RRBs  were  established  in  1975  during  Fifth  five  year  plan  period(  1974-79).Hence, 1st  Statement   is correct.
o  Regional   Rural   Banks   (RRBs)   were   established   in  1975   under   the   provisions   of   the   Ordinance promulgated on the 26th September 1975 and followed by Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976 with a view to develop the rural economy and to create a supplementary  channel to the 'Cooperative  Credit Structure' with a view to enlarge institutional credit for the rural and agriculture sector.
o  The source of funds of RRBs comprise  of owned funds, borrowings from NABARD,  sponsor  banks, and other sources including SIDBI and National  Housing Bank (NHB). Hence, 2nd Statement  is incorrect.
o  The  RRBs  mobilise  deposits  primarily from  rural/semi-urban areas  and  provide  loans  and  advances mostly  to  small  and  marginal  farmers,  agricultural  labourers,  rural  artisans  and  other  segments  of priority sector. Hence, 3rd Statement is correct.

Q 12.D
    National Population Policy 2000 has -
1.Short term Goal (Provide contraception,  health care infra, personnel, childcare),
2.Medium  term Goal (Bring Total fertility rate to replacement level (=2.1) by 2010 and
3.Long term Goal (Achieve stable population by 2045).
Note: That after review of National Population policy, the aim to achieve stable population is being extended to 2070, due to poor performance of some states.


3                                       www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 13.A
o  The expenditure on healthcare as a percent of GDP has been around 4% in the last ten years. Hence, 1st statement  is correct.
o  Public spending in the last 10 years has been around 1% of GDP (Both Centre & states) while the rest has been provided by the private sector.
o  India is amongst the countries where private sector has major share in the healthcare.  At its current level of income, most of the countries spend higher on health in terms of percentage of GDP. Hence, 2nd statement  is incorrect.

Q 14.B
o  ASHA must primarily be a woman resident of the village. Hence, 1st statement  is correct.
o  She should be a literate woman with due preference  in selection  to those who are qualified upto 10th standard  wherever  they are interested  and available  in good numbers.  This condition  may  be relaxed only if no suitable person with this qualification is available. Hence, 2nd statements is incorrect.
o  The ASHAs receives performance-based incentives. Hence, 3rd statement  in correct.
o  The  States  have  been  given  the  flexibility  to  relax  the  population  norms.  Hence,  4th  statement   is correct.

Q 15.D
o  Rashtriya Arogya Nidhi (RAN) previously known as National  Illness Assistance Fund (NIAF) was set up under the Ministry  of Health and Family Welfare in 1997.Hence,  1st statement  is correct.
o  It aims to  provide for financial assistance to patients, living below poverty line, who are  suffering from major life threatening diseases, to receive medical treatment at any of the super specialty hospitals/institutes or other Govt hospitals. Hence, 2nd statement  is correct.
o  In this scheme, the states are needed to create their own  State Illness funds  in which central government provides funding  to the extent of   50% of contribution made by State Govt/Union Territories. Hence, 3rd statement  is correct.

Q 16.C
o  The Multi-dimensaional Poverty Index (MPI), published in the UNDP 2010 report, complements  monitory measures of poverty by considering overlapping deprivation suffered by people at the same time.
o  The index identifies deprivation across the same three dimensions as the HDI. In other words the MPI identifies multiple  deprivations at the household  and individual level in health, education  and standard of living and shows the number of people who are multi-dimensionally poor (suffering
deprivations in 33% of weighted indicators) and the number of deprivations with which poor households
typically contend with.
o  Hence, both 1st and 2nd statement  are correct.



Q 17.A
o  Hitherto, only banks were permitted to set up and operate ATMs in India . In June 2012, the RBI issued policy guidelines permitting non-bank  entities to set up and operate White label ATMs (WLAs) in the country after seeking the Reserve Bank's authorisation under the Payment  and Settlement Systems Act, 2007. Thus, WLAs are non-bank  ATMs operated  by private companies. The objective of permitting non-banks to operate white label ATMs was to enhance the spread of ATMs in semi-urban and rural areas,where bank-owned ATM penetration has not been growing. Hence, 1st Statement is correct.
o  RBI permitted  non-bank  entities incorporated in India under the Companies  Act 1956, to set up, own and operate ATMs in India. They will provide the banking services to the customers of banks in India, based on the cards (debit/credit/prepaid) issued by banks. The WLAO's role would be confined to acquisition of transactions of all banks' customers and hence they would need to establish technical connectivity with the existing authorised shared ATM Network Operators / Card Payment Network Operators. Hence, 2nd Statement is correct.
o  The Reserve Bank of India has allowed operators of white label Automated Teller Machines (ATMs) to
accept international credit, debit and prepaid cards and eased rules for cash supply tie-ups at these.

4                                       www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
However, acceptance  of deposits at the WLAs, by the WLA Operator  would not be permitted. Hence,
3rd Statement  is incorrect.
o  Tata Communications Payment  Solutions  Limited (TCPSL) is the first company authorized by RBI to open White Label ATMs in the country.  TCPSL's first White Labelled ATM was launched under the brand name 'Indicash' in 2013, in Chandrapada,  a village located in Vasai-Virar, Maharashtra.
o  Further on the new rules, WLA operators will have an option to provide facilities for Dynamic Currency Conversion for international cards. The currency conversion rate can be only had from authorised banks. The conversion will be restricted to the amount requested by the international cardholder to his home currency.
o  Also, WLA operators will now have the freedom to tie-up with other commercial banks for cash supply at their ATMs. Earlier, operators had to link only with sponsor banks for cash supply. Operators can enter into service agreements with the supplier bank for adequate supply of genuine and good quality notes.



Q 18.D
o  It is in news because The Second National  Lok Adalat was held across India involving the Supreme Court,
24 high courts, districts courts and taluka-level courts.
o  The National  Legal Services Authority (NALSA)  has been constituted under the Legal Services
Authorities Act, 1987 to provide free Legal Services to the weaker sections of the society and to organize
Lok Adalats for amicable settlement of disputes.
o  Section 12 of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 prescribes the criteria for giving legal services to the eligible persons. Section 12 of the Act reads as under:-
o  "12.Every person who has to file or defend a case shall be entitled to legal services under  this Act if that
person is -
o  (a) a member of a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe;
o  (b) a victim of trafficking in human beings or begar as referred to in Article 23 of the Constitution;
o  (c) a woman or a child;
o  (d) a mentally ill or otherwise disabled person;
o  (e) a person under circumstances of undeserved want such as being a victim of a mass disaster, ethnic violence, caste atrocity, flood, drought, earthquake or industrial disaster;
o  Legal Services to Trans-Gender people was taken up as a new project of NALSA.
o  so option d is correct .



Q 19.D
o  Department of Disability Affairs under the Ministry  of Social Justice and Empowerment administers the following major schemes for the welfare and rehabilitation of persons with disabilities:
(i)   Deendayal  Disabled  Rehabilitation Scheme (DDRS) under which financial assistance is provided to Non- governmental  organizations running projects for the welfare of persons with disabilities &
(ii)  Schemes of Assistance to Disabled  Persons for Purchase/Fitting of Aids/ Appliances (ADIP) provides assistance  to the implementing Agencies for providing  aids and appliances  to persons with disabilities.
o  Besides, seven National Institutes (NIs), eight Composite Regional Centers (CRCs) and 220 District Disability Rehabilitation  Centres (DDRCs) under the Ministry are engaged in human resource development,  providing rehabilitation services to the persons with disabilities, research & development efforts and awareness generation etc.



Q 20.D
o  On the recommendations of Demographic Sub-Committee  appointed by the Research Programme of Planning  Commision  in 1955, the Ministry  of Health provided grants for the establishment  of Demographic Research Centres (DRC) in Delhi, Calcutta and Trivandrum to undertake research on various demographic,  social & economic aspects of population growth in their respective regions.
o  Later on, Family Planning  Communication Action Research Centres were established to carry out
research studies in the field of family planning communication  to understand the processes of

5                                       www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
acceptance of family planning and evolve more efficient programmes for the acceptance of small family norm under the guidance of expert committees appointed by the Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare from time to time.
o  These centres exist mostly in Universities and Institutions of national repute.
o  The nomenclatures of DRC and Family Planning Committee  Action Research Centres were changed to Population Research Centre (PRC) in 1978-79 after taking into account the fact that activities  of all research centres were more or less alike.
o  The PRCs are expected to carry out research on various aspects of population stabilisation, conduct demographic and socio-demographic surveys and study communication  aspects of Population and Family Welfare Programme. At present, there is a network of 18 PRCs in 12 Universities and 6 institutions of national repute scattered over 17 states of India.
The PRCs are autonomous in their functioning. These Centres are provided with 100 per cent central assistance in the form of grants-in-aid on a year-to-year basis. In most of the States where PRCs are present, Research Coordination Committees have been constituted under the chairmanship of Health Secretaries of respective States. This is to provide a forum for exchange of ideas and findings between programme administrators  and researchers for the optimum utilisation of resources and also identification of areas where further research may be needed.
o  Thus, it undertakes- demographic research, research projects relating to Family Planning
;conducts   biological  studies of population control.

Q 21.D
o  More than the poor or marginal farmers, the rich farmers get the benefit of subsidy. This keeps them insulated against the competitive forces of the market and reduces the competition. Hence, 1st statement  is correct.
o  Subsidies encourage wasteful use of resources such as excessive use of electricity, fertilisers etc without worrying about the cost of such usage. Hence, 2nd statement  is correct.
o  Fertiliser subsidy such urea has led to excessive use of particular fertilisers, resulting in impaired
micronutrients  in the soil. Hence, 3rd statement  is correct.
o

Q 22.D
o  According to FAO "food security exists when all people at all times have physical,  social and economic access to sufficient,  safe and nutritious  food to meet their dietary needs and food preferences  for an active, healthy life."
o  Intrinsic to this definition are the four pillars of food security, that is, availability, stability of supply, access and utilization by the body.
o  Nutrition considerations  are mentioned in the definition itself. In India although nutritional component is relatively constrained due to limited resources. However, nutrition  of lactating  mothers is taken care of under NFSA.
o  Stability of supply and access to food is possible when the food prices are available to the public at affordable prices and do not rise unexpectedly.  It is the reason government procures the food grain and then distributes it through PDS to maintain a stable supply at affordable  prices.
o  Under TPDS and now under NFSA, the identification of poor is to be done by the states.
o  Hence, all the statements are correct.

Q 23.A
o  Rajiv Gandhi Scheme for Empowerment  of Adolescent Girls [RGSEAG]  also known as SABLA, is a scheme proposed by the Ministry for women and child development for  Adolescent Girls of 11 to 18
years,  whereby the Nutrition Programme for Adolescent  Girls (NPAG) and Kishori Shakti Yojana (KSY)
would be merged with content enrichment.
o  The scheme is proposed to be implemented using  the platform of Integrated Child Development
Services Scheme.



6                                       www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
o  It's a Centrally Sponsored Scheme to be implemented through the State Governments/UTs with 100% financial assistance from the Central Government for all inputs, except supplementary  nutrition for which Government of India and States would share on 50: 50 basis.
o  The scheme aims at empowering adolescent girls (AGs) of 11-18 years with focus on out-of-school  girls by improvement in their nutritional and health status and upgrading various skills like home skills, life skills and vocational skills. The scheme also aims at equipping the girls on family welfare, health hygiene etc.
o  Hence, only 3rd statement  is incorrect. Rest  all are correct.

Q 24.A
o  The eight MDGs include eradication of extreme poverty and hunger, achieving universal primary education, promoting gender equality and empowering women, reducing child mortality, improving maternal health, combating HIV/AIDS, malaria and TB, ensuring environmental  sustainability and developing global partnership for development. Some MDG targets for India by 2015 are as follows:
o  Infant Mortality Rate target of 27 per thousand live birth by 2015. Hence, 1st statement  is correct.
o  Maternal Mortality Ratio (MMR) by three quarters, between 1990 and 2015 to 109 per one lakh births.
Hence, 2nd statements is correct.
o  Child Mortality rate to be reduced to 42 per 1000 live births.
o  India was required to halve the percentage of population below the national poverty line by 2015 over the 1990 level.
o  Reducing TFR doesn't form a part of MDG targets. Hence, 3rd statement  is incorrect.

Q 25.A
o  New Method of calculating  Education  Index (2010 onwards)
Education index : calculated on the basis of Mean Years of Schooling  and  Expected Years of Schooling.
o  Old method of calculating Education  Index
Education index: Knowledge and education, as measured by the adult literacy rate (with two-thirds weighting) and the combined primary, secondary, and tertiary Gross Enrolment  Ratio (with one-third weighting).

Q 26.C
o  NSAP  stands  for  National  Social  Assistance  Programme.   It  was  launched  on  15th  August,  1995.  In providing social assistance benefits to poor households in the case of old age, death of the breadwinner and maternity, the NSAP aims at ensuring minimum  national standards,  in addition to the benefits that the States are currently providing or might provide in future.
     The  National  Maternity  Benefit  Scheme  (NMBS)  was  subsequently  transferred  on 1st April,  2001 from the Ministry  of Rural development  to the Ministry  of Health  and Family  Welfare.  So it is no longer part of NSAP. Hence,  1st  statement  is incorrect,  as it doesnot  include  maternity provisions and benefits.
     The  National   Social   Assistance   Programme   (NSAP)   represents   a  significant   step  towards   the fulfilment  of  the  Directive  Principles   in  Article  41  and  42  of  the  Constitution   recognizing   the concurrent  responsibility  of the  Central  and  the  State  Governments  in the  matter.  In particular, Article 41 of the Constitution of India directs the State to provide public assistance  to its citizens in case of unemployment, old age, sickness  and disablement and in other cases of undeserved want within  the  limit  of  its  economic  capacity  and  development. Earlier  article  41 and 42 both  were included  but  now  with  removal  of maternity  benefit  scheme  from  it article  42 is not  fulfilled  by NSAP(Article 42-Provision  for just  and humane  conditions  of work and maternity  relief The State shall  make  provision  for  securing  just  and  humane  conditions  of  work  and  for  maternity  relief). Hence 2nd   statement   is incorrect.
     National  Family  Benefit  Scheme  (NFBS):  Rs. 10000/-  will be given as a lumpsum  assistance  to the bereaved   household   in  the  event  of  death  of  the  bread-winner   according   to  new  guidelines published in March 2015. Hence, only 3rd statement  is correct.



7                                       www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 27.C
o  Ministry    of   Women   and   Child   Development would   be   responsible   for   budgetary   control   and adminstration  of the scheme  at the Centre.Thus,  the scheme  would  be anchored  by the  Ministry  of Women and Child Development with the critical task of coordinating and monitoring Multi Sectoral interventions  by the Ministry of Human Resource  and Development  and Ministry of Health and Family Welfare at the Central level. Hence, 1st Statement  is incorrect.
o  Its overall goal is to improve the Child Sex Ratio in 100 Gender Critical Districts. Hence, 3rd statement  is
correct.
Its objectives  are -
o  To prevent Gender biased sex selective elimination
o  To ensure survival& protection of the girl child
o  To ensure education & participation of the girl child
o  Appropriate  initiatives  will  be taken  to  encourage  girls  to  express  their  views  and  to  be  heard,  to participate actively, effectively and equally at all levels of social, economic, and political leadership
o  Long  term  interventions  for gender  equality  would  focus  on creating  enabling environment  including employable opportunities,  safety & security, mobility & speedy justice.
o  Sukanya  Samridhi  Account also known  as Sukanya  Devi Yojana  is  a small deposit scheme for girl child,
as part of the "Beti  Bachao  Beti Padhao"  campaign,  which would fetch an interest rate of 9.1 per cent and provide income tax rebate.The  account can be opened at any time from the birth of a girl child till she attains the age of 10 years, with a minimum deposit of Rs 1000 and a maximum of Rs 1.5 lakh can be deposited  during  the  financial  year.The  account  will  remain  operative  for  21 years  from  the  date  of opening  of  the  account  or  marriage  of  the  girl  child  after  attaining  18  years  of  age.To  meet  the requirement  of higher education  expenses,  partial withdrawal  of 50 per cent of the balance  would be allowed after the girl child has attended 18 years of age. Hence, 2nd Statement  is correct.


Q 28.D
    The Ministry of Rural Development  has decided to re-design and re-structure  the on going Swarnjayanti Gram Swarojgar Yojana (SGSY) into National Livelihood Mission (NRLM). The idea has been conceived as a cornerstone of national poverty reduction strategy. The objective of the Mission is to reduce poverty among rural BPL by promoting diversified and gainful self-employment and wage employment opportunities  which would lead to an appreciable increase in income on sustainable basis.
    The NRLM has been envisaged to perform the following functions:
    facilitate establishment  of state level umbrella agencies by the state governments for providing institutional support for poverty elimination programs.
    support state level umbrella organizations in the design and implementation  of a pro-poor programs
    provide professional and technical support an guidance to the state agencies by seeking out and disseminating pro-poor technologies and institutional innovations through research and development and forging linkages between the state agencies and the national centers of excellence.

Q 29.D
o  In India, Pentavalent vaccine was introduced in Tamil Nadu and Kerala in December 2011, under the
Universal Immunization  Programme.
o  It is given for  Five Diseases i.e. Diphtheria, Pertussis, Tetanus, Hepatitis-B, Hib. (Hib Haemophilus
Influenzae Type B). Hence, 1st statement  is incorrect.
o  This is an injection (and not oral drops like polio vaccine.). Hence, 2nd statement  is incorrect.



Q 30.C
o  COMMIT an initiative is  started by UN , to end violence against women and girls. Hence, only 3rd statement  is correct. Rest all are incorrect.
o  According to UN Women, currently, there are 125 countries which have laws that penalize domestic violence. However, up to seven in 10 women continue to be targeted for physical and/or sexual violence in their lifetime, and 603 million women live in countries where domestic violence is still not a crime.

8                                       www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
o  The new initiative called COMMIT by UN thus,ask governments to make national commitments  that will be showcased globally, encouraging countries to come up with new policies to protect victims.

Q 31.C

Except statement c , all statements are part of  HDI.


Q 32.C
o  The objective of RSBY is to provide protection to BPL households(unorganized sector) from financial liabilities arising out of health shocks that involve hospitalization.
o  RSBY provides the participating BPL household with freedom of choice between public and private  hospitals  and makes him a potential client worth attracting on account of the significant revenues that hospitals stand to earn through the  scheme. Hence, 1st Statement is correct.
o  A beneficiary of RSBY gets cashless benefit in any of the empanelled hospitals. He/ she only needs to carry his/ her smart card (Biometric Card) and provide verification through his/ her finger print. Hence,
2nd Statement  is incorrect.
o  Beneficiaries under RSBY are entitled to hospitalization  coverage up to Rs. 30,000/- for most of the diseases that require hospitalization.
o  Pre-existing conditions are covered from day one and there is no age limit. Hence, 3rd Statement  is correct.
o  Coverage extends to five members of the family which includes the head of household, spouse and up to three dependents. Beneficiaries need to pay only Rs. 30/- as registration fee while Central and State Government pays the premium to the insurer selected by the State Government on the basis of a competitive bidding.
o  For participating providers it is a paperless scheme as they do not need to send all the papers related to treatment to the insurer. They send online claims to the insurer and get paid electronically.
o  In pursuant  to the Government decision, from April 1 , 2015, this scheme will be implemented by
Ministry  of Health and Family Welfare and not by Ministry  of Labour and Employment.

Q 33.A
o  The Nutrition Resource Platform (NRP) is an initiative of the Child Development and Nutrition  Bureau of the Ministry  of Women and Child Development (MWCD), Government of India, developed with the aim to collect, collate and make available resources and materials on nutrition. Hence, 1st Statement  is incorrect.
o  It is planned as a knowledge repository of information collected from sectors identified in National Plan of Action on Nutrition  such as nutrition, food, health, agriculture, education, water and sanitation to aid knowledge generation, policy formulation and improve adoption of good practices to influence behaviour change around nutrition and child care.
o  It is an interactive knowledge resource base which facilitates real quick time interaction, exchange of ideas, discussions between Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) and other stakeholders to promote a better understanding  of the existing and the newer researches in the field of nutrition and child care. Hence, 2nd Statement  is correct.
o  It assists in evolving  a perspective plan on nutrition  at State, District and Sub District Level by MWCD
and State Governments. Hence, 3rd Statement  is correct.
o  NRP will offer services such as data collection for Management Information System (MIS) besides rendering services such as Voice Blast, SMS Blast, In-Dialling on Interactive Voice Response System (IVRS).

Q 34.D

Objectives  of MNREGA
o  Expanding earning sources.
o  Strengthening pure natural resources under control via works that deal with causes of serious hardship like famine, deforestation and ground break down and so motivate maintainable growth.
o  Strengthening grassroots procedures of democracy.

9                                       www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
o  Infusing visibility and responsibility in government.
o  Strengthening high decentralization  as well as deepening procedures of democracy by providing a critical part to the local Panchayati Raj, Organizations  in planning, tracking and execution.
o  Hence, all the statements are correct.




Q 35.D
o  It was first detected in 2009 in North America. Hence,1st statement   is incorrect.
o  The World Health Organization (WHO) has stated that there is no reason to believe that pigs are transmitting the flu to humans. So, usually pigs are not quelled in order to reduce the impact of Swine Flu. Hence, 2nd statement  is incorrect.

Q 36.D
o  As per the analysis done by the Economic Survey of 2013-14, majority of Indian firms willfully choose to remain informal so as to evade taxes, conjure government benefits, avoid payment of social benefits to its employees etc.
o  If the workers are on a contractual basis they do not fall under the strict labor laws of India and hence have the greater freedom of hiring and firing. Also, they tend to pay lesser salaries and social sector benefits to the contractual employees. Hence, prefer to keep the labor on contract.
o  Privatization has led to decline in the hiring by the public sector post the reform period. Public sector is still the largest employer in the formal sector, but its capacity has reduced over the years.
o  All these factors have led to the casualisation of workforce which means that more number of people
are indulged in informal employment.
o  Hence, all the statements are correct.


Q 37.D

All are Statutory  Bodies.
o  Dental Council of India is a Statutory Body incorporated under an Act of Parliament viz. The Dentists Act,
1948 (XVI of 1948) to regulate the Dental Education and the profession of Dentistry throughout India
and it is financed by the Govt. of India in the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (Department of Health) through Grant-in-aid. The General Body of the Dental Council of India representing various State Governments, Universities, Dental Colleges, Central Government, etc.
o  The Pharmacy  Council of India (PCI) is the statutory body of government of India constituted under
the Pharmacy Act, 1948. The Council was first constituted on 4 March 1948. The Pharmacy Council of India is constituted by central government every five years. There are three types of members collectively forms a frame of PCI,elected members, nominated members and ex-officio members. The objectives of the PCI are to regulate the pharmacy education in the Country for the purpose of registration as a pharmacist under the Pharmacy Act. They also regulate the Profession and Practice of Pharmacy.
o  The Indian Nursing Council is a statutory body constituted under the Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947.
The Council is responsible for regulation and maintenance of a uniform standard of training for Nurses, Midwives, Auxilliary Nurse-Midwives  and Health Visitors.
o  The Medical Council of India (MCI) is the statutory body for establishing uniform and high standards of medical education in India. The Council grants recognition of medical qualifications, gives accreditation to medical colleges, grants registration to medical practitioners, and monitors medical practice in India.
o  The Food Safety and Standards  Authority of India (FSSAI) established under the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 as a statutory body for laying down science based standards for articles of food and regulating manufacturing,  processing, distribution, sale and import of food so as to ensure safe and wholesome food for human consumption.




10                                    www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 38.B
o  The University Grants Commission (UGC) of India is a statutory organisation set up by the Union government in 1956, charged with coordination, determination and maintenance of standards  of university education.  It provides recognition to universities in India, and disburses  funds to such recognized universities and colleges.
o  Hence, only 1st and 2nd statements are correct.





Q 39.D
o  RTE clarifies that 'compulsory education'  means obligation of the appropriate government to provide free elementary education  and ensure compulsory admission, attendance and completion of elementary education  to every child in the six to fourteen age group.
o  Hence, all the statements are correct.

Q 40.A
o  In pursuant of a recent policy decision of government, from 1st April,2015,  The Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojna (RSBY) of the Labour and Employment Ministry will now be implemented by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
o  RSBY, the health insurance scheme for BPL families ,was launched for workers in unorganised sector in
2007-08. Hence, 1st and 2nd Statements are correct.
o  The scheme provides for IT-enabled and smart card-based cashless healthy insurance, including maternity  benefit cover of up to Rs 30,000 per annum to BPL families (a unit of five) and 11 occupational groups in the unorganised sector. Hence, 3rd Statement is incorrect.
o  In India, out of the estimated workforce of 47 crore, only 8 crore are organised workers and 39 crore are workers in the unorganised sector.

Q 41.A
o  Jan Shikshan Sansthan (formerly known as Shramik  Vidyapeeth) have a challenging mandate of providing vocational skills to non-literate, neo-literates as well as school drop-outs by identifying skills that have a market in the region of their establishment.
The scope of work of Jan Shikshan Sansthans (JSSs) includes the following:
(i)   Develop/Source  appropriate curriculum and training modules covering vocational elements general awareness and life enrichment components.
(ii)  Wherever possible, JSSs are encouraged to undertake training equivalent to courses designed by the
Directorate of Adult Education, National Institute of Open Schooling and Director General, Employment
& Training.
(iii) Provide training to a pool of resource persons and master trainers for conducting training as also availability of infrastructure and training - specific equipment.
(iv) Administer simple tests and award certificates.
(v)  Network with employers and industries for trainees to get suitable placements
Hence, only 1st statement  is correct. Rest all are incorrect.



Q 42.A
o  To supervise the operation of the Fund and to approve projects for adaptation activity in eligible developing countries an  Adaptation Fund Board (AFB) was set up in 2008 under UNFCCC. India as an eligible country has access to Adaptation Fund and can seek financial support to undertake adaptation activities at national and regional level.
o  NABARD has been accredited by the Adaptation Fund Board of UNFCCC as National Implementing  Entity
(NIE) in India.
The NIEs bears full responsibility for the overall management  of the projects and programmes financed


11                                    www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
by the Adaptation Fund and will bear all financial, monitoring, and reporting responsibilities.  Hence, 1st
Statement is incorrect.
o  'National  Clean Energy Fund' was created in 2011 and is financed by clean energy cess on coal
produced and imported in India. Hence, 2nd Statement is correct.
o  In the budget, 2015-16 , it is  proposed to increase the Scheduled rate of Clean Energy Cess levied on coal, lignite and peat to Rs 300 per tonne from Rs 100 per tonne. The effective rate of Clean Energy Cess is being increased to Rs 200 per tonne from Rs 100 per tonne.
o  A 'National Adaptation Fund' for climate change, with an initial amount of Rs 100 crore. The fund will focus on innovative methods of water conservation, use of hybrid seeds, etc, to help agriculture from climate change. Hence, 3rd Statement is correct.



Q 43.B
o  The Model APMC Act:-
     provides for direct sale of farm produce to contract farming sponsors.  Hence, 2nd statement  is correct.
     provides for setting up 'Special markets'    for "specified  agricultural commodities" mostly
perishables and provides for the establishment of consumers'  and farmers'  markets to facilitate direct sale of agricultural produce to consumers. Hence, 3rd statement  is correct.
     permits private persons, farmers and consumers  to establish new markets for agricultural produce
in any area. Hence, 5th statement  is correct.
     requires a single levy of market fee on the sale of notified agricultural commodities in any market area;
      it replaces licensing  with registrations of market functionaries which would allow them to operate in one or more different market areas. Hence, 4th statement  is incorrect.
     provides for the creation of marketing infrastructure  from the revenue earned by the APMC.
o  The provisions of the Model APMC Act do not go far enough to create a national or even state level common market for agricultural commodities.  The reason is that the model APMC Act retains the mandatory requirement of the buyers having to pay APMC charges even when the produce is sold directly outside the APMC area  ,say, to the contract sponsors or in a market set up by private individuals even though no facility provided by the APMC is used. Hence, 1st statement  is incorrect.


Q 44.A

Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram, which is a Child Health Screening and Early Intervention Services Programme to provide comprehensive  care to all the children in the community is launched under The National  Rural Health Mission (NRHM).
The key feature of the Services is the continuum of care extending over different phases of the life of a
child over the first 18 years. Hence, 1st Statement  correct and  3rd  statement  is incorrect.
The Objectives of RBSK is early identification and early intervention for children from birth to 18 years to cover 4 D's viz. Defects at birth, Deficiencies, Diseases  and Development delays including  disability. Hence 2nd statement  is correct.
Child Health Screening and Early Intervention Services envisage to cover 30 identified health conditions for early detection, free treatment and management through dedicated mobile health teams placed in every block in the country.

Q 45.D

All Statements are Correct. (for more details refer answer explanation of Q 32)


Q 46.D
o  In areas where the JE virus is common, encephalitis occurs mainly in young children because older children and adults have already been infected and are immune.


12                                    www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
o  The virus causing Japanese encephalitis is transmitted by mosquitoes belonging to the Culex tritaeniorhynchus and Culex vishnui groups, which breed particularly in flooded rice fields.
o  The virus circulates in ardeid birds (herons and egrets).
o  Pigs are amplifying hosts, in that the virus reproduces in pigs and infects mosquitoes that take blood meals, but does not cause disease.
The virus tends to spill over into human populations when infected mosquito populations build up
explosively and the human biting rate increases (these culicines are normally zoophilic, i.e. they prefer to take blood meals from animals).
o  Japanese encephalitis (JE) is a disease caused by a flavivirus that affects the membranes around the
brain.
o  Hence, all the statements are correct.


Q 47.D

All the statements are correct.


Q 48.D
o  Minimum support prices are currently announced for 24 commodities including seven cereals (paddy, wheat, barley, jowar, bajra, maize and ragi); five pulses (gram, arhar/tur, moong, urad and lentil); eight oilseeds (groundnut, rapeseed/mustard, toria, soyabean, sunflower  seed, sesamum,  safflower  seed and nigerseed);  copra, raw cotton, raw jute and virginia flu cured (VFC) tobacco. Hence, 1st statement is incorrect.
o  Minimum Support Price (MSP) is a form of market intervention by the Government of India to insure agricultural producers against any sharp fall in farm prices. The minimum support prices are announced by the Government of India at the beginning of the sowing season for certain crops on the basis of the recommendations of the Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP). MSP is price fixed by Government of India to protect the producer - farmers - against excessive fall in price during bumper production years.
o  The minimum support prices are a guarantee price for their produce from the Government. The major objectives are to support the farmers from distress sales and to procure food grains for public distribution. Hence, its purpose is not to control inflation  of agricultural products.  Hence, 2nd statement  is incorrect.
o  A Market Intervention Scheme (MIS) already exists which is implemented on the request of State Governments by the centre for procurement of perishable and horticultural commodities in the event of fall in market prices. Hence, horticultural products are not going to be included in the MSP scheme.
o  The minimum support prices are announced by the Government of India at the beginning  of the sowing season for certain crops on the basis of the recommendations of the Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP).Hence,  3rd statement  is incorrect.



Q 49.B
o  Reproductive, Maternal  , New-Born  Child and Adolescent  Health (RMNCH+A) approach was launched  in 2013 as one of the National Health Mission component.
o  it essentially looks to address the major causes of mortality among women and children as well as the delays in accessing and utilizing  health care and services.
o  It also introduces new initiatives like the use of Score Card to track the performance, National  Iron + Initiative to address the issue of anemia across all age groups and the Comprehensive  Screening and Early interventions for defects at birth , diseases and deficiencies among children and adolescents.
o  The RMNCH+A appropriately directs the States to focus their efforts on the most vulnerable population and disadvantaged  groups in the country.
o  The 12th Five Year Plan has defined the national  health outcomes and the three goals that are relevant to RMNCH+A  strategic approach as follows:
(1) Reduction of Infant Mortality Rate (IMR) to 25 per 1,000 live births by 2017

13                                    www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
(2) Reduction in Maternal Mortality Ratio (MMR) to 100 per 100,000 live births by 2017 (3) Reduction in Total Fertility Rate (TFR) to 2.1 by 2017



Q 50.B
    Food & Nutrition Board (FNB) was established in the Department of Food, Ministry of Agriculture, in
1964 as a non-Statutory Ministerial wing with the objective of diversifying Indian diet for improving the nutritional status of the people.
    Later the Food and Nutrition Board was transferred to the Department of Women and Child Development with effect from 01.04.1993 in pursuance of the National  Nutrition  Policy adopted by the Government in 1993 and now it is a technical  support wing under Child Development Bureau of the Ministry.  Hence, Statement 1 is incorrect.

The main functions  of FNB includes:
o  To oversee implementation of various nutrition  oriented sectoral interventions and issue policy guidelines  on critical nutrition  issues. Hence, 2nd Statement  is correct.
o  To promote and coordinate activities with regard to bringing nutritional issues centre stage through advocacy and sensitization of policy planners and implementers
o  A vigorous awareness campaign on prevention and control of malnutrition at all levels including infant and young child nutrition issues
o  Focusing on reduction in micronutrient  malnutrition
o  Improving content and delivery of existing nutrition related interventions enlisting cooperation of professional institutions and social organizations in the area of nutrition and health.

Q 51.C
o  The objective of NSDC, formed in 2010, is to fulfill the growing needs for skilled manpower  in the country, mainly by fostering private sector initiatives in skill development.  NSDC, a body under the Ministry  of Finance, is one of its kind public private partnership endeavour, with 51 per cent equity held by private sector and 49 per cent by the Union Government.  Hence 1st statement   is incorrect.
o   Salient Features-
1.    Upgrade skills to international standards  through significant industry involvement.
2.    Enhance, support and coordinate private sector initiatives for skill development  through appropriate
Public-Private Partnership (PPP) models;
3.    Focus on underprivileged sections of society and backward  regions of the country thereby enabling a  move  out  of  poverty;   similarly,   focus  significantly   on  the  unorganized  or  informal   sector workforce.
4.    Prioritize initiatives that can have a multiplier or catalytic effect as opposed to one-off impact
5.    It is beginning of the endeavour of Government  to take through the vision of skilling 500 million  by
2022.     Out     of    that 150     million     people     by    2022     through     private     sector     initiatives.
Hence 2nd statement   is correct.
6.    NSDC  will  play  three  key  roles  - 1. Funding  and  incentivising, 2. Enabling  support  services,  most importantly,    setting   up   standards    and   accreditation    systems   in   partnership    with   industry associations,  3.Shaping   /creating   critical  skill  groups,  develop  models  for  skill  development  and attract potential private players and provide support to these efforts.
7.    The National  Skill  Certification and Monetary  Reward  Scheme,  that is branded as STAR (Standard Training   Assessment   and   Reward)   for   promotional   purposes,   is  a  scheme   launched   by  the Government   and  implemented  by  NSDC  in  2013  to  motivate  the  youth  of  India  to  acquire  a vocational skills  and envisages  a monetary  reward  that will in essence financially  help those who wish to acquire a new skill or upgrade their skills to a higher level. Hence 4th statement   is correct.

Q 52.D
o  Demographic dividend  is referred to the increase in working  age population and not necessarily labor force of the country. Working age population also includes students and others who may not be available to work. Hence, 1st statement is incorrect.

14                                    www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
o  Although India has witnessed a great demographic dividend, it has not contributed to the growth because of several factors. Its contribution to growth has been an average of 0.5 percentage  point since
1991. Hence, 2nd statement is incorrect.
o  Therefore,  option (d) is correct answer.

Q 53.B
o  WHO describes three objectives  of Universal  Health Coverage:
o  Equity in access to health services - those who need the services should get them, not only those who can pay for them;
o  Quality of health services is good enough to improve the health of those receiving services; and
o  Financial-risk protection  - ensuring that the cost of using care does not put people at risk of financial hardship.
o  Hence  1st and 2nd statement  are correct.
o  Providing quality medical education is not included as the objective. Hence 2nd statement   is incorrect.
o  Also, the aim of universal health coverage is not only to insure the poor but even those who are well off. Hence 4th statement   is incorrect.
o  Hence, option b is the correct answer.

Q 54.C

The GII measures gender inequalities in three important aspects of human development
o  Reproductive health measured by
     Maternal mortality ratio and
     Adolescent birth rates.
o  Empowerment, measured by
     Proportion of parliamentary seats occupied by females and
     Proportion of adult females and males aged 25 years and older with at least some secondary education.
o  Economic  status expressed as labour market participation and measured by
     labour force participation rate of female and male populations aged 15 years and older.
     Hence option (c) is correct answer.

Q 55.C
o  Government of India (GoI) set up a High Level Committee  (HLC) in August 2014 with Shri Shanta Kumar as the Chairman, six members and a special invitee to suggest restructuring or unbundling of FCI with a view to improve its operational efficiency and financial management.
o  GoI also asked HLC to suggest measures for overall improvement in management of foodgrains  by FCI;
to suggest reorienting the role and functions of FCI in MSP operations, storage and distribution
of foodgrains and food security systems of the country; and to suggest cost effective models for storage and movement of grains and integration of supply chain of foodgrains in the country.
o  Some important recommendations of the committee are :
o  That FCI hand over all procurement operations of wheat, paddy and rice to states that have gained sufficient experience in this regard and have created reasonable infrastructure for procurement.
o  That GoI has a second look at NFSA, its commitments  and implementation.  Given that leakages in PDS range from 40 to 50 percent, and in some states go as high as 60 to 70 percent, GoI should defer implementation  of NFSA in states that have not done end to end computerization; have not put the list of beneficiaries online for anyone to verify, and have not set up vigilance committees to check pilferage from PDS. But, did not recommend  its abolition.
o  Six months ration to be given once instead of every month to avoid unnecessary hassle to consumer and reduce operational cost of PDS. Hence 2nd statement   is correct.
o  It recommended  that farmers be given direct cash subsidy (of about Rs 7000/ha) and fertilizer sector can then be deregulated. Hence 4th statement  is correct.
o  It also recommended  having a relook at the current coverage of 67 percent of population, bringing it
down to around 40 percent. Hence 5th statement   is correct.


15                                    www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
o  It has recommended  containers  to be used instead of gunny bags to transfer foodgrains to long distance.
o  Hence option (c) is correct answer.


Q 56.D
o  The 100 districts have been identified on the basis of low Child Sex Ratio as per Census 2011 covering all States/UTs as a pilot with at least one district in each state. The three criteria for selection of districts namely are i) districts below the national  average ii) districts above national  average but shown declining trend and iii) districts above national average and shown increasing  trend.
o  Measurable outcomes and indicators will bring together concerned sectors, states and districts for urgent concerted Multi-Sectoral action to improve the CSR.
o  A sustained Social Mobilization and Communication  Campaign to create equal value for the girl child &
promote her education forms core strategy under scheme.
o  So option D is the correct answer.


Q 57.D

All the statements are correct regarding India's progress in achieving MDGs
o  In respect of some indicators, India is expected to reach close to the target level by 2015 if not actually meet the target level like Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary education and tertiary education.
o  For some indicators India is fast, that is, it has already achieved the target level well ahead of the dead line, like halving the percentage of population below the poverty line and Net Enrollment Ratio in primary education.
o  The areas of concern are the rest of the Indicators especially those relating to share of women in wage employment in the non - agricultural sector, proportion of seats held by women in National Parliament.

Q 58.B

The NCEUS(National  Commission for Enterprises in the Unorganised Sector) adopted the following definition of the "unorganized sector" :
o  The unorganized sector consists of all unincorporated  private enterprises owned by individuals or households engaged in the sale and production of goods and services operated on a proprietary or partnership basis and with less than 10 total workers.

Q 59.C
o  Rotavac is developed indigenously using indigenous strain by Bharat Biotech Ltd., Hyderabad and
Department of Biotechnology,  Government of India.
o  Regarding the gastroenteritis,  commonly known as diarrhoea  infection,  children are more susceptible to infection due to weak immune system, it rarely infects adults. Generally, it is not fatal in case of adults.
o  It is administered three times orally at 4 weeks interval, not through injection i.e. sub-cutaneous.
o  Hence , only 3rd Statement is incorrect,  rest all are correct.



Q 60.B
o  The Indian Constitution protects tribal interests through the Fifth and Sixth Schedule.
o  PESA comes under the Fifth Schedule, which mandates tribal advisory councils to oversee tribal affairs and also gives extrajudicial, extraconstitutional powers to the Governors of each State to intervene in matters where they see tribal autonomy being compromised.  Hence , 1st Statement is incorrect.
o  Most of the tribes in India are collectively identified under Article 342 (1&2) of the Constitution as Scheduled Tribes, which provided them overarching immunity to the extent of granting them the right to self-determination as guaranteed under Article 244 (Administration  of Scheduled Areas and Tribal Areas) of Part X: The Scheduled and Tribal Areas.


16                                    www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
o  The reservation of seats in the scheduled areas at every panchayat shall be in proportion to the population of the communities in that panchayat for whom reservation is sought.
o  The reservation for the Scheduled tribes at panchayats shall not be less than one-half of the total number of seats. Hence, 2nd Statement  is incorrect.
o  All seats of chairpersons of panchayats at all level shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes.Hence,  3rd
Statement is correct.

Q 61.C
1.    Tax Evasion:  meaning illegal and fraudulent arrangements  where liability to tax is hidden or ignored i.e. the tax payer pays less than he is legally obligated to pay by hiding income or information from tax authority.
2.    Tax Avoidance: The legal means used to avoid or reduce tax liability, which would be otherwise incurred, by taking advantage of some provision or lack of provision in the law.   Thus, in this case tax payer tries
to reduce his tax liability but here the arrangement will be legal, but may not be as per intent of the
law.   Thus, in this case, tax payer does not hide the key facts but is still able to avoid or reduce tax liability on account of some loopholes or otherwise.
3.    Tax Mitigation: It is a situation where the taxpayer takes advantage of a fiscal incentive afforded to him
by the tax legislation by actually submitting to the conditions and economic consequences that the particular tax legislation entails.  A good example of tax mitigation is the setting up of a business undertaking by a tax payer in a specified area such as Special Economic Zone (SEZ).
4.    Tax Planning:  Tax Planning is defined as arrangement  of a person's business and / or private affairs in
order to minimize tax liability.




Q 62.C
    The India Newborn Action Plan is the fulfillment of a commitment made to the global community at the Global Newborn  Conference  held at Johannesburg  in April 2013-the commitment to end all preventable newborn deaths, and the 67th World Health Assembly  at Geneva in May 2014.
    The Action Plan is in synchrony with the Global Every Newborn Action Plan (2014) that sets out a vision of a world in which there are no preventable deaths of newborns or stillbirths; where every pregnancy is wanted and every birth celebrated; and where women, babies and children survive, thrive and reach their full potential.
    India Newborn  Action Plan (INAP)
o  Builds on existing commitments  under the National Health Mission and 'Call to Action' for Child
Survival and Development.
o  Aligns with the Global Every Newborn Action Plan (ENAP); defines commitments  based on specific contextual needs of the country.
o  Aims at attaining Single Digit Neonatal  Mortality Rate by 2030, five years ahead of the global plan.
o  Emphasizes strengthened surveillance mechanism for tracking stillbirths.
o  Focuses on ending preventable newborn deaths, improving quality of care and care beyond survival.
o  Prioritizes those babies that are born too soon, too small, or sick as they account for majority of all new born deaths.
o  Aspires towards ensuring equitable progress for girls and boys, rural and urban, rich and poor, and between districts and states.
o  Identifies major guiding principles  under the overarching principle of Integration: Equity, Gender,Quality of Care, Convergence, Accountability, and Partnerships.
o  Defines six pillars of interventions: Pre-conception and antenatal  care; Care during labour and child birth; Immediate newborn  care; Care of healthy newborn;  Care of small and sick newborn;  and Care beyond newborn survival.
o  Serves as a framework for states/districts  to develop their own action plan with measurable
indicators.
o  The INAP will be implemented within the existing RMNCH+A  framework.


17                                    www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
The two specific goals of INAP are:
     Ending Preventable Newborn Deaths to achieve 'Single Digit NMR' by 2030, with all the states to individually achieve this target by 2035.
     Ending Preventable Stillbirths to achieve 'Single Digit SBR' by 2030, with all the states to individually achieve this target by 2035. Hence, statement  2 and 3 are incorrect.

Q 63.C
o  Astronomers claim they had found rings around an asteroid, the smallest object known to have this feature and only the fifth after Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune.

Q 64.A
o  Under Antyodaya Anna Yojana (AAY) “ 35 Kg grains( Rice at Rs 3/- per kg and wheat Rs 2/- per kg)”.
o  In India root cause of hunger is not the lack of food but the economic and social distribution of food.
o  In June, 1997, the Government launched the Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) with a view to successfully target poor sections of society for distribution of foodgrains. Under TPDS, Government allocates foodgrains (wheat and rice) to States/UTs @ 35 kg per family per month to the accepted number of 6.52 crore BPL families, including about 2.43 crore Antyodaya Anna Yojana (AAY) families. Considering the availability of foodgrains in Central pool and past off take, allocation is also presently being made for Above Poverty Line (APL) families between 15 kg and 35 kg per family per month.

Annapurna Scheme
o  Ministry of Rural Development launched this scheme in 2000-01. Indigent senior citizens of 65 years of age or above who though eligible for old age pension under the National Old Age Pension Scheme (NOAPS) but are not getting the pension are covered under the Scheme. 10 kg of foodgrains per person per month are supplied free of cost under the scheme.
o  From 2002-03, the scheme has been transferred to State Plan along with the National Social Assistance
Programme comprising the National Old Age Pension Scheme and the National Family Benefit Scheme.

Q 65.D
o  The Mahila Samakhya Programme (Education for Women's Equality) started in 1989 is a concrete programme for the education and empowerment  of women in rural areas, particularly those from socially and economically marginalised groups.
o  The objectives of the Mahila Samakhya scheme are:
     to enhance the self-image and self-confidence  of women.
     create an environment where women can seek knowledge and information and empower them to play a positive role in their own development  and that of society.
     to establish a decentralized and participative mode of management.
     to enable the Mahila Sanghas to actively assist and monitor educational activities in the villages including the primary school, adult and non-formal educational centre;
     to provide women and adolescent girls with the necessary support structure and create opportunities for their education and
     to set in motion circumstances for larger participation of women and girls in formal and non-formal educational programmes.

Q 66.D

The Natural Rate of Unemployment  is the rate of Unemployment  when the labour market is in equilibrium.
o  It is the difference between those who would like a job at the current wage rate and those who are
willing and able to take a job.
     The Natural Rate of Unemployment  will therefore include:
o  frictional unemployment
o  structural unemployment
o  E.g. a worker who is not able to get a job because he doesn't have the right skills


18                                    www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
     The natural rate of unemployment  is unemployment  caused by supply side factors rather than demand side factors.
     The Natural Rate of Unemployment  is sometimes known as the Non accelerating inflation rate of Unemployment  NAIRU. This is because when unemployment  is 4% there is no tendency for inflation to increase
     Sometimes the natural rate is known as the full employment level of unemployment.  This is because even if the economy is operating at full capacity and there is no demand deficient unemployment  then there will still be some unemployment  caused by supply side factors.
     Hence all of the above statements are correct

Q 67.D
     The Union Culture Ministry will set up a National Cultural Audio-Visual Archives to identify and preserve the cultural heritage of India. The objective of this project is to create digital archives of international standards through IGNCA and its partnering and collaborating institutions. Hence 1st statement  is correct.
     A memorandum  of agreement for a pilot project was signed between the Indira Gandhi National  Centre for the Arts (IGNCA) under the Ministry  of Culture and Rupayan  Sansthan.  Hence 2nd statement  is correct.
     Under the project, main focus would be on identifying and preserving the cultural heritage of India available in audio-visual form in governmental and non-governmental institutions across the country through digitisation and making the material accessible in the public domain. Hence 3rd statement  is correct.

Q 68.C
     Literacy rate denotes the percentage of population above 7 years of age, who is able to read, write and have the ability to do arithmetic  calculations with understanding.

Q 69.D

Q 70.D

The Strategic action plan 2011 -2022 has following goals :
     Ensure that all households, schools and anganwadis in rural India have access to and use adequate quantity of safe drinking water. â€¢ Provide enabling support and environment for Panchayat Raj Institutions and local communities to manage at least 60% of rural drinking water sources and systems.
     Legal and regulatory measures are proposed in plan to maintain high water quality.
By 2017-
     Ensure that at least 55% of rural households are provided with piped water supply; at least 35% of rural households have piped water supply with a household connection; less than 20% use public taps and less than 45% use handpumps or other safe and adequate private water sources. All services meet set standards in terms of quality and number of hours of supply every day.
      Ensure that all households, schools and anganwadis in rural India have access to and use adequate
quantity of safe drinking water.
      Provide enabling support and environment for Panchayat Raj Institutions and local communities to manage at least 60% of rural drinking water sources and systems.
By 2022 -
      Ensure that at least 90% of rural households are provided with piped water supply; at least 80% of rural households have piped water supply with a household connection; less than 10% use public taps and less than 10% use handpumps or other safe and adequate private water sources.
     Provide enabling support and environment for all Panchayat Raj Institutions and local communities to
manage 100% of rural drinking water sources and systems.
     Hence all three statements are correct.




19                                    www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 71.B
    The SFIO is a multi-disciplinary organization  under Ministry  of Corporate  Affairs,  consisting of experts in the  field  of accountancy,  forensic  auditing,  law,  information  technology,  investigation,  company  law, capital market and taxation for detecting and prosecuting or recommending  for prosecution white-collar crimes/frauds.  The SFIO will normally take up for investigation  only such cases, which are characterized by:
     complexity and having inter-departmental and multi disciplinary ramifications;
     substantial   involvement   of   public   interest   to  be   judged   by   size,   either   in   terms   of   monetary misappropriation or in terms of persons affected, and;
     the possibility  of investigation  leading to or contributing  towards a clear improvement  in systems, laws
or procedures.  The SFIO shall investigate  serious cases of fraud received from Department  of company Affairs.  Hence,  1st  statement   is  incorrect.   It  was  set  up  after  the  recommendation of  the  Naresh Chandra Committee. Hence, 2nd statement  is correct.

Q 72.A
     The Usual Status approach  to measuring unemployment  uses a reference period of 365 days i.e. one year preceding the date of the survey of NSSO for measuring unemployment.
     The Current Daily Status approach to measuring unemployment  seeks to ascertain the activity status of an individual for each day of the reference week. It reports time disposition of an individual on each day of the reference week.
     If CDS is higher than UPS it means that the person did get work in a particular period of the year but not throughout the year.
     In an economy which is not going through major structural change, it indicates present of seasonal unemployment. For Example, in India unemployment  according to CDS is higher than UPS because a large portion of labor force is employed in agriculture, which becomes workless after the agricultural period is over.
Q 73.D
     The National Food Security Mission (NFSM) is being implemented with the new target of additional production of 25 million tonnes of foodgrains comprising 10 million tonnes rice, 8 million tonnes wheat,
4 million tonnes pulses, and 3 million tonnes coarse cereals by the end of the Twelfth Five Year Plan
(2016-17).
     The revamped NFSM is being implemented from 2014-15 in 619 districts of 28 states. In addition to rice, wheat and pulses, crops like coarse cereals and commercial crops (sugarcane, cotton, and jute) have been included since 2014-15. Hence, 1st Statement  is correct.
     The pulses component has been allocated fifty per cent of total funds under the NFSM in order to
increase their production.
     To promote the use of bio-fertilizers,subsidy on bio-fertilizer has also been enhanced from Rs.100 per ha to Rs.300 per ha. Hence, 3rd Statement  is correct.
      Promotion of farmer producer organizations (FPOs), value addition, dal mill, and assistance for custom hiring charges have also been undertaken under the Mission.
     Majority of the farmers are small producers who face difficulties in managing high risk involved in farming mainly due to weather aberrations, uneven access to technologies, unreliable input supplies, erratic power supply, inadequate marketing arrangements etc. Forming and strengthening  of Farmer Producer Organizations  (FPOs) is likely to mitigate at least some of the risks and constraints faced by the farmers. So option 2 is correct

Q 74.A
     Total fertility rate represents the number of children that would be born to a woman during the age span of 15 to 49 years. Hence, 1st  statement   1 is correct.
     The latest Sample Registration System (SRS) statistical report shows that West Bengal, Delhi, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Maharashtra, Jammu and Kashmir, Karnataka and Odisha have already attained the replacement level TFR of 2.1. This trend shows that these states would soon be facing old age related issues.
     TFR is not included in any of the MDG targets. Hence, 2nd Statement   is incorrect. MDGs are

20                                    www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
o  Goal 1: Eradicate Extreme Hunger and Poverty
o  Goal 2: Achieve Universal Primary Education
o  Goal 3: Promote Gender Equality and Empower Women
o  Goal 4: Reduce Child Mortality
o  Goal 5: Improve Maternal Health
o  Goal 6: Combat HIV/AIDS, Malaria and other diseases
o  Goal 7: Ensure Environmental  Sustainability
o  Goal 8: Develop a Global Partnership for Development

Q 75.C
     Department of AYUSH, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India has launched
National AYUSH Mission (NAM) during 12thPlan for implementing  through States/UTs. The objectives if this mission are:
o   To provide cost effective AYUSH Services, with a universal access  through upgrading AYUSH Hospitals
and Dispensaries,  co-location of AYUSH facilities at Primary Health Centres (PHCs), Community Health
Centres (CHCs) and District Hospitals (DHs).
o   To strengthen institutional capacity at the state level through upgrading AYUSH educational institutions, State Govt. ASU&H Pharmacies, Drug Testing Laboratories and ASU & H enforcement mechanism.
o   Support cultivation of medicinal plants by adopting Good Agricultural Practices (GAPs) so as to
provide sustained supply of quality raw-materials and support certification mechanism for quality standards, Good Agricultural/Collection/Storage Practices.
o   Support setting up of clusters through convergence of cultivation, warehousing, value addition and
marketing and development of infrastructure for entrepreneurs.
Hence, except 3rd statement  all are correct.



Q 76.D
    It replaced Human Poverty Index as it did not take in account the multidimensional aspect of poverty.
    The Central Social Welfare Board (CSWB) was set up by a Resolution of Government of India on 12th August, 1953 with the objective of promoting social welfare activities and implementing welfare programmes for women & children through voluntary organizations.
    In order to give it a legal status, the Board was registered as a charitable company in 1969.
    The Board has been making concerted efforts for empowerment  of women through Family Counseling Centre Programme, Short Stay Homes, Awareness Generation Programme, and Condensed Courses of Education for Adult Women and other support services.
    Its Vision is to be the leading organization for promotion of dedicated voluntary action for social and economic empowerment  of women and care and support of children.
    Its Mission is to support voluntary organizations  financially and technically for socio economic empowerment  of women and nurture of children; to create enabling environment of empowered
women to live with dignity and participate as equal partners in development.
    Dr. Durgabai  Deshmukh  was the founder chairperson of the central Social Welfare Board in the first years of its existence from 1953-62.
    Central Social Welfare Board has honoured the memory of this great visionary and pioneer of women's progress by instituting an annual award carrying her name known as "Dr. Durgabai Deshmukh Award for Women's Development."

Q 77.D
    The British Government had from time to time declared some of the tribes that, according to them, were involved in criminal activities as Criminal Tribes. The Criminal Tribes Act (CTA), 1871 considered them as
a 'Criminal Tribe's.
    CTA was repealed by the Criminal Tribes Laws (Repeal) Act, 1952 on the recommendations of the Shri Ananthasayanam Ayyangar Committee. As a result, the tribes notified earlier as Criminal Tribes, stood Denotified, and the name 'Denotified Tribes' (DTs) has been in use for them since then.
21                                    www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
    Nomads are people who are constantly on the move and have no permanent home. On the other hand, Semi-nomadic  groups tend to have a fixed abode for a part of the year and are Itinerant in the rest of the year. Hence, 1st and 2nd statements are correct.
    Recently in January 2015 The Government has reconstituted a National Commission for Denotified, Nomadic and Semi-Nomadic Tribes (NCDNT), which will submit its report in a period of three years. Hence, 3rd statement  is correct.
    There are certain groups of DNTs who are not covered under the lists of SC/ST & OBCs and for them the
Government has launched two schemes namely
    Dr. Ambedkar Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Pre-Matric and Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme for
Denotified, Nomadic and Semi-Nomadic Tribes (DNTs) and
    Nanaji Deshmukh Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Construction of Hostels for Denotified, Nomadic and
Semi-Nomadic Tribes. Hence, 4th statement  is correct.

Q 78.C
     2001-2011 is the first decade (with the exception of 1911-1921) which has actually added lesser population compared to the previous decade. The total number of children in the age-group 0-6 is 158.8 million. The proportion of Child Population in the age group of 0-6 years to total population is 13.1 percent while the corresponding figure in 2001 was 15.9 percent. The decline has been to the extent of
2.8 points. In 2011 Bihar has the lowest literacy rate of 63.82%. The average Literacy rate in 2001 was
64.83 per cent.
     The under-6 child sex ratio in 2011 is 914  females for every 1,000 males, indicating a continuing preference for male  children over females. The female sex ratio was more favourable in the last  census, at 927.



Q 79.C
     National Mission on Libraries (NML) was set up in pursuance of a report of the National Knowledge Commission (in its Report to the Nation (2006-2009), which recommended  a total revamp of the Library and Information Service sector to serve the changing needs and expectations of the users and give a fillip to the library movement in the country. Hence 1st statement  is correct.
     Nine important constituents of the NML include upgradation of infrastructure, digitization and modernisation, census of libraries and their development as knowledge centres and transformation of libraries into empowering and inclusive  institutions.
     NML is an initiative of the Ministry  of Culture to modernize and digitally link public libraries across the country. Hence 2nd statement  is incorrect.
     NML also intends to create a National Virtual Library of India (NVLI) to facilitate a comprehensive
database on digital resources, carry out a census on the resources available in the libraries and conduct a study on the reading habits in different regions of the country. Hence 3rd statement  is correct.
     Raja Rammohun Roy Library Foundation (RRRLF), an autonomous body under the Ministry of Culture
will be the nodal agency for the National Mission on Libraries for administrative,  logistics, planning and budgeting purposes. Hence, 4th statement  is also correct.

Q 80.D
     The objective of shifting from product-based  subsidy (PBS) to nutrient-based  subsidy (NBS) regime was to restore soil health by addressing the nutrient imbalances of NPK and the lack of secondary and micro nutrients through use of fertilisers on specific soil-moisture conditions and crop needs. Also, price decontrol is supposed to incentivise innovation in fertiliser products.
     The subsidy will beadmissible for the three macro nutrient.
     The Nutrient  Based Subsidy was introduced  in the fertilizer  sector in 2010 toreplace the 'Product based subsidy'.
     Nutrients  - Nitrogen (N), Phosphorous (P) and Potassium (K) - one secondary nutrient - Sulphur (S) - and
two micro nutrients  â€” Zinc and Boron - on actual weight of the nutrient  in the fertiliser.



22                                    www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
     The scheme will be applicable on controlled fertilisers other than urea, but including diammonium phosphate (DAP), monoammonium phosphates (MAP), triple superphosphate  (TSP), muriate of potash (MoP), ammonium sulphate, single superphosphate  and 12 other complex fertilisers.
     Under NBS, the government pays the fertilizer companies a fixed amount of subsidy per tonne of nutrients used and the companies  get the freedom to set the prices of these fertilizers  at MRP at reasonable  rate.
     Thus, all the three statements are correct.

Q 81.A
     The Longevity  Dividend  is used to  describe the economic and health benefits that would accrue to individuals and societies if we extend healthy life by slowing the biological processes of aging.
     The idea is to extend healthy life by shifting our emphasis from disease management to delayed aging.
      The Longevity Dividend is an approach to public health based on a broader strategy of fostering  health for all generations by developing a new horizontal model to health promotion and disease prevention. Unlike the current vertical approach to disease that targets individual disorders as they arise, the Longevity Dividend model seeks to prevent or delay the root causes of disease and disability by attacking the one main risk factor for them all - biological aging.

Q 82.B
     Nutrition Education and Training through Community Food and Nutrition Extension Units (CFNEUS)
scheme is implemented by Ministry of Women and Child Development.
     The basic objectives of the scheme are :
o  To create nutrition awareness among the people particularly the women and adolescent girls;
o  To impart skills and education for achieving adequate nutrition within their available means;
o  To train housewives and adolescent girls in fruit & vegetable preservation;
o  To explain the importance of non-food factors like hygiene, sanitation, safe drinking water etc. for nutrition and health of the people;
o  To equip the grassroot level workers of concerned sectors with basic messages on food, nutrition
and health so as to enable than to communicate  to the community during the Course of their duties.
o  To enlighten the people about the existing health, nutrition and welfare services for promoting their optimal utilisation.

Q 83.A
     The Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY) aims at correcting  the imbalances in the availability of affordable  healthcare  facilities  in the different parts of the country in general, and augmenting facilities  for quality medical education  in the under-served States in particular. Hence, statement  1 and 2 are correct.
     Under Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana beneficiaries are entitled to hospitalization  coverage upto Rs
30,000. Hence, statement  3 is incorrect.

Q 84.D
     The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are a proposed set of targets relating to future international development.  The SDGs were first formally discussed at the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Developement  held in Rio De Janeiro in June 2012 (Rio+20). It also provided the basis for their conceptualization.
     The Rio+20 outcome gave the mandate that the SDGs should be coherent with and integrated  into the
UN development agenda (MDGs) beyond 2015 and seek to replace the Millennium Development Goals after 2015.
     On 19 July 2014, the UN General Assembly's Open Working Group on Sustainable Development  Goals (OWG) forwarded a proposal for the SDGs to the Assembly. The proposal contained 17 goals with 169 targets covering a broad range of sustainable development issues. On 4 December 2014, the UN General Assembly accepted the Secretary-General's Synthesis Report which stated that the agenda for the post-
2015 SDG process would be based on the OWG proposals.
     17 SDGs are:

23                                    www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
o  GOAL 1 - End Poverty in all its forms and everywhere.
o  GOAL 2 - End Hunger , Achieve Food Security and improved nutrition, and promote sustainable agriculture
o  GOAL 3 - Ensure healthy lives and promote wellbeing for all at all ages
o  GOAL 4 - Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all
o  GOAL 5 - Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls
o  GOAL 6 - Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all
o  GOAL 7 - Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all
o  GOAL 8 - Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment, and decent work for all
o  GOAL 9 - Build resilient infrastructure,  promote inclusive and sustainable industrialisation,  and foster innovation
o  GOAL 10 - Reduce inequality within and among countries
o  GOAL 11 - Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable
o  GOAL 12 - Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns
o  GOAL 13 - Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts
o  GOAL 14 - Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development
o  GOAL 15 - Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably
manage forests, combat desertification  and halt and reverse land degradation, and halt biodiversity loss
o  GOAL 16 - Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development,  provide access to
justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels
o  GOAL 17 - Strengthen the means of implementation  and revitalise the global partnership for sustainable development

Q 85.B

Q 86.C
    The Government has initiated a pilot scheme on Infrastructure Development in satellite town around seven mega-cities. The objective of the scheme are as under:
     Development of urban infrastructure facilities like solid waste management,  water supply and sewerage to channelize their future growth and ameliorate pressure on mega cities.
     Implementation  of reforms such as e-governance, property tax, double entry accounting, creation of
barrier free built environment and energy & water audit.
    The eight satellite towns identified for implementation  of the scheme are Vikarabad(Andhra Pradesh), Sanand (Gujarat), Sonipat (Haryana), Hoskote (Karnataka), Vasai-Virar (Maharashtra), Sriperumbudur (Tamilnadu), Pilkhua (Uttar Pradesh) and New Town(West Bengal). The scheme has been operationalised.

Q 87.C

Central Road Fund
     The Central Government has created a dedicated fund, called Central Road Fund from collection of cess from petrol and diesel. Which is created for collection of cess on petrol and high speed diesel (HSD) oil.
     The fund is distributed for development and maintenance of National Highway, State Roads, Rural Roads
and for provision of road over bridges/under  bridges and other safety features at unmanned Railway
Crossing as provided in Central Road Fund Act, 2000.
     Hence, Both the statements are correct.

Q 88.C
     Tribal affairs ministry uses NSTFDC for promotion of various upliftment execises. The NGOs are provided with fund by ministry if they are working for welfare of scheduled tribes.


24                                    www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
     The MSP is given for Minor forest produce. Minor forest products include all products obtainable from the forests other than wood and thus comprise products of vegetable and animal origin.
     Hence, Except 4th statement  all are correct.

Q 89.D
     'Sugamya Bharat' to be carried out by the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment  would highlight accessibility issues of differently-abled persons such as difficulty to access public transport and buildings.  It will strive for achieving universal accessibility for all citizens including  Persons with Disabilities, to be able to gain access and live independently.
     Major components of this programme are :

(i) Create Mass Awareness
(ii) Capacity Building
(iii) Interventions (Technology solutions, Legal framework, Resource generation) (iv) Leverage corporate  sector efforts including  CSR resources.
(v) Leadership endorsements
     Hence All statements are correct.

Q 90.D
     The decline in the child sex ratio (CSR) is a major indicator of women disempowerment. CSR reflects both, pre-birth discrimination  manifested through gender biased sex selection, and post birth discrimination  against girls. Social construct discriminating  against girls on the one hand, easy
availability, affordability and subsequent misuse of diagnostic tools on the other hand, have been critical
in increasing Sex Selective Elimination of girls leading to low Child Sex Ratio. Since coordinated and convergent  efforts are needed to ensure survival,  protection  and empowerment of the girl child, Government has announced  Beti Bachao Beti Padhao initiative. Hence, 1st Statement  is correct.
     The scheme will promote early registration of pregnancies, institutional deliveries  and early
registration of births. Hence, 2nd Statement  is correct.
     The panchayats will form an integral role, they will be held responsible for child marriages.They will also be responsible for putting up  'gudda -guddi boards' to show the number of new born boys and girls, every month. Hence, 3rd Statement is correct.

Q 91.C
     A geographical indication (GI) is a sign used on products that have a specific geographical origin and possess qualities or a reputation that are due to that origin. In order to function as a GI, a sign must identify a product as originating in a given place. Its purpose is to protect the indigenous craft or products manufactured by people belonging to that place from being used from commercial purpose by anyone else.Hence, 1st Statement  is correct.
     A geographical indication right enables those who have the right to use the indication to prevent its use by a third party whose product does not conform to the applicable standards. For example, in the jurisdictions in which the Darjeeling geographical indication is protected, producers of Darjeeling tea can exclude use of the term ‘Darjeeling’    for tea not grown in their tea gardens or not produced according to the standards set out in the code of practice for the geographical indication. However,  a protected geographical indication does not enable the holder to prevent someone from making a product using the same techniques  as those set out in the standards  for that indication. Hence, 2nd Statement is incorrect.
     Both trademark and geographical indication  can be given for both type of products. For example, Agmark is a trademark for agri products while Meerut scissors have been alloted geographical indication which is an industrial product.Hence, 3rd Statement is incorrect.
     A geographical indication is given for 10 years which needs to be renewed after that. Hence, 4th
Statement is correct.




25                                    www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 92.D


All the statements regarding National Blood Policy 2002 are correct.
It's objectives  are:
     To reiterate firmly the Govt. commitment to provide safe and adequate quantity of blood, blood components and blood products.
     To make available adequate resources to develop and re-organise the blood transfusion service in the
entire country.
     To make latest technology available for operating the blood transfusion services and ensure its functioning in an updated manner.
     To launch extensive awareness programmes for blood banking services including donor  motivation, so as to ensure adequate availability of safe blood.
     To encourage appropriate clinical use of blood and blood products.
     To strengthen the manpower through Human Resource Development.
     To encourage Research & Development in the field of Transfusion Medicine and related Technology.
     To take adequate legislative and educational steps to eliminate profiteering in blood banks.

Q 93.A
     All the Disease except Dengue are covered under the protection by immunization from diseases.
     Though Dengue is vector borned disease its not part of the Universal Immunazation  program.

Q 94.B
     NSDC is a not-for-profit company  set up by the Ministry  of Finance, under Section 25 of the Companies
Act. Hence, 1st Statement  is incorrect.
     The National Skill Development Corporation India, (NSDC) is a one of its kind, Public Private Partnership in India ,and has an equity base of Rs. 10 crore, of which the Government of India holds for 49%, while the private sector holds 51%. set up to facilitate the development and upgrading of the skills of the growing Indian workforce through skill training programmes.
     NSDC provides funding to build scalable , for-profit  vocational training initiatives.  Hence, 2nd Statement is incorrect.
     A large part of  NSDC's efforts are directed at the private sector and towards developing skills in the
unorgainised sector in India.
     To promote skill development efforts in the unorganised sector, it funds skill training and development programmes.It  also engages in advocacy and training programmes , in-depth research to discover skill gaps in the Indian workforce and developing accreditation norms. Hence, 3rd Statement is correct.

Q 95.C
     The Banking Ombudsman Scheme enables an expeditious and inexpensive forum to bank customers for resolution of complaints relating to certain services rendered by banks. The Banking Ombudsman Scheme is introduced under Section 35 A of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 by RBI with effect from
1995.
     The Banking Ombudsman is a senior official appointed by the Reserve Bank of India to redress customer complaints against deficiency in certain banking services.
     All Scheduled Commercial Banks, Regional Rural Banks and Scheduled  Primary Co-operative Banks are covered under the Scheme.

Q 96.B

It excludes all female govt. employees because they are entitled for paid maternity leave.

Q 97.B
     PMJDY envisages universal access to banking facilities with at least one basic banking account for every
household, financial literacy, access to credit and insurance. Hence, 1st Statement   is incorrect.
     The beneficiaries will receive a RuPay Debit Card having inbuilt accident insurance cover of Rs 1 lakh. In addition, there is a life insurance  cover of Rs 30,000 to those who opened their bank accounts for the


26                                    www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
first time between 15 August 2014 and 26 January 2015 and meet other eligibility conditions of the
Yojana. Hence, Statement   2nd is correct.
     There is no provision of collateral free loans to the farmers but the scheme talks about providing the beneficiaries with overdraft facility of Rs.5000 after six months which would help to rescue the farmers from the clutches of the moneylenders.  Hence, 3rd Statement  is incorrect.
     RBI has issued guidelines in August, 2014, where people who do not have officially valid documents or Aadhaar Numbers can still get bank accounts opened by submitting two copies of signed photographs at the bank branch. However, these accounts will be called small accounts and shall normally be valid for
12 months and shall be continued subject to showing of proof that he/she has applied for any of the officially valid document within 12 months of opening of such ‘Small Account’.  These accounts have certain limitations such as balance at any point of time should not exceed Rs. 50,000/- total credit in one year should not exceed Rs. one lac, and total withdrawal should not exceed Rs. 10,000/- in a month. Hence, 4th Statement   is correct.

Q 98.A
     The two programmes - Ishan Uday and Ishan Vikas - are part of initiatives taken by the HRD ministry.
     The University Grants Commission (UGC) has launched ‘Ishan Uday’, a Special Scholarship Scheme for North East Region (NER) from academic session 2014-15. Under the scheme ten thousand fresh scholarships are to be provided  for general degree course, technical and professional courses including medical and para-medical courses.
     The scheme permits a grant of 10,000 scholarships to students from the Northeast, whose parental income is below Rs 4.5 lakh per annum and they would be provided scholarship ranging from Rs 3,500 to
5,000 per month for studying  at undergraduate level in colleges and universities of the country. Hence,
(a) option is correct.
     ‘Ishan Vikas’ is a comprehensive  plan to facilitate  interaction between teachers and selected school children from the North-Eastern states and bring them into close contact with the Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs), Indian Institutes of Science Education and Research (IISERs) and National Institute for Advanced Studies (NIAS) during their vacation periods  in order to enhance the quality of education  and fostering their desire to pursue technical education.

Q 99.C
     The Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin) has been launched on 2nd October, 2014, which aims at attaining a 100% Open Defecation  Free India by 2019.
Background :
     As per the latest data of Census 2011, in rural areas, only 32.7% families have access to sanitation facilities.
     The Central Rural Sanitation Programme (CRSP), India's first nationwide programme for rural sanitation, launched in 1986 in the Ministry of Rural Development with the objective of improving the quality of life of rural people. The programme was supply driven, highly subsidized,  and gave emphasis on a single construction model for BPL households.
     The Total Sanitation Campaign  (TSC) under the restructured CRSP was launched with effect from
1.4.1999 following a ‘community led’ and ‘people centered’ approach. TSC moved away from the principle of state-wise allocation  to a ‘demand-driven’ approach. Additionally, It lays emphasis on school sanitation and hygiene education for bringing about attitudinal and behavioral changes for adoption of hygienic practices from an early age.
     The Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan  (NBA) the revamped TSC in 2012, aimed at to accelerate the sanitation
coverage in the rural areas so as to comprehensively cover the rural community through renewed strategies and saturation approach and to transform  rural India into Nirmal Bharat.
     While the programme has been successful to some extent, the fact that there are still a large number of rural households without access to safe sanitation facilities, the Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin) has been launched with the following objectives.
o  Bring about an improvement in the general quality of life in the rural areas.
o  Accelerate  sanitation coverage in rural areas to achieve the vision of Swachh Bharat by 2019 with all Gram Panchayats in the country attaining Nirmal status.

27                                    www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
o  Motivate communities and Panchayati Raj Institutions promoting  sustainable sanitation facilities  through awareness creation and health education.
o  Encourage cost effective and appropriate technologies for ecologically safe and sustainable sanitation.
o  Develop community managed environmental sanitation  systems focusing on solid & liquid waste management for overall cleanliness in the rural areas.

Q 100.C
     The revised series of the National Accounts Statistics (NAS) with 2011-12 as the base year replaced the earlier series with the base year 2004-05.
     Estimates of gross value added (GVA) both at aggregate and sectoral levels have undergone changes.
The sector-wise shares in aggregate GVA have undergone significant revision especially in the case of manufacturing  and services. As evident from table:
Percentage  share of sectors in GVA at factor cost at current prices average of 2011-12 to 2013-14
2004-05 series                                                       2011-12 series          Employment share in 2013-14
Sector                         Share in %          Share in %                           Share in % Agriculture and allied activities         17.9                      18.7                                         49
Industry                                                   26.1                      31.7                                         24
Services                                                    56.1                      49.6                                         27
India's services sector has a high share in income and relatively low share in employment.  Hence first statement  is incorrect.
    The South East Asian countries have high employment growth due to focus on labour intensive export
oriented industries. Hence second statement  is correct.
    Growth, employment and poverty are interdependent  however improvement in growth may not necessarily lead to improvement in employment and poverty. For instance the jobless growth phase witnessed in the late 90s. Hence third statement  is incorrect.




























Copyright  © by Vision IAS
All  rights  are  reserved.  No  part  of  this  document  may  be  reproduced,  stored  in  a  retrieval  system  or transmitted  in any  form  or by any  means,  electronic,  mechanical,  photocopying,  recording  or otherwise,
without prior permission of Vision IAS

28                                    www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
