VISIONIAS z™
www.visionias.in www.visionias.wordpress.com

ANSWERS & EXPLANATION GENERAL STUIDES (P) 2015 – Test 9 (1558)



Q 1.D
     Contrary to Wavell Plan, with the rejection of demand for Pakistan Cabinet Mission made it clear that minority cannot be allowed to place a veto on the advance of the majority. All the statements mentioned are correct
Q 2.D Q 3.B
    Gandhi set up AIAU League in September 1932, while in Jail.
    Throughout his campaign he was attacked by orthodox and reactionary elements. The orthodox Hindu opinion in Bengal was against the acceptance of permanent caste Hindu Minority Status by the Poona Pact.  The Government defeated the Temple Entry Bill in 1934 to appease orthodox Hindus.

Q 4.A

    To boycott the council election which were sheduled for November 1920 after acceptance of Montford reform. It was demanded by ML Nehru but was rejected.

Q 5.C

1. The princely states should not be handed over to the Indian govt. without prior consent of the prince.
2. Viceroy and not the Governor General in the Council was to be the Crown agent in the dealing with
the states. (Note: Generally both the posts were held by same person in India. Called viceroy when deals with princely states and called Governor General when dealing with British India).

Q 6.A
     Curzon was against liberal press in India. So Official secrets act was passed to restrict the freedom of press in 1904. So option 1 is correct.
     In 1898 section 124 A of IPC was further amplified with new provisions under IPC section 156A but section 124A was already present. It was not added by government during Curzon’s Rule. So option 2 is correct.
     Calcutta corporation Act was passed during his tenure which reduced strength of elected members and
increased the strength of official members. So it was aimed at reducing popular control over Municipal corporation of Calcutta and did not target industries or import. So option (3) is incorrect.

Q 7.C
     At the outset,  the recruitment  to Indian  civil service  was outlined  by the Indian  Act of 1784  and the Charter  Act of 1793  was  only through  nominations  by the members  of the Court  of Directors  of the Company. Hence, 1st  Statement is correct.
     The introduction  of competitive  examinations  in 1853, though opened the opportunities  for the Indians, But they were still remained effectively barred as the recruitment examination  was held only in England. Hence, 2nd Statement is correct.
     By 1941, the  Indians  outnumbered  the British in the membership  of the civil service with the gradual
'Indianisation'  of  civil  services  and  with   the Government  of India  Act 1919  providing  for  a separate recruitment examination to the ICS to be held in India. Hence, 3rd Statement is correct.

1                                                                    www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 8.D
     The  movement  was  strongly secular in nature.  Concern  with  religion  was  seen  as petty  and  narrow- minded,  and unworthy  of  revolutionaries.   Leaders  belonging  to,  different  religions  and  regions  were accepted  by the movement.  Lala Har Dayal was a Hindu, and so were Ram Chandra  and many others, Barkatullah  was  a  Muslim  and  Rash  Behari  Bose  a  Hindu  and  a  Bengali.  But  perhaps  much  more important, the Ghadarites consciously set out to create a secular consciousness   among the Punjabis.
     Another  marked  feature of Ghadar ideology  was its democratic  and egalitarian  content.  It was clearly
stated by the Ghadarites that their objective was the establishment  of an independent republic of India.
     The Ghadar Movement also failed to generate an effective and sustained  leadership  that was capable of integrating   the  various  aspects  of  the  movement.   Har  Dayal  himself  was  temperamentally  totally unsuited to the role of an organizer; he was a propagandist,  an inspirer, an ideologue. Even his ideas did not form a structured  whole  but remained  a shifting  amalgam  of various  theories  that attracted  him from  time  to  time.  Further,  his  departure   from  the  U.S.  at  a  critical  stage  left  his  compatriots floundering.
     Hence all the statements given are correct.

Q 9.A

Gandhi-Irwin pact signed in 1931 which placed congress on equal footing with the government has following provisions.
1. Suspension of civil disobedience movement. So option 1 is correct.
2. Gandhi agreed to participate in 2nd round table conference. So option 2 is incorrect.
3. Gandhi initiated movement by breaking Salt Law. So salt become major issue during starting of movement. Gandhi requested to abolish restrictions on salt making. Government removed restrictions on making salt for personal uses not for sale. So option 3 is incorrect.

Q 10.D
   The  Moderates  and  Extremists  cooperated  with  one  another  during  the  course  of  the movement.Hence,1st Statement is incorrect.
     During  the  movement,the  streets  of Calcutta  were  full of cries  of ‘Bande  Mataram’  which  overnight became  the National  song  of Bengal  and which  was soon to become  the theme  song of the national movement. Hence, 2nd Statement is incorrect.
     Rabindranath  Tagore  composed  the national  song,  'Amar  Sonar  Bangla,'  for the occasion,  which  was sung by huge crowds parading the streets. This song was adopted as its national anthem by Bangladesh in 1971 after liberation. But this was not the theme song of the Indian national movement.
     During the movement,the  ceremony  of Rakhsabandhan  was utilized in a new way.Hindus  and Muslims
tied   Rakhi  on  one  another's  wrists  as  a  symbol  of  unbreakable  Hindu-  Muslim   unity  .  Hence,  3rd
Statement is incorrect.

Q 11.C
     Both peasants and Zamindars participated in movement and there was a complete absence of anti- zamindar violence.
     Muslims participated and gave shelter to underground activists but their participation was limited.
Highest participation  was seen in non-cooperation/khilafat movement.
     Government officials especially those from lower levels in police and administration  actively participated in the movement.

Q 12.B
     Agrarian structure were quite complex and they didn’t had power to abolish the zamindari system. So option 1 is incorrect.
     Effective administrative  work by Indians weakened the myth that Indians are not fit to rule. So option 2 is correct.
     In October 1939 2nd world war was started and government declared that India’s support for the war
without consulting Indians. So in protest congress ministries resigned. So option 3 is incorrect.


2                                                                    www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 13.A
     During  Swadeshi  Movement the Capitalists' remained opposed to the boycott agitation. Even during the Non Cooperation Movement , some of the Capitalists openly declared themselves enemies of the Non Cooperation Movement. However, during the 1930s Civil Disobedience Movement, the Capitalists largely supported the Movement .Hence 1st Statement is correct.
     FICCI did not participate in the first round table conference because in their opinion unless the Round
Table Conference was attended by Mahatma Gandhi. Hence , 2nd Statement  is incorrect.
     The capitalists did not support the government in introduction of public safety bill since it intended to contain communists. Hence  3rd Statement  is incorrect.

Q 14.C
    The second phase of programme includes mass civil disobedience including non-payment of taxes.

Q 15.B
Skill Development Scheme                                                       Ministry
1.    Placement Linked Skill development Programme      :       Ministry of Commerce and  Industry
2.    Craftsmen Training Scheme                                             :       Ministry of Labour and Employment
3.    Udaan                                                                                   :       Ministry of Home Affairs
4.    STAR Scheme                                                                       :       Ministry of Skill Development and
Entrepreneurship
     Only, 3 and 4 are correctly matched.

Q 16.D
     MCA21 data base is maintained by Ministry of Corporate Affairs
     Other two statements are correct.

Q 17.D
     It was established by Royal Proclamation  in 1921 on the recommendation of Montford reforms
     The Chamber of Princes ( Narendra Mandal) was an institution established in 1920 by a Royal Proclamation of the King-Emperor to provide a forum in which the rulers of the princely states of India could voice their needs and aspirations to the government of British India. It survived until the end of the British Raj in 1947
     The creation of the Chamber of Princes followed the abandonment  by the British of their long- established policy of isolating the Indian rulers from each other and also from the rest of the world

Q 18.A
     In Morley-Minto reforms the number of members in provincial legislative council were increased which was demanded by Moderates. Also non-official majority was introduced. So option 1 is correct.
     According to policy of divide and rule muslims were given separate electorate and representation  in excess of the strength of their population. So option 2 is incorrect.
     Women were given voting rights in Government of India Act 1919. So option 3 is incorrect.

Q 19.D
     Reliance  was  placed  on  ancient  learning  and  original  thoughts  were  discouraged.  It was  confined  to literature,   law,  religion   etc  and  excluded   study   of  physical   and  natural   sciences,technology  and geography, one of the reason of backwardness of the education.
     Centres of education were financed by nawabs, rajas and were spread all over the country.

Q 20.B
     There  have  been  sinkhole  formation  in  soils  characterised  by  rocks  which  do  not  dissolve  in  water.
Sinkholes  are  also  formed  during  long  periods  of  drought,  where  groundwater  levels  fall,  meaning cavities that were once supported by the water become weaker.
     However, they are more common in soils with water-soluble  evaporate rocks such as salt or gypsum or carbonate rocks such as limestone or dolomite.

3                                                                    www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 21.D
     Swami Dayanand, the founder of the Arya Samaj, disregarded the authority of later hindu scriptures like
Purana and blamed them for the evil practices of idol worship etc.
     The Samaj rejected the caste system based on birth but supported the vedic notion of the same where a person was not borne in a caste but identified with it as per the occupation he followed.

Q 22.C
     The Tebagha struggle, 1946, took place in Bengal , between the share-croppers  and the jotedars.
      The share-croppers  asserted that they would no longer pay a half of their crop to the jotedars but only
1/3rd . Also, they demanded that before dividion, the  crop would be stored in their 'khamars'(godowns)
and not that of jotedars.
     The recommendations of Bengal Land Revenue  Commission or the Floud commission , so constituted , had already incorporated these demands  raised by the share-croppers in its report to the Government.Hence, Statement  (c) is incorrect.

Q 23.B
    The Indian capitalist class grew from about mid 19th century with largely an independent capital base and not as junior partners of foreign capital or as compradors.

Q 24.C

Horizontal Devolution Formula In the 13th and 14th Finance Commissions
Variable                           Weights accorded
13th           14th
Population (1971)                                    25.0           17.5
Population (2011)                                     0.0            10.0
Fiscal capacity/Income  distance           47.5           50.0
Area                                                             10.0           15.0
Forest cover                                                0.0              7.5
Fiscal discipline                                         17.5             0.0
Total                                                             100             100

Source : Reports of 13th and 14th Finance Commission
     All parameters are part of new computation, please refer the above picture.

Q 25.A
     caste Hindus and Muslims were to have equal representation
     congress objected the plan as an attempt to reduce the congress to the status of an purely caste hindu party and insisted on its right to include members of all communities among its nominees.

Q 26.A
     CSP was not a rival political organisation but was launcehd "to work within the Congress, to strengthen it, to mould and shape its policies"
     CSP preferred unity in national movement before its socialist inclination.
     It wanted to gradually persuade Congress to adopt a socialist vision of independent India. And effects of its effort were visible in economic program adopted at Faizpur session and in constitution of Planning Committee under chairmanship of JL Nehru.

Q 27.B
     Champaran Satyagrah was directed mainly against the European indigo planters.
     Kheda Satyagrah was directed chiefly against govt due to its failure to implement the provisions of Famine code which mandated remission of land revenue if the crop yield was less than 25% of then normal.


4                                                                    www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 28.C
     Government of India Act 1935 made certain landmark changes many of which were included in Indian constitution such as.
Concurrent list on which provinces and centre both can legislate.
     Also Provincial autonomy and Dyarchy at Centre were added in this Act.
     In this act provisions were made for indirect elections for federal assembly and direct elections for council of state.
     The Upper House of the Federal Legislature, the Council of State, would consist of 260 members: 156 (60%) elected from the British India and 104 (40%) nominated by the rulers of the princely states.
     The Lower House, the Federal Assembly, would consist of 375 members: 250 (67%) elected by the Legislative Assemblies of the British Indian provinces; 125 (33%) nominated by the rulers of the princely states.
     So option c is correct as only third statement is incorrect.

Q 29.C
    They advocated nationalisation  of railways

Q 30.B
     Health and Family Welfare Minister launched “Mission Indradhanush,”  which will aim to cover all those children by 2020 who had not been vaccinated, or were partially vaccinated, against seven vaccine- preventable diseases — diphtheria, whooping cough, tetanus, polio, tuberculosis, measles and hepatitis B. The Ministry identified 201 high-focus districts in the country in the first phase.

Q 31.B
     They did not try to generate  a mass revolution  instead  they decided  to copy the methods  of the Irish terrorists  and the Russian  Nihilists to assassinate  unpopular  officials. This was a prime reason for their failure as they didn't have a mass base and thus terrorism as a political tool failed
     Revolutionary   terrorists  didn't  agree  with  the  ideas  of  passive  resistance   and  non-cooperation  as
advocated by the militant nationalists

Q 32.A
    The Boundary Plan was made Public only after the partition so that the responsibility of partition would not fall on the British.

Q 33.D
     Mappila  Revolt The Mappilas were the Muslim tenants inhabiting the Malabar region where most of the landlords were Hindus. The Mappilas had expressed their resentment against the oppression of the landlords during the nineteenth century also. Their grievances centred around lack of security of tenure, high rents, renewal fees and other oppressive exactions.
     The Mappila tenants were particularly encouraged by the demand of the local Congress body for a
government legislation regulating tenant – landlord relations. Soon, the Mappila movement merged with the ongoing Khilafat agitation. The leaders of the Khilafat – Non – Cooperation Movement like Gandhi, Shaukat Ali and Maulana Azad addressed Mappila meetings. After the arrest of national leaders, the leadership passed into the hands of local Mappila leaders.
     Things took a turn for the worse in August 1921 when the arrest of a respected priest leader, Ali
Musaliar, sparked off large – scale riots. Initially, the symbols of British authority – courts, police stations, treasuries and offices – and unpopular landlords (jenmies who were mostly Hindus) were the targets.
But once the British declared martial law and repression began in earnest, the character of the rebellion underwent a definite change. Many Hindus were seen by the Mappilas  to be helping the authorities. What began as an anti – government and anti – landlord  affair acquired communal  overtones.  The communalization of the rebellion  completed  the isolation  of the Mappilas  from the Khilafat  – Non – Cooperation Movement. By December 1921, all resistance had come to a stop.



5                                                                    www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 34.D

Q 35.B
     In revolutionary associations overemphasis  on religion were there which kept Muslims aloof from revolutionary  terrorism. So option 1 is correct.
     After decline of Swadeshi movement younger nationalist who participated in Swadeshi movement found
it impossible to disappear into the background. They looked for avenues to dissipate their patriotic energy so they got attracted towards revolutionary  terrorism So there was sudden increase in terrorist activities after Swadeshi movement. So option 2 is incorrect.
     Revolutionay terrorists groups in India opted to follow in the footsteps of Russian Nihilists or Irish nationalists. So option 3 is correct.

Q 36.D
     Failure of Cripps mission proved that the British Govt was not interested in giving India meaningful self govt.
     In the wake of Japanese aggression, the British in South-East Asia left the local people at the mercy of
Japanese troops and rescued only Englishmen. This behavior worried the Indian public.
     There were shortage of essential items in Bengal, Orrisa and Assam and British Government was apathetic towards the situation.

Q 37.A
    INA Day was celebrated on 12 November, 1945.

Q 38.B
     During the National Conference  on Education  ,1937 in Wardha ,resolutions  regarding education in India were  passed.  Based  on  the  resolutions  passed  here, Zakir  Hussain  Committee  formulated  a detailed National  Scheme  (known  as Wardha  Scheme)  for  basic  education  which  was  based  on  the  principle of 'learning  through activity'  . Hence, 1st Statement is correct and 2nd Statement  is incorrect.
     According   to  this  scheme first  seven  years  of  schooling  should  be  an  integral  part  of  a  free  and compulsory nationwide education system. Hence, Statement  3 is incorrect.
     Both  Wardha  Scheme  and  Hunter  Commission   laid  importance   on   Vernacular   languages   (mother
tongue) .

Q 39.B
     Supreme court in Bengal was established by Regulating Act 1773. so option 1 is incorrect.
     The charter Act 1813 had the following characteristics:
     1. A sum of one lakh rupees was to be set aside for the revival, promotion and encouragement  of literature, learning and science among the native of India.
     2. The company’s monopoly of Trade In India ended because of a spirit of laissez-faire and also because of the continental system by Napolean which closed the European ports to Britain. The 1813 Act sought to redress these grievances.
     So all other options are correct.

Q 40.B
     During Swadeshi Movement Tilak used innovative methods such as using festivals to spread idea of
Swadeshi into masses. So option 1 is correct.
     During Swadeshi movement leaders focused on national education also. So National Council of Education was set up to organise a system of education on national lines and under national control. So option 2 is correct.
     During Swadeshi movement Indian domestic manufacturing  capacity increased. Industries such as textile
mills, soap, match factories, tanneries, banks were established. So option 3 is incorrect.

Q 41.D


6                                                                    www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 42.D
     Swarajya was defined as goal of Congress in Calcutta session in 1906 because popularity of Extremists was increasing and they were demanding Swarajya as a goal of congress. So option 1 is incorrect.
     Tilak has done great work in popularising the Swadeshi movement. The Extremists wanted that Tilak or
Lala Lajpat Rai should become the president of congress in Surat Session. So option 2 is incorrect.
     The main point of conflict between moderates and extremists was extent of Swadeshi movement. But moderates demanded to reduce the extent of Swadeshi movement because they don’t want to antagonise the government as council reforms were on anvil. So option 3 is correct.

Q 43.D
     Gandhiji was joined by Rajendra Prasad, Mahadeo Desai, Narhari Parekh and others.
     Sardar Vallabh Bhai Patel and Indu Lal Yagnik joined him in Kheda Movement.
     Gandhi arrived in Champaran 10 April 1917 with a team of eminent lawyers: Brajkishore
Prasad, Rajendra Prasad, Anugrah Narayan Sinha and others including Acharya kripalani. Q 44.B
Q 45.B
     Gandhi's such request was turned down due to oppostion by the muslims.

Q 46.A
     Picketing of those shops which sell foreign goods, liquor and opium.
     Dandi Salt March had an immense impact on the entire nation. Each and every corner of the country was gripped in a unique fervor of nationalism. Soon this act of violation of the Salt Laws assumed an all India character. The entire nation amalgamated  under the call of a single man, Mahatma Gandhi. There were reports of satyagrahas and instances of law violation from Bombay, Central and United Provinces, Bengal and Gujarat. The program of the Civil Disobedience  Movement incorporated  besides the breaking of the Salt Laws, picketing  of shops selling foreign goods and liquor, bonfire of cloth, refusal to pay taxes and avoidance  of offices by the public officers and schools by the students.  Even the women joined forces against the British. Those from orthodox families did not hesitate to respond to the call of the Mahatma. They took active part in the picketing exercises. Perturbed by the growing popularity of the movement, the British government  imprisoned  Mahatma  Gandhi and Jawaharlal  Nehru, in a bid to thwart it. Thus, the second struggle for attaining Swaraj launched by the Congress, under the able guidance of Mahatma, served the critical function of mobilizing the masses on a large scale against the British.

Q 47.D
     Congress started the "Quit India" movement. Dr. Ambedkar severely criticized this move. He describes it as "both irresponsible and insane, a bankruptcy of statesmanship and a measure to retrieve the Congress prestige that had gone down since the war started. It would be madness, he said, to weaken law and order at a time when the barbarians were at the gates."

Q 48.C
     The official reason given for partition of Bengal was that Bengal with a population of 78 million (about a quarter of Population of British India) had become too big to be administered. Hence, 1st Statement  is correct.
     After partition Bengali speaking population became  minority in Bengal. Hence, 2nd Statement  is
incorrect.
     The real motive behind the partition was the British desire to weaken Bengal which was the nerve centre of Indian nationalism. So to weaken Bengal it was partitioned. Hence 3rd Statement  is incorrect.
Q 49.D
     Bhagat Singh and B.K. Dutt threw bomb protesting against the bill.
     Public Safety Bill was intended to contain the Communists, but was opposed on the ground that such a provision would be used to attack the national movement. Further, the provisions of the bill would reduce the civil liberties of citizens in general and workers in particular.

7                                                                    www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
     The bill was not passed in the legislature. Swarajists defeated the bill in the legislature. This was one of the noteworthy contributions of Swarajists. However the British brought the Public Safety ordinance to serve the purpose.

Q 50.D
     In Calcutta session 1928 Nehru report was approved  but the younger elements  like Jawahar  Lal Nehru and Subhash Chandra Bose remain dissatisfied as only dominion status was demanded by Nehru report. While  these  younger  elements  were demanding  complete  independence.  Here  congress  also decided that  if the demand  for  dominion  status  was  not  accepted  in 1 year  than  they  not  only  will  demand complete independence  but would also launch a civil disobedience  movement to attain it’s objective. So option D is correct.

Q 51.B
     Under  the  treaty,  British  undertook  to  defend  the  ruler  from  his  enemies  and  promised  to  non- interference   in  the  internal   affairs   but  they  didn't   keep  this  promise.   Through   British   resident, they  interfered in the day-to-day administration  of the state.
     Wellesley  did not invent the system,it  existed long before him. Dupleix was perhaps  the first who had
lent European troops to Indian princess at the expense of the latter.
     Wellesley  concluded  that the best way to safeguard  India against Napoleon  was to make the Company the arbiter of the Indian political world and place the Indian states beyond the influence of the French.

Q 52.B
    An immediate expansion of Viceroy's executive council by enlarging Indian representation.

Q 53.A
     The possibility of bringing in revolutionary literature that would be immune from press acts and quest for arms took Indian revolutionaries  and some leaders abroad. So option (1) and 2 is correct.
     Shyamji Krishnavarma  had started Indian Home Rule Society in London. So option 3 is wrong.

Q 54.C
     To   curb   the   students   participation   in   Civil   Disobedience   Movement,   Cunningham   Circular   was implemented  in 1930 by the British, which played an important role in shaping the Freedom Struggle in Assam.
     It forced  the students and their guardians to furnish assurances of good behaviour and forbade them to participate in political activities, and  evoked strong response.
     Students  quit schools  in protest  and many Educational  Institutions  like Kamrup  Academy  of Guwahati and Sibsagar Vidyapeeth were established.

Q 55.C

The goal of Congress is defined as Purna Swaraj for the first time in Lahore session 1929. So option 1 is incorrect.
In Karachi session two very important resolutions were passed
1. Resolution on fundamental rights which included primary education as a fundamental right.
So option 2 is correct.
2. Resolution on National economic programme was pass which included right to form unions (by peasants and workers)
So option 3 is correct.
The Karachi session remained the basic political and economic programme for congress for future.

Q 56.B
     Rajendra  Lahiri,  Ashfaqulla  Khan,  Pandit  Ram  Prasad  Bismil  and  Thakur  Roshan  Singh  were  awarded capital punishment in Kakori Case.
     Bhagat Singh, Sukhdev and Rajguru were were awarded capital punishment in Second Lahore conspiracy trial case.

8                                                                    www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
     When Bengal was partitioned, it sparked an outburst of public anger against the British. The anger led to civil unrest and a nationalist  campaign  was carried out by groups of revolutionaries,  led by Aurobindo Ghosh (Arabindo  Ghosh),  Rasbihari  Bose and Bagha  Jatin and organized  into groups like Jugantar.  The British  cracked   down  hard  on  the  activists   and  the  conflict   came  to  a  head  on  April  30,  1908 when Khudiram   Bose  and  Prafulla  Chaki  attempted   to  kill  Magistrate Kingsford,  a judge  known  for handing down particularly  harsh sentences against nationalists.  However, the bomb thrown at his horse carriage missed its target and instead landed in another carriage and killed two British women.

Q 57.D
     Montagu-Chelmsford reforms, 1919 provided for a commission to enquire into the working of the system of the govt after 10 years of these reforms. But the Simon Commission was constituted 2 years before such a Commission was due. It was due to the fact that the conservative govt in England felt sure of its defeat in next General Election in England and it didn’t want to leave the appointment of such a commission to successor govt.
Q 58.D Q 59.A
    Only the first 3 are the demands put forward by the Khilafat committee.
    Jazirat-ul-Arab = Iraq, Palestine, Arabia and Syria

Q 60.C Q 61.D



Opium Commission 1893
     In 1893 a royal commission was issued to inquire into the results of using opium in India, and the possibility of prohibiting it.
     This commission examined many witnesses and finally reported in 1895. The result was as follows:
o  The result of Opium use in India is much less harmful than it was supposed.
o  Opium rarely sends any criminal to the Jails, as Alcohol sends criminals to English Jails as a cause of crime and death in England.
o  It is used by the holy saints of India. Opium is not associated to any disease and it is widely used as a remedy in Malaria and Fever.
The result was that the Government happily accepted the recommendation of this commission and
shelved the idea of imposing a ban on Opium.

Q 62.C
     According  to the Indian Councils  Act of 1909 the most of the members  were indirectly  elected.  There was no direct elections. Hence, 1st Statement is incorrect.
     Only one Indian  was to be appointed  to the viceroy’s  executive  council  under  the 1909  Councils  Act.
Whereas  under  the  1919  Act  ,the  number  of  Indian  members  in  the  Executive  Council  of  Governor
General was raised from one to three. Hence 2nd Statement is incorrect.
     The Indian Councils  Act of 1909 increased  the number  of elected  members  in the imperial  Legislative
Council and the provincial legislative councils. So statement 3 is also incorrect.
     Separate  electorate  for Muslims  was introduced  in 1909  and income  qualifications  for Muslim  voters was lesser than that for Hindus. Only 4th statement is correct.
      Separate Electorate : The community  to which the electorate  belongs  would choose their own leaders via an election in which the candidates  of only their community  would be allowed to contest and only their community members would vote.

Q 63.A
     Accounts of girls could be opened from the time of their birth till their attaining the age of 10 years not 7 years.
     Second statement is correct.
     Third statement is incorrect, there is no provision of extra interest rate as of now
9                                                                    www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 64.C
     The Lex Loci act was proposed in 1845 and passed in 1850. It provided right to inherit ancestral property to Hindu converts to Christianity. The conversion issue was becoming important for Christian Missionaries as  loss of inheritance rights was impeding the success of conversion because then that would mean few Hindus will going to convert , if they lost their property as a result.
     However, a similar law was passed by Lord Bentinck in 1832, however, it applied to Bengal only.

Q 65.D
     The Rowlatt Act gave the power to the executive to detain persons without trial for maximum of 2 years.
     After the Jalliawala Bagh massacre, Gandhi ji suspended only Civil Disobidience  part of Rowlatt
Satyagrah.
     In orgIn their struggle against the Rowlatt Act the same weapons of non-violence and Satyagraha were applied. anising the ensuing political movement Gandhiji constituted a 'Satyagraha Sabha' in Bombay of which he himself was the President

Q 66.C
     Permanent Settlement of Bengal, 1793 happened during the period of Lord Cornwallis.
     Permanent Settlement was introduced, to regulate revenue administration.  in this, Zamindars were recognised owners of land and a ten year settlement was made with them in 1790. In 1793, the decinnial settlement was declared permanent and zamindars and their legitimate sucessesor were allowed to hold their estates at that very assesed rate for ever.
Q 67.D Q 68.C
     An All Parties Conference met in Feb.1928 and appointed a sub-Committee  under the chairmanship  of
Motilal Nehru to draft a constitution. Thus, it was the first major attempt by the Indians to draft a constitutional  framework for the country. Hence, 1st Statement is correct.
     The Joint Electorates were proposed throughout British India. However, reservation for Muslims was given only where in minority. Hence, 2nd Statement is incorrect.
     The Motilal Nehru Committee noted that everyone knew that the distribution of provinces in India had no rational basis. Thus by raising the question, at the meeting as to what principles should govern the redistribution of provinces, it suggested the following factors: Partly geographical and partly economic and financial, but the main considerations must necessarily be the wishes of the people and the linguistic  unity of the are concerned.  Hence,3rd Statement is correct.

Q 69.D
     ‘Stilwell  route’ was constructed  by the Americans  during  the Second  World  War from Ledo in Assam, India to Kunming, China.
     It passes through Lekhapani, Jairampur, Nampong and Pangsau pass, India-Burma (Myanmar) border.
     Originally it was called 'Ledo Road'; later it was name after General Joseph Warren Stilwell (1883-1946), Chief  of  Staff  to  Allied  Forces  in  China-Burma-India theatre  for  defence  of  Burma  (Myanmar)  from Japanese forces

Q 70.D
     Statements 1 and 2 are correct.
     The Saddler University Commission (1917-1919) also recommended:  inauguration of many new universities, less rigidity in framing regulations for universities, some special recommendation in relation to Calcutta University.
     After 1919 reforms, Department of Education was transferred to the control of popular ministers in various provinces. And the Department of Education of Govt of India(central govt) was amalgamated with other departments.
     Sargeant Plan of Education recommended  universal free and compulsory education for children between the ages of 6 and 11.

10                                                                 www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 71.B
     Khan Abdul Gaffar Khan was a leader in NWFP who led  civil disobedience movement  there. He is also known as frontier Gandhi. So option 1 and 2 are correct.
     He had organised a volunteer brigade Khudai Khidmatgars popularly known as Red-Shirts who were pledged to the freedom struggle and non-violence. So option 3 is incorrect.

Q 72.C
     Not Swarajists but the No-Changers argued that parliamentary work would lead to neglect of constructive work, loss of revolutionary  zeal and to political corruption. Constructive work would prepare everyone for the next phase of civil disobedience.
     Swarajists Arguments:
(i) The Swarajists argued that entering the councils would not negate the non-cooperation programme;
in fact, it would be like carrying on the movement through other means—opening a new front.
(ii) In a time of political vacuum, council work would serve to enthuse the masses and keep up their morale Entry of nationalists would deter the Government from stuffing the councils with undesirable elements who may be used to provide legitimacy to government measures.
(iii) Their only intention was to use the councils as an arena of political struggle; they had no intention to
use the councils as organs for gradual transformation  of colonial rule.

Q 73.D
     The second wave of revolutionary terrorism started after Gandhi stopped his non-cooperation movement. This forced youths to other ways to achieve freedom.
     Ideologically most of the revolutionaries  in this new wave were inspired by Russian revolution based on
socialistic ideas.
     Women also participated in some revolutionary activities. As evident from Chittagong Armory Raid violence could not repulse women.

Q 74.D

Gandhi recommended  -
1. Spinning,
2. removal of untouchability
3. Sobriety (non-consumption of alcohol or opium)
4. Hindu-Muslim  amity,
5. Equality for women.
He used to explain his program for strengthening India by counting these five virtues on the five fingers of his hand.

Q 75.C
     Sikhs, Christians were already declared as minority. In communal award depressed classes were declared minorities and provision of separate electorate has been made for them. So option 1 is incorrect.
     Gandhi has taken fast unto death in protest against communal award because he saw communal award as an attack on nationalism and national unity. So option 2 is correct.
     Poona Pact is signed between B.R. Ambedkar and Gandhi. According to this pact, separate electorate for
depressed classed were abolished but reservation were given to them. Now seats for depressed classes had increased from 71 to 147 in provincial legislature and 18% of total in central legislature. So option 3 is correct.
Q 76.A
     The Ministry for Health & Family Welfare launched the National Deworming initiative aimed to protect more than 24 crore children in the ages of 1-19 years from intestinal worms. So option 4 is incorrect.
     Intestinal worms can be transmitted by skin contact with larva infected soil.
     So option 2 is correct.
     Intestinal worms in small children reduces their nutrient uptake capacity which affects the physical and cognitive development  of children. So option 3 is correct.
     Under this initiative Albendazole tablets will be given to all targeted children.So option 1 is correct,

11                                                                 www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 77.A
     Tilak never presided over the INC (Indian National Congress).
     During the Surat session the radical nationalist wanted Tilak to be president but the moderates were successful in nominating  Rash Behari Ghosh as president.
     Rash Behari Bose is different person. He was one of the great revolutionaries  of the first half of the 20th century. He came into limelight when he threw a bomb on Lord Hardinge's (the then Viceroy of India) procession in Chandni Chowk, Delhi on December 23, 1912. In March 1942, he organised a conference to set up an Indian Independence  League, the first session of which was held in June 1942 at Bangkok. He was then elected President of the Council of Action for the formation of INA. He mobilised Indian
soldiers taken as prisoners of war by the Japanese forces for an armed rebellion against the British rule. In 1943, he handed over the charge of INA to Subash Chandra Bose in Singapore. Bose died in Tokyo on January 21, 1945.

Q 78.A
     By mid-April the satyagraha had started losing momentum, forcing Gandhi to withdraw it. As a political campaign, therefore, it was a manifest failure, since it failed to secure its only aim, i.e., the repeal of the Rowlatt Act. It also lapsed into violence, although it was meant to be non-violent. Gandhi admitted to have committed a Himalayan blunder by offering the weapon of satyagraha to a people insufficiently trained in the discipline of non-violence.  But the movement was significant nevertheless, as it was the first nationwide popular agitation, marking the beginning of a transformation  of Indian nationalist politics from being the politics of some restricted classes to becoming the politics of the masses.

Q 79.D

By 1908 the open phase of Swadeshi movement was almost over because:
      There was severe government repression (leaders were arrested).
     Split in congress created differences among leaders. After the split, Congress became weak.
Consequently,  the government utilised this situation to benefit themselves by severe repression of extremists leaders. So statement 1 and 3 are correct reasons.
      The movement were limited to upper and middle classes and failed to reach the masses especially peasants. So statement 2 is correct reason.
     During Swadeshi movement, leaders did not pulled out due to violence so statement 4 is not a reason of decay of Swadeshi movement.

Q 80.A
     Local Self Government was a transferred subject under the Government of India Act, 1919 under the popular ministerial control.
     Simon Commission suggested the retrograde step of increasing control of provincial govt over local governments in the interest of greater efficiency.
     The Government of India Act, 1935 gave further impetus to the development  of local institutions because now the popular ministries controlled finance which was not the case under the Government of India Act, 1919.

Q 81.A
     The British Government's  decision to partition Bengal had been made public in Dec.1903. The official reason given for the decision was that Bengal with a population of 78 million had become too big to be administered.  But the real motive behind the partition plan was the British desire to weaken Bengal , the nerve centre of Indian Nationalism. Hence, 1st Statement is correct.
     The Partition took place on the basis of (i) language - thus reducing the Bengalis to a minority in Bengal - as the new Bengal created was to have 17 million  Bengalis and 37 million Hindi and Oriya speaking people. (ii) Religion- western half of the Bengal was to be made a Hindu majority area and eastern half was to be a Muslim majority area.Thus, there was no basis of Caste to partition  Bengal. Hence, 2nd Statement is incorrect.



12                                                                 www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
     Benaras Session under the Presidentship of Gopal Krishna Gokhale was convened to condemn the Partition of Bengal and the reactionary policies of Curzon and support the anti-Partition  and Swadeshi Movement of Bengal. Hence, 3rd Statement  is incorrect.

Q 82.C
     Strikes  in Tea plantations  of Assam  occurred  during  the non-cooperation movement.  The other three methods were followed during the Swadeshi movement of 1905.
Q 83.D Q 84.C

Q 85.B

1. G.Gokhale                   Servants of India Society
2. B.G.Tilak                      Kesari
3. Dadabhai Naoroji      Dnyan Prasarak Mandali
4. Lala Lajpat Rai            The People

    In 1905, Gokhale laid the foundation of the Servants of India Society with a view to "the training of national missionaries for the service of India, and to promote, by all constitutional  means, the true interests of Indian people."
    Tilak started the newspaper "Kesari"(Marathi) to inculcate among people the spirit of service to nation and propagate his views.
    Lala Lajpat Rai was a fearless journalist and founded and edited the English weekly "The People".

Q 86.D
    It was opposite

Q 87.C Q 88.C
Q 89.A
     After 1929, the Congress left the political activities in the princely states to the praja mandals.
     The policy of the Indian National Congress towards the Indian states had been first enunciated in 1920 at Nagpur when a resolution calling upon the Princes to grant full responsible government in their States had been passed. Simultaneously,  however, the Congress, while allowing residents of the States
to become members of the Congress, made it clear that they could not initiate political activity in the
States in the name of Congress
but only in their individual capacity or as members of the local political organizations.
     In 1927, the Congress reiterated as resolution of 1920, and in 1929 Jawaharlal Nehru, in his presidential address to the famous Lahore Congress, declared that ‘the Indian states cannot live apart from the rest of India. . . the only people who have a right to determine the future of the states must be the people of those states’). In later years, the Congress demanded  that the Princes guarantee  fundamental rights to their people.
     In the Haripura session in 1938, the Congress had reiterated its policy that movements in the States should not be launched in the name of the Congress but should rely on their own independent strength and fight through local organizations

Q 90.B
1.    In his book Anandmath, Bankim Chandra Chatterjee popularised the idea of mother India.
2.    Wasudev Balwant Phadke mobilized the tribal youth. Vasudev Balwant Phadke, an educated clerk, raised a Ramosi  peasant  force  of about  50 in Maharashtra  during  1879,  and organized  social  banditry  on a significant scale.

13                                                                 www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
3.    In Germany, Har Dyal continued to promote his mission, independence  for India. He knew that Germans had great sympathy  with the Gadar  movement  because  they and Gadarites  had common  enemy,  the British.  Har  Dyal,  along  with  Virendra   Nath  Chattopadhyay,   younger   brother  of  politician-poetess Sarojani Naidu, Barkatullah, Bhupendra Nath Datta, brother of Swami Vivekananda,  Ajit Singh, Champak Raman  Pillai, Tarak Nath Das, and Bhai Bhagwan  Singh formed Berlin  Indian  Committee in September
1914,  also  known  as the Indian  Revolutionary  Society.  The  objectives  of the society  were  to arrange
financial  assistance  from  German  Government for  revolutionary    activities  and  propaganda   work  in different   countries   of  the  world,  plan  training  of  volunteer   force  of  Indian  fighters  and  arrange transportation   of  arms  and  ammunitions   to  reach  the  Gadarites   for  a  revolt  against   the  British Government in India.

Q 91.B
     The zamindars and poligars displaced by merchants and moneylenders.  They were themselves impoverished under the Company rule. Hence, Statement 1 is not the cause of revolt against the Company rule.
     The other two statements are correct.

Q 92.D
     While  Subhash  and  other  left  leaders  wanted  to  take  advantage  of  British  vulnerabilities,   Gandhiji wanted to cooperate with the British at this time.
     Note: Nehru neither wanted to help British nor wanted to harm the British war efforts at this time.

Q 93.B
     Metcalfe Act repealed the 1823 ordinance. According to 1823 ordinance starting or using a press without license was a penal offence. So statement 1 is correct.
     Vernacular press act gave power of seizure of press equipment to district magistrate. In this regard the decision of district magistrate was final and no appeal could be made in court of law. So option 2 is incorrect.
     Lord Ripon repealed the Vernacular Press Act. So option 3 is correct.

Q 94.A
     Desai – Liaqat pact was an effort towards formation of interim government. It was proposed by Bhulabhai Desai of congress and Liaqat Ali Khan of muslim league. According to it equal number of persons would be nominated by the congress and league in the central legislature and the muslim league would drop its demand for Pakistan.

Q 95.B
      Lord Cornwallis is known as 'Father of Civil Service' in India

Q 96.B
     It was the Indigo planters who maintained a band of Lathiyals (armed retainers) to enforce indigo cultivation. However the famers used peaceful demonstrations  and social boycotts.

Q 97.B
     The doctrine recognized the right of adopted son to succeed to the personal property of the chieftain,but drew a distinction between succession to private property and succession to the royal gaddi.
     Other statements are correct. The approval aspect was indeed an option provided to rulers, although
British rarely allowed such cases.

Q 98.B
     The Home leagues functioned independently as Congress could not adopt a radical program as that.
Therefore statement 1 is wrong.
     The objective of this movement was to obtain self rule under the British rule in constitutional  way.

14                                                                 www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
     Montagu Declaration in 1917 satisfied the moderates and in the spirit of declaration Mrs. Annie Besant was also released from jail, which pacified the people and movement weakened.
     The movement made the Annie Besant and Tilak, the most popular leaders of the day and both favoured the reunification of congress. This act of unifying Congress became easy due to the popularity of both
the leaders.

Q 99.A
     Indian   Agriculture   during   18th  century   was  technically   backward   and  stagnant   as  techniques   of production remained stationary for centuries. Also Indian villages were largely self-sufficient. It was not a closed economy as it traded with other countries of Europe and Asia.

Q 100.A
     Under the Zamindari system, the zamindar was recognized as the owner who could mortgage, bequeath and sell the land.
     Zamindari system covered the least area among all the three system prevalent. Ryotwari and Mahalwari were the most prevalent.
     2nd statement is correct.







































Copyright  © by Vision IAS
All  rights  are  reserved.  No  part  of  this  document  may  be  reproduced,  stored  in  a  retrieval  system  or transmitted  in  any  form  or  by  any  means,  electronic,  mechanical,  photocopying,  recording  or  otherwise,
without prior permission of Vision IAS


15                                                                 www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
