VISIONIAS z™
www.visionias.in www.visionias.wordpress.com

ANSWERS & EXPLANATION GENERAL STUIDES (P) 2015 – Test 4 (1553)




Q 1.B
India is bounded by the Himalayas in the north, Hindukush and Sulaiman ranges in the northwest, Purvachal hills in the north-east and by the large expanse of the Indian ocean in the south, it forms a great geographic entity known as the Indian subcontinent. It includes the countries — Pakistan, Nepal, Bhutan, Bangladesh and India.

Q 2.C
Damodar River is known as the "sorrow' of West Bengal as it used to flood many areas of Bardhaman, Hooghly, Howrah and Medinipur districts.
The Damodar River flows through a rift valley lying between plateaus of Chotanagpur and Hazaribag in the north and Ranchi in the south

Q 3.B
The western coastal plains is widest in the north.

Q 4.B
Tilaiya Dam is located on Barakar River (Jharkhand) Hirakud Dam located on Mahanadi River( Odisha)
Koyna Dam is on Koyna River, tributary of Krishna River (Maharashtra)

Q 5.D
India’s tiger population jumped 30% in four years. The figure rose from 1706(2010) to 2226 (2014)
The largest tiger reserve by area is 3,568 km2 (1,378 sq mi) Nagarjunsagar-Srisailam Tiger Reserve in Andhra
Pradesh and Telangana. Hence Statement 3rd is incorrect.

Q 6.B
The Himalayas are the mountain ranges that extend between the Indus and Brahmaputra river. The mountains extending from Pamir plateau to Indus river are known as Karakoram.

Q 7.D
All the statements are correct except 4th because Dugong inhabit shallow waters& feed on sea grasses.

Q 8.A
The river in their lower course split into numerous channels due to deposition of silt,these channels are known as Distributaries. For example Hoogly is western most distributary of Ganga river.
In the lower course, due to gentle slope, the velocity of the river increases which results in the formation of
riverine islands.

Q 9.B
The laterite soils develop in areas with high temperature and high rainfall. These are the result of intense leaching due to tropical rains. With rain, lime and silica are leached away, and soils rich in iron oxide and aluminium compound are left behind. Humus content of the soil is removed fast by bacteria that thrives well in high temperature. These soils are poor in organic matter, nitrogen, phosphate and calcium, while iron oxide and potash are in excess. Hence, laterites are not suitable for cultivation; however, application of manures and fertilisers are required for making the soils fertile for cultivation.
Q 10.A
Deccan plateau is the highest along its western edge and gently slopes towards the east. The north-western part of the Deccan plateau is known as the Deccan Trap.

Q 11.C
Narmada and Tapi river flows through hard rocks, thus they do not have sufficient sediments to form deltas. And
other western ghat’s west flowing rivers also do not have sufficient sediments.
Statement 3 is wrong because Arabian branch causes lot of rainfall on west coastal plains, thus making it wetter than eastern coastal plains.

Q 12.A
Most of western Haryana is semi-desert and accounts for low rainfall, whereas rainfall in north-eastern part of
Haryana is relatively high.
Haryana is located in the northwest India between 27 degree 37' to 30 degree 35' latitude and between 74 degree 28' to 77 degree 36' longitude

Q 13.D
Monsoon in India is essentially pulsating in nature, i.e., they occur in wet spells of few days duration at a time.

Q 14.D
The Kankar layer of Arid soil contains Calcium content. Excessive irrigation with dry climatic conditions promotes capillary action, which results in the deposition of salt on the top layer of the soil. This increases the salinity and makes the soil infertile. In such areas farmers are advised to add gypsum to solve the problem of salinity in the soil.

Q 15.A
A few Andaman and Nicobar islands are volcanic in origin. However, most of them are believed to be an elevated portion of submarine mountains.
Q 16.D Q 17.A
Gomti and Kosi rivers are left bank tributary of Ganga.

Q 18.A
Kalol and Ankaleshwar oil fields are in Gujarat. Mangla is in Rajasthan. Mumbai High is in Maharashtra.

Q 19.B
No-tillage farming is planting without removing the existing plant cover and previous crop residues.  No-till is an agricultural technique which increases the amount of water  and organic matter (nutrients) in the soil and decreases erosion. Minimum tillage farming is shallow ploughing only to the depth needed to ensure quick seed germination and leaving crop residues and ground litter to protect the soil. A mulch is a layer of material applied to the surface of an area of soil. Its purpose is any or all of the following: to conserve moisture, to improve the fertility and health of the soil, to reduce weed growth.

Q 20.C
Black Soil/Regur Soil is found in the Deccan Plateau & parts of Andhra & Tamil Nadu. Hence 1st Statement is
correct.
Black Soil swells when sticky & wet & shrinks when dry(develops cracks that aids in self-ploughing) – this unique characteristic of Black Soil i.e. slow absorption & less moisture helps it to retain the moisture for a long time & aids in cultivation of rain-fed crops even in dry season.Hence, 2nd Statement is incorrect.
Q 21.B
Isohyte and Isohaline definition is reversed in the question.

Q 22.C
Mangroves are woody plants and shrub that inhabit the upper intertidal zones of saltwater  areas, primarily in tropical and subtropical coastal regions within 30° of the equator.
Protects the coast from erosion, storm surges, tsunamis ,etc. due to the massive & strong root system of the
Mangrov Forests. Hence, 2nd Statement is incorrect.
Sundarbans is the only & largest mangrove tiger land on the globe

Q 23.C
Gharials are predominantly a fish eater & harmless to humans.Hence, Statement 3rd is incorrect, rest all are
correct.

Q 24.A
Gujarat has a coastline of 1600 km which is the longest coastline in India.
The tropic of cancer divides the country into almost two equal halves and not exactly two equal halves.

Q 25.C
Statement 2 is wrong. Black soils are rich in lime, iron, magnesia and alumina. They also contain potash. But they lack in phosphorous, nitrogen and organic matter.
Other statements are correct.

Q 26.A
Nallamalla Hills- Andhra Pradesh and Telangana. Javadi Hills- Northern Tamil Nadu.
Shevaroy Hills- Near Salem in Tamil Nadu.
Cardamom Hills- southeast Kerala and southwest Tamil Nadu.

Q 27.C
“A delta typically should have enough sediment to counter ocean energy. But if you stop bringing in sediment,
eventually the ocean will win."
A proliferation of large dams that starve deltas of sediment, groundwater mining that causes land compaction, and artificial levees that affect river courses, have been responsible for the subsiding of major Indian deltas including Ganga-Brahmaputra, Krishna-Godavari, Brahmani and Mahanadi
Q 28.D Q 29.B
Peninsular rivers like Narmada and Tapi do not have their origin in Western Ghats.

Q 30.B
Laterites and Lateritic soil:are rich in iron and aluminium & suitable for tea, coffee, rubber, cinchona, coconut and suitable for rice and millet cultivation if manure are added.
Black  soil   ideal  for  cotton  crop,  for  growing  cereals,  oilseeds,  citrus  fruits  and  vegetables,  tobacco  and
sugarcane. Therefore, Statement2 is incorrect.
In India though Arabica is widely grown but Robusta is also grown.  The harvest of Arabica takes place between
November to January, while for Robusta it is December to February. Therefore, Statement 3 is incorrect.

Q 31.C
In India, only Damodar and Narmada flows through rift valley.
Q 32.A
Absence of meanders is one of the characteristics of Peninsular river. Rivers like Mahanadi discharge into the Bay of Bengal.

Q 33.C
Luni  is  the  largest river  system  of  Rajasthan, west of  Aravali. It originates  near Pushkar  in two  branches- Sabarmati and Saraswati, which join with each other at Govindgadh. From here the river comes out to be Luni.
An  ephemeral water  body is  a wetland, spring, stream, river, pond or lake that  only  exists  for  a  short  period following precipitation. They are not the same as intermittent or seasonal waterbodies, which exist for longer periods, but not all year round. Luni river system is one of them.
Q 34.D Q 35.D
An exclusive economic zone (EEZ) is a sea zone prescribed by the United Nations Convention on the Laws of
Sea over which a state has special rights regarding the exploration and use of marine resources, including energy production from water and wind. It stretches from the baseline out to 200 nautical miles (nmi) from its coast. Nautical mile is a non- SI unit.1 nautical mile is about 1.8 kms.

Q 36.A
Laterite soils are commonly found in Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh and the hilly areas of
Orissa and Assam. They are not found in Uttar Pradesh. Other 2 pairs are correct.

Q 37.A

Nilgiri is just above Anna malai. Satpura is just above Ajanta hills. Vindhyas are in north



Q 38.B
Arunachal Pradesh area is 83,743 km2, whereas Assam area is 79,000 km2. Arunachal Pradesh has a border with China, Myanmar, and Bhutan.
Arunachal Pradesh is located between 26.28° N and 29.30° N latitude. Uttarakhand latitudinal extent is 28°43' N
to 31°27' N.

Q 39.D
President Pranab Mukherjee on 12 January 2015 gave his assent to an ordinance that amends the Mines and Minerals Development and Regulation (MMDR) Act, 1957. The ordinance paves way for introduction of competitive bidding for allocation of mines of iron ore and other non-coal minerals.
Objective of the MMDR (Amendment) Bill, 2014
• Improved transparency in the allocation of mineral resources
• Obtaining for the government its fair share of the value of such resources
• Attracting private investment and the latest technology
• Eliminating delay in administration, so as to enable expeditious and optimum development of the mineral
resources of the country

Q 40.A
Tropical evergreen forests are found in the western slope of the Western Ghats, hills of the northeastern region and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands. Uttar Pradesh has deciduous forests.
Statements 2 and 3 are correct.

Q 41.A
Nor  Westers  are  dreaded  evening  thunderstorms  in  Bengal  and  Assam.  Their  notorious  nature  can  be
understood from the local nomenclature of ‘Kalbaisakhi’, a calamity of the month of Baisakh. (April -May).These
showers are useful for tea, jute and rice cultivation. In Assam, these storms are known as “Bardoli Chheerha”.
Q 42.C
Red soil develops on crystalline igneous rocks in areas of low rainfall in the eastern and southern part of the Deccan Plateau. Along the piedmont zone of the Western Ghat, long stretch of area is occupied by red loamy soil. The soil develops a reddish colour due to a wide diffusion of iron in crystalline and metamorphic rocks. It looks yellow when it occurs in a hydrated form. It is relatively less fertile and needs irrigation. It is rich in soluble salts but devoid of phosphoric acid, carbon compounds and organic matter.

Q 43.A
First and second statements are correct. The region gets drained by Godavari, Krishna and Penner rivers.

Q 44.A
Relief is simply the difference in elevation between two points. When the surface is relatively flat we say it has
low relief. Conversely, mountainous regions have high relief. The relief features of the earth are be divided into three orders based on what created them and their size.
First  order  relief  features are  the  tectonic  plates  and  are  the  largest  in  spatial  extent.  Two  types  of plates, continental and oceanic are differentiated by their rock and mineral composition. Thus continents and ocean basin are example of the first order relief.
Second order relief features are created by plate tectonics. They are the result of plate collision or divergence. Example- Mountains system, oceanic ridges etc.
Third order relief features are for the most part created by erosion and deposition of the surface as opposed to
the movement of tectonic plates. Individual landforms are considered third order relief features.

Q 45.D
Neyveli in Tamil Nadu has lignite mines. Singarauli is in Madhya Pradesh. Singareni is in khammam district in
Telangana. Talcher is in Odisha.

Q 46.D
Gujarat is the main producer of tobacco, cotton, and groundnuts in India. Kutch is the marshy land while the south east portion is fertile plain.
Gujarat has oil and natural gas producing sites such as Kalol, Khambhat, and Ankleshwar.

Q 47.D
Rosewood, mahogony, aini and ebony are some of the species of evergreen forests. Sandalwood is a species of
Tropical Deciduous Forests. Deodar is a species of Montane forest.

Q 48.B
Tamil Nadu has the largest installation of wind turbines in the country in the Muppandal -Perungudi area near Kanniyakumari with an aggregate capacity of 380mw. This is one of the largest concentrations of wind farm capacity at a single location anywhere in the world. Prospective areas of Geo-thermal energy are North-west Himalayan ranges (Puga valley in Jammu & Kashmir and Manikaran area in Himachal Pradesh), West coast running through Maharashtra and Gujarat, the Narmada-Sone valley and the Damodar valley.

Q 49.B
Peaty  soils  are  found  in  the  areas  of  heavy  rainfall  and high humidity, where  there  is  a  good  growth of vegetation. Thus, large quantity of dead organic matter accumulates in these areas, and this gives a rich humus and organic content to the soil. Organic matter in these soils may go even up to 40 -50 per cent. These soils are normally heavy and black in colour. At many places, they are alkaline also. It occurs widely in the northern part of Bihar, southern part of Uttaranchal and the coastal areas of West Bengal, Orissa and Tamil Nadu.

Q 50.B
All the three hydal projects are installed across the Chenab river.
Q 51.C
Bauxite, an aluminium ore, is the world's main source of aluminium. It consists mostly of the minerals Al(OH)3 and AlO(OH).
Electric power represents about 20% to 40% of the cost of producing aluminium. So cheap power availability attracts aluminium industries.

Q 52.D
On the basis of water drainage, Indian drainage system is divided into - Arabian sea Drainage and Bay of Bengal Drainage. They are separated from each other through the Delhi ridge, the Aravalis and Sahyadris. River system originating in the east of this system, drains in Bay of Bengal.
Hence both statements are correct.

Q 53.C
When the rivers originate from a hill and flow in all directions, the drainage pattern is known as radial. Example - Rivers originating from Amarkantak range. Volcanoesusually display excellent radial drainage. Other geological features on which radial drainage commonly develops are domes and laccoliths.
When the primary tributaries of rivers flow parallel to each other and secondary tributaries join them at right angles, the pattern is known as trellis. The old folded mountains of the Singhbhum (Chotanagpur Plateau) have a drainage of trellis pattern.
When the river discharge their waters from all directions in a lake or depression, the pattern is known as
centripetal.
The drainage pattern resembling the branches of a tree is known as dendritic. Example- Rivers of Northern plain. Dendritic systems form in V-shaped valleys; as a result, the rock types must be impervious and non-porous.

Q 54.B
Tropical Deciduous Forests are the most widespread forests in India. They are called monsoon forests.
Tropical evergreen forests are called evergreen because there is no definite time for the trees to shed their leaves.
Statement 4 is correct.

Q 55.D
Both the statements are correct.

Q 56.B
The correct order of given biosphere reserves in the increasing order of their latitude is: Agasthyamalai (Kerala) –
Nilgiri (Kerala,Tamil Nadu, Karnataka) – Simlipal (Odisha)- Nokrek (Meghalaya).

Q 57.A
Bangladesh shares its borders with the following states of India:
1. West Bengal
2. Assam
3. Tripura
4. Meghalaya
5. Mizoram

Q 58.C
The monsoon approaches the landmass in two branches: (i) The Arabian Sea branch
(ii) The Bay of Bengal branch.
The Tamil Nadu coast is situated parallel to the Bay of Bengal branch of southwest monsoon. It also lies in the rain shadow area of the Arabian Sea branch of the south-west monsoon. This is why Tamil Nadu coast remains dry during this season.
Q 59.C

Q 60.C
Both the statements are correct.

Q 61.D
Cotton is a tropical crop grown in kharif season in semi-arid areas of the country.
Cotton requires clear sky during flowering stage. India ranks fourth in the world in the production of cotton after China, U.S.A. and Pakistan and accounts for about 8.3 per cent of production of cotton in the world. Cotton occupies  about  4.7  per  cent  of  total  cropped  area  in  the  country.  Leading  producers  of  this  crop  are Maharashtra, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Punjab and Haryana.

Q 62.B
India  has  one  of  the  largest share  of  arable  land.  Low  productivity  is  the  prime  cause  of  less  agriculture production in India.

Q 63.A
Canaries were used in coal mines to detect carbon monoxide gas. The canaries react even if 0.15 per cent of CO is present in the air. Now sophisticated hand held CO detectors are used by most of the companies. But, some miners still trust the birds.

Q 64.C
Most of the coal deposits in India are of bituminous type. This bituminous coal was formed only during the
Gondwana period. However, India also lignite formed during tertiary period. Statement three is correct.

Q 65.C
In Mixed Farming, equal emphasis is laid on crop cultivation and animal husbandry.
Subsistence agriculture is one in which the farming areas consume all, or nearly so, of the products locally grown. E.g. is slash and burn agriculture or shifting cultivation.
In Extensive Farming Commercial grain cultivation is practised in the interior parts of semi-arid lands of the mid
latitudes. Wheat is the principal crop, though other crops like corn, barley, oats and rye are also grown. The size of the farm is very large,therefore entire perations of cultivation from ploughing to harvesting are mechanized. The regions where farmers specialize in vegetables only, the farming is know as truck farming. The distance of truck farms from the market is governed by the distance that a truck can cover overnight, hence the name truck Farming.

Q 66.C
Dry deciduous forest covers vast areas of the country, where rainfall ranges between 70 -100 cm. s the dry season begins, the trees shed their leaves completely and the forest appears like a vast grassland with naked trees all around. Tendu, palas, amaltas, bel, khair, axlewood, etc. are the common trees of these forests.

Q 67.B
Nanda Devi Biosphere Reserve is in Uttarakhand. Other two pairs are correct.

Q 68.C
Both the statements are correct.

Q 69.B
There is a strict procedure to determine a list of tropical cyclone names in an ocean basin(s) by the Tropical Cyclone Regional Body responsible for that basin(s) at its annual/biennial meeting. There are five tropical cyclone regional bodies, i.e. ESCAP/WMO Typhoon Committee, WMO/ESCAP Panel on Tropical Cyclones, RA I Tropical Cyclone Committee, RA IV Hurricane Committee, and RA V Tropical Cyclone Committee. For instance, Hurricane Committee determines a per-designated list of hurricane names for six years separately at its annual session.
The per-designated list of hurricane names are proposed by its members that include National Meteorological and Hydrological Services in the North/Central America and the Caribbean. Naming procedures in other regions are almost the same as in the Caribbean. In general, tropical cyclones are named according to the rules at a regional level.
It is important to note that tropical cyclones/hurricanes are named neither after any particular person, nor with any preference in alphabetical sequence. The tropical cyclone/hurricane names selected are those that are familiar to the people in each region. Obviously, the main purpose of naming a tropical cyclone/hurri cane is basically for people easily to understand and remember the tropical cyclone/hurricane in a region, thus to facilitate tropical cyclone/hurricane disaster risk awareness, preparedness, management and reduction.

Q 70.D
Sikkim touches the boundary of only West Bengal and Meghalaya touches the boundary of only Assam. Whereas
other Indian states share boundaries with two or more Indian states.

Q 71.C
Thorium is not used as a nuclear fuel because India does not possess the technology to generate nuclear energy from it.
Thorium is a radioactive element.

Q 72.B
Most of the available water is used for agriculture uses. Statement 2 is correct.

Q 73.A
Estuary are the regions of high tide, as high tide does not allow deposition of sediments, thus delta formation is restricted.
Estuary does not have fertile lands because they are devoid of rich sediments brought by the river.
Narmada and Tapi flows through rift valley and rock bed is also hard. They remains devoid of sediments and thus does not form depositories.

Q 74. A
    River regime refers to the volume of water flowing in a river measured over time. A river regime is the difference in the discharge of the river throughout the year. The information can easily be shown on a graph.
    During the year in Britain, it would be expected that the discharge of most rivers would be greater in winter months than in the summer. River regimes will also reflect the area that they are in.
    Option B is River discharge. River discharge is defined as the volume of water passing a measuring point or gauging station in a river in a given time. It is measured in cubic metres per second (cumecs).

Q 75.C
Both the statements are correct

Q 76.C

     Eastern coastal plains are more prone to cyclones. More cyclones occur in the Bay of Bengal than in the
Arabian Sea and the ratio is approximately 4:1.

     The western coastal plains are an example of submerged coastal plain. It is believed that

     the city of Dwaraka which was once a part of the Indian mainland situated along the west

     coast is submerged under water (A coast where sediment is deposited but still the shoreline is shifting landward is called Retrograding coast.). Because of this submergence it is a narrow belt and provides natural conditions for the development of ports and harbours. Kandla, Mazagaon, JLN port Navha Sheva, Marmagao, Mangalore, Cochin, etc. are some of the important natural ports located along the west coast. Extending from the Gujarat coast
     in the north to the Kerala coast in the south, the western coast may be divided into following divisions – the Kachchh and Kathiawar coast in Gujarat, Konkan coast in Maharashtra, Goan coast and Malabar coast in Karnataka and Kerala respectively.

     The western coastal plains are narrow in the middle and get broader towards north and south. The rivers flowing through this coastal plain do not form any delta. The Malabar coast has got certain distinguishing features in the form of ‘Kayals’ (backwaters), which are used for fishing, inland navigation and also due
to its special attraction for tourists. Every year the famous Nehru Trophy Vallamkali (boat race) is held in
Punnamada Kayal in Kerala.

     As compared to the western coastal plain, the eastern coastal plain is broader and is an

     example of an emergent coast. There are welldeveloped deltas here, formed by the rivers

     flowing eastward in to the Bay of Bengal. These include the deltas of the Mahanadi, the

     Godavari, the Krishna and the Kaveri. Because of its emergent nature, it has less number of

     ports and harbours. The continental shelf extends up to 500 km into the sea, which makes it difficult for the development of good ports and harbours.


Q 77.C
A large level of irrigated land(Cultivable land) has lost its fertility due to alkanisation and salinity of soils ( around
8 million ha land and waterlogging ( around 7 million ha).

Q 78.A
In second half of October, the mercury begins to fall rapidly, particularly in northern India. The weather in the retreating monsoon is dry in north India but it is associated with rain in the eastern part of the Peninsula.

Q 79.C
Minicoy islands is separated from Cannanore Island by nine degree channel.

Q 80.D
The latitudinal and longitudinal extent of India, are roughly about 30 degrees, whereas the actual distance measured from north to south extremity is 3,214 km, and that from east to west is only 2,933 km. This difference is based on the fact that the distance between two longitudes decreases towards the poles whereas the distance between two latitudes remains the same everywhere.
The meridian length of 1 degree of latitude on the Earth is 111.2 km or 69 miles. Hence, none of the statements are correct.

Q 81.C
All the three statements are correct

Q 82.C
Both are correct

Q 83.C
Monsoon retreats fairly rapid from southern half of the peninsula and gradually from northern half.

Q 84.C
Shifting cultivation increases soil erosion by deforestation.
Check dams reduce the velocity of water and thus its eroding power. Lands with a slope gradient of 15-25 per cent should not be used for cultivation.

Q 85.C
All the three pairs are correctly matched.
Shimoga in Karnataka is an important source of iron ore.
Jharia in Jharkhand is famous for its high quality metallurgical coal.
Manganese is obtained from Khondolite deposits in Kalahandi district in Odisha.

Q 86.B
In laterite soils, due to high rainfall, lime and silica are leached away, and soils rich in iron oxide and aluminium compound are left behind. The other two statements are correct.

Q 87.D
All are correct.

Q 88.B
Salinity, generally  , increases  with depth  & there  is  a  distinct  zone  called  the  ‘HALOCLINE’ where  salinity
increases  sharply.  Other  factors  remaining  constant,  increasing  salinity  of  seawater   causes  its  density  to increase.
Hence, Ist Statement is wrong.
Bay of Bengal witness low salinity trend due to influx of river water whereas Arabian Sea witness high salinity due to evaporation & low influx of fresh water. Hence, Statement 2 is correct.
Brackish water is salt water and fresh water mixed together. It is saltier than fresh water, but not as salty as seawater. It may result from mixing of seawater with fresh water, as in estuaries, or it may occur in brackish fossil aquifers. Mangroves are important brackish water habitats.

Q 89.B
Jute is still mostly grown in the eastern states like West Bengal and lower Assam. Second statement is correct.

Q 90.A
The moisture content of the Western Disturbance gets augmented from the Caspian Sea in the north and Persian
Gulf in the south.
The Western disturbance are highly regarded as beneficial for Rabi crops in North India. Q 91.C
Uranium Deposits occur in Dharwar Rocks.
World’s richest monazite deposits occur in Palakkad & Kollam Districts of Kerela, Vishakhapatnam in Andhra
Pradesh & Mahanadi River Delta in Orissa.

Q 92.C
Statement 1 and 3 are reversed.

Q 93.A
The given conditions are ideal for growing Tea. Rubber cultivation require a heavy rainfall of 200 to 300 cm. Jute is not grown in hill slopes.

Q 94.C
Maize is a food as well as fodder crop grown under semi-arid climatic conditions and over inferior soils. This crop occupies about 3.6 per cent of total cropped area in India. Maize cultivation is not concentrated in any specific region. It is sown all over India except eastern and north-eastern regions.

Q 95.D
The eastern states were the regions of good and heavy rainfall. This inhibited development of irrigation facilities. The size of farms is small so the advanced means of agriculture could not be practiced. Low levels of literacy and superstition obstructed introduction of new forms of agriculture and development.

Q 96.C
All the options are correct.
Q 97.D
Pearl Millet one of the major rainfed cereal grown in semi-arid areas like Rajasthan, Haryana, Gujarat
Groundnut-Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu
Maize  is  a  food  as  well  as  fodder  crop grown  under  semi-arid climatic conditions  over  inferior  soils- MP, Rajasthan,Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh
Jowar main food crop in semi-arid areas of Central & Southern India

Q 98.A
Isohyte and Isohaline definition is reversed in the question.

Q 99.B
Orchard farming is a major occupations of such a climate.
Patoral farming is not possible due to limited growth for vegetation and grasses in winter season.

Q 100.C
Both lantana and water hyacinth were brought into India as decorative garden plants. Both have now become a
public menace. Lantana is sometimes also referred as ‘terror of Bengal’.









































Copyright © by Vision IAS
All  rights  are  reserved.  No  part  of  this  document  may  be  reproduced,  stored  in  a  retrieval  system  or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without prior permission of Vision IAS
VISIONIAS z™
www.visionias.in www.visionias.wordpress.com

ANSWERS & EXPLANATION GENERAL STUIDES (P) 2015 – Test 4 (1553)




Q.  1.B

बायत उत्तय  भें हिभारम,  उत्तय-ऩश्चिभ     भें हिदकश   औय  सरेभान श्रश्चणमाॊ,  उत्तय-ऩर्   भें ऩर्ाचर  ऩिाड़ी  औय  दश्चिण  भें हिद भिासागय   से  घघया िआ   िैI     मि  एक फड़   बौगोघरक  ईकाई  का घनभाण कयता िै   जो बायतीम उऩभिाद्वीऩ   के
ऱऩ भें जाना जाता ि। इसभ  शाघभर दश िैं   - ऩाहकस्तान, नेऩार, बटान, फाॊग्रादश   औय  बायत।



Q.  2.C

र्धभान,  िगरी,  िार्ड़ा   औय  भेहदनीऩय   श्चजरों   के   कई ित्रों   भें  फाढ़ रान के   कायण दाभोदय नदी  को “ ऩश्चिभ   फगार
का शोक”  के   ऱऩ भें जाना जाता ि।

दाभोदय नदी  उत्तय  भें छोटानागऩय   औय  िजायीफाग   के   ऩठायों तथा  दश्चिण   भें  याॊची के   फीच एक  भ्रश  घाटी से िोकय फिती ि।


Q.  3.B

ऩश्चिभी  तटीम भदान उत्तय  भें सर्ाघधक  चौड़ा ि।



Q.  4.B

घतरमा फाॉध  फयाकय नदी  ऩय श्चस्थत िै   (झायखॊड),

िीयाकड   फाॊध भिानदी  नदी ऩय श्चस्थत िै   (ओहडशा),

कोमना फाॊध कष्णा की सिामक  कोमना नदी ऩय श्चस्थत िै   (भिायाष्ट्र)।



Q.  5.D
बायत के   फाघों की  आफादी भें  चाय र्र्षो भें  30%  की र्द्धि   िई   ि। फाघों की  सख्मा   भें िई   र्द्धि   िै   - 1706  (2010)
से 2226 (2014)
आध्र  प्रदश  औय  तेरगाना   भें नागाजुनसागय-श्रीशरभ   टाइगय   रयजर् ित्रपर   की दृद्धि   से  सफसे  फड़ा टाइगय   रयजर् िै
(3568 र्गहकरोभीटय अथर्ा 1378 र्ग भीर)।   इसघरए कथन 3  गरत ि।



Q.  6.B

हिभारम ऩर्त श्रखरा   घसधु  औय  ब्रहऩत्र   नदी के   फीच  द्धर्स्तत   ि। ऩाभीय  ऩठाय  से  घसधु नदी  तक इसक द्धर्स्ताय

को कायाकोयभ के   ऱऩ भें जाना जाता ि।
Q.  7.D

कथन 4  को छोड़कय  सबी कथन सिी  िैं  , क्मोंहक  डगोंग  (dugong)   उथरे  ऩानी  भें यिता  िै  औय  सागयीम  घास इनका बोजन ि।


Q.  8.A

घनचरे प्रर्ाि   ित्र   भें अर्सादों के   जभार् के   कायण नदी  कई  शाखाओ भें  फट जाती  िै,  इन  शाखाओ को सिामक नहदमों   के   ऱऩ भें जाना जाता ि। उदाियण के   घरए, िगरी   गगा  नदी  की सफसे ऩश्चिभी  सिामक नदी ि।

घनचरे प्रर्ाि   ित्र   भें,  भद ढार के   कायण नदी का र्ेग  कभ िो जाता िै   श्चजससे  नदी  अर्सादों  को घनिेद्धऩत  कय दती
िै   ,ऩरयणाभस्र्ऱऩ  नदी द्वीऩों   का घनभाण िोता   ि।



Q.  9.B
रेटयाइट  भदा उच्च   ताऩभान  औय बायी र्र्षा के   ित्रों   भें  द्धर्कघसत िोती   ि। मे  भदाएॉ  उष्णकहटफधीम र्र्षा के   कायण तीव्र   घनिारन का ऩरयणाभ ि।  र्र्षा के  साथ चूना  औय घसघरका  तो घनिघरत  िो जाते  िैं  औय    रौि-आक्साइड  तथा एल्मभीघनमभ  के   मौघगक से  सभि   भदा  शेर्ष   यि  जाती ि। उच्च   ताऩभानों  भें  आसानी से  ऩनऩन  र्ार  जीर्ाणु
ऺभस  की  भात्रा को  तेजी  से  नि कय दते  ि। इन  भदाओ भें जैर्  ऩदाथ, नाईट्रोजन, पॉस्पट औय  कश्चल्शमभ   की कभी  िोती   िै   तथा  रौि-आक्साइड   औय ऩोटाश  की  कभी    िोती   ि। इसघरए,   रेटयाइट  भदा कद्धर्ष   के   घरए  ऩमाप्त उऩजाऊ  निीॊ   ि। पसरों के   घरए  उऩजाऊ फनान  के   घरए इन  भदाओ भें खाद एर्  उर्यक   की  बायी  भात्रा डारनी ऩड़ती ि।



Q.  10.A

दक्कन-ऩठाय अऩन  ऩश्चिभी हकनाय  के   साथ सफसे अघधक  ऊचा  िै   औय  ऩर् की ओय इसका  ढरान भद ि। दक्कन के   ऩठाय का उत्तय-ऩश्चिभी   बाग दक्कन ट्रऩ   के   ऱऩ भें जाना जाता ि।


Q.  11.C

नभदा  औय ताऩी नदी  कड़ी चट्टानों  से िोकय   फिती िैं, अत् इनक  ऩास  डल्टा फनान  के   घरए ऩमाप्त   अर्साद निीॊ

िोता   ि। ऩश्चिभी घाट  के   ऩश्चिभ   भें फिन र्ारी   अन्म नहदमों   के   ऩास बी ऩमाप्त   अर्साद निीॊ   िोता   ि।
कथन 3 गरत िै   क्मोंहक, अयफ शाखा  (भानसन) ऩश्चिभ   तटीम  भदानों   ऩय बायी  र्र्षा कयती  िै, इस  प्रकाय ऩर्ी तटीम  भदानों  की तरना   भें मि ज्मादा आर्द्   िोता   ि।


Q.  12.B

ऩश्चिभी  िरयमाणा   के   अघधकाॊश  बाग अि यघगस्तान  िैं   तथा मिाॉ   र्र्षा कभ  िोती   िै, जफहक  िरयमाणा   के   उत्तय-ऩर्ी बाग भें अऩेिाकत अघधक र्र्षा  िोती   ि।
िरयमाणा   बायत के   उत्तय-ऩघशभ भें  27  हडग्री  37  '  से 30  हडग्री  35'    उत्तयी  अिाॊश के   फीच  औय  74  हडग्री  28'  से 77
हडग्री  36' ऩश्चिभी दशाॊतय के   फीच श्चस्थत ि।





2                                                                 www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q.  13.D

बायत भें भानसन अघनर्ाम ऱऩ  से स्पयण  (pulsating)  प्रकघत का    ि।, अथात   र्े हकसी सभम  कछ सभम  के  आर्द् चयणों भें र्र्षा कयते ि।


Q.  14.D

शष्क भदा  के   ककय सस्तय भें  कश्चल्शमभ   ऩामा  जाता  ि। शष्क  जरर्ाम   ऩरयश्चस्थघतमों   के   साथ  अत्मघधक घसचाई कघशका  हिमा    को फढ़ार्ा दता  िै   ऩरयणाभस्र्ऱऩ  भदा के   शीर्ष   स्तय  ऩय  रर्ण जभा िो  जाता ि। इसस रर्णता फढ़ जाती  िै   औय भदा  अनर्य   फन जाता ि। ऐसे ित्रों   भें हकसानों को भदा भें रर्णता   की सभस्मा  को िर कयन के   घरए श्चजप्सभ   डारन   की सराि दी जाती ि।


Q.  15.A

अडभान   औय घनकोफाय द्वीऩ   सभि   के   कछ  द्वीऩ   उत्ऩघत भें  ज्र्ाराभखीम   ि। िाराॊहक,  उनभें  से  ज्मादातय डफे   िए ऩिाड़ों   के   उठ िए   बाग भान जाते ि।
Q.  16.D Q.  17.A

गोभती  औय कोसी गगा  नदी  के   फाए हकनाय की  सिामक नहदमाॉ   ि।


Q.  18.A

करोर औय  अरकश्वय तेर ित्र   गजयात भें ि। भगरा   याजस्थान भें ि।
भफई िाई   भिायाष्ट्र   भें ि।



Q.  19.B

जुताई  यहित कद्धर्ष   र्तभान पसरों  औय  द्धऩछरे  पसर के   अर्शेर्ष को  िटामे   द्धफना   की जान  र्ारी   जुताई ऩिघत   ि। जुताई  यहित कद्धर्ष, एक कद्धर्ष   तकनीक िै   श्चजससे  भदा  भें  ऩानी  औय काफघनक ऩदाथ  (ऩोर्षक तत्र्ों) की  भात्रा फढ़ती

िै   औय अऩयदन  कभ  िोता   ि।

न्मनतभ  जुताई  की खती त्र्रयत फीज अकयण   के   घरए  आर्श्मक गियाई   तक उथरा  जुताई तथा पसर अर्शेर्ष औय जभीनी  अर्घशि  को भदा  सयिा ित   छोड़न की एक द्धर्घध   ि।
भश्चल्चॊग   ,  जैर्  ऩदाथ से घभट्टी की सति को ढकने  की प्रहिमा ि। इसक घनम्नघरश्चखत   उद्दश्म   िै:  नभी सयिण,
उर्यता   र्द्धि   औय भदा  स्र्ास््म  भें  सधाय,  खयऩतर्ाय   र्द्धि   को कभ  कयना।


Q.  20.C
कारी भदा / यगय   भदा दक्कन-ऩठाय, आध्र  एर्भ   तघभरनाड के   कछ हिस्सों भें ऩामा जाता ि। इसघरए कथन 1

सिी   ि।
मे भदाएॉ गीर  िोन   ऩय  पर जाती  िैं   औय  घचऩघचऩी  िो  जाती ि। सखने  ऩय  मे  घसकड़ जाती  िैं   (चौड़ी  दयाय द्धर्कघसत  िो जाती िैं   ,ऐसा   प्रतीत  िोता   िै   हक   इनभे स्र्त् जुताई िो  गई िो)।   नभी के   धीभे  अर्शोर्षण  औय नभी

3                                                                 www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
के   िम की इस  द्धर्शेर्षता  के   कायण कारी  भदा भें एक रफी   अर्घध तक  नभी  फनी यिती  ि। इसक  कायण पसरों
को द्धर्शेर्ष  ऱऩ से र्र्षाधीन पसरों को, शष्क ऋत भें बी नभी घभरती यिती िैI   इसघरए कथन 2 सिी   निीॊ   िैI



Q.  21.B

सभर्द्धि  औय  सभरर्णता   यखाओ  की  ऩरयबार्षा प्रश्न भें द्धर्ऩयीत   ि।



Q.  22.C

भन्ग्रोर् र्नस्ऩघत   बभध्म यखा से  30  हडग्री  के   बीतय   भख्म   ऱऩ से  उष्णकहटफधीम औय तटीम ित्रों   भें,  सभर्द्ी   ित्रों के   ऊऩयी अतज्र्ारयम  ित्रों   भें उगन र्ार ऩेड़-ऩौध  औय झाहड़माॉ ि।
अघधक औय भजफत जड़ो के कायण मे भन्ग्रोर्   र्न अऩयदन, चिर्ातीम रियों, सनाभी आहद से तटों यिा  कयते  ि। इसघरए कथन 2 गरत िैI

सदयफन दघनमा   भें एकभात्र   औय सफसे  फड़ा भग्रोर्  फाघ आर्ास  ि।



Q.  23.C

घहड़मार   भख्म   ऱऩ  से भछरी खाने र्ारी   प्रजाघत  िै   औय भनष्म  को नकसान  निीॊ   ऩिचाता   ि। कथन 3 गरत िै फाहक  सबी कथन सिी   ि।


Q.  24.A

बायत भें गजयात की तट  यखा सफसे  रफी   िै   (रगबग   1600  हकरोभीटय)।

कक  यखा दश  को  रगबग दो  फयाफय हिस्सों  भें  फाॉटती  िै   न हक   ठीक  दो  फयाफय हिस्सों  भें।



Q.  25.C

कथन 2 गरत ि। कारी  भदा चूना,  रोिा,  भग्नीघशमा  औय एल्मघभना भें  सभि   िोती   ि। इसभ  ऩोटाश बी ऩामा जाता ि। रेहकन इसभ पास्पोयस, नाइट्रोजन औय काफघनक   ऩदाथ  की कभी िोती   ि।
अन्म कथन  सिी   ि।



Q.  26.A

नाल्राभारा ऩिाड़ी - आध्र  प्रदश   औय  तेरगाना। जार्ादी ऩिाड़ी - उत्तयी   तघभरनाड।
शेर्ायॉम ऩिाड़ी   - तघभरनाड भें सरेभ के   ऩास।
काडाभभ ऩिाड़ी   - दश्चिण-ऩर्   कयर  औय दश्चिण-ऩश्चिभ   तघभरनाड।



Q.  27.C

सभर्द्ी    ऊजा  का  भकाफरा   कयन  के    घरए  एक  डल्टा भें  ऩमाप्त    अर्साद  जभा  िोते    यिना    चाहिए।    रेहकन  महद अर्साद जभा िोन   भें अर्योध उत्ऩन्न िोता   िैं   तो  डल्टा सभर्द्   भें डफन रग जामेंगे।


4                                                                 www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
फड़     फाॊधों  की   सख्मा    भें  र्द्धि    (जो  डल्टाओ को  अर्साद   यहित  कय  दता   िै),  बौभ-जर    खनन   (जो  बघभ
सिनन(compaction)  का कायण िै) औय  गगा-ब्रहऩत्र,  कष्णा-गोदार्यी,  ब्राहणी  औय भिानदी नहदमों   ऩय फन  कद्धत्रभ तटफध (श्चजससे   नदी धाया  प्रबाद्धर्त िोती   िै) आहद बायतीम  डल्टाओ के   डफन के प्रभख कायण िैंI
Q.  28.D Q.  29.B

ऩश्चिभी  घाट नभदा  औय ताऩी जैसी प्रामद्वीऩीम  नहदमों   का उदगभ  स्रोत निीॊ   ि।



Q.  30 B

रेटयाइट  एर्भ   रटरयहटक   भदा  रोिा   औय एल्मघभघनमभ से  सभि   िोती   िैं   तथा  चाम,   कॉपी,   यफय,   घसनकोना  ,
नारयमर   की खती  के   घरए  उऩमक्त   िोती   िैं, अगय  उर्यक   डार   हदमा जाए  तो  मे  चार्र औय फाजया की  खती  के घरए बी उऩमक्त   ि।
कारी  भदा कऩास की पसर, घतरिन,     खट्ट पर औय  सश्चजजमाॊ,     तफाक औय गन्न  के   घरए  आदश िै।   इसघरए
कथन 2  गरत ि।
बायत भें अयद्धफका   फड़   ऩभान  ऩय उगामा  जाता िै   रेहकन योफस्टा बी  उगामा  जाता  ि। अयद्धफका   की खती,  नर्म्फय-
जनर्यी   के   फीच िोती   िै   जफहक योफस्टा की  हदसफय.-फ़यर्यी के   फीच िोती   िैI   इसघरए कथन 3 गरत ि।


Q :  31  C

हदए गए  द्धर्कल्ऩ भें  कर्र   दाभोदय औय नभदा  रयफ्ट   घाटी से फिती  ि। ताऩी एर्  भािी   नहदमाॉ   बी भ्रश  भें फिती
िैं   |


Q :  32  A

द्धर्सऩ  का अबार्  प्रामद्वीऩीम  नहदमों   का एक  प्रभख रिण ि। जैसे भिानदी फगार   की खाड़ी भें  घगयती ि।

Q :  33  C
रनी    याजस्थान  का  र्ित    नदी  तत्र    ि। अयार्री    के    ऩश्चिभ    से   ऩष्कय  के    नजदीक  इसका  उद्गभ    दो  शाखाओ साफयभती  र् सयस्र्ती  के   रऩ  भें िोता   िै   जो हक   आऩस भें  गोद्धर्दगढ   भें घभरती िैं   मिाॉ   से रनी   नदी के   रऩ  भें आगे  फढ़ती ि। एक  अल्ऩकाघरक जर तत्र   आर्द्बघभ,  धाया,  नदी,  ताराफ   मा झीर  र्र्षण से  एक  छोटी  अर्घध ित प्रर्ाहित  िोता   िैं,  र्े द्धर्याभी  मा भौसभी जरतत्र   जैसे निीॊ   िैं   जो रफी   अर्घध  के   घरए  प्रर्ाहित िोता   िैं,  हकन्त  ऩय र्र्ष के   दौयान निीॊ।   रनी   नदी तत्र   उनभें से एक ि।


Q :  34  D



Q :  35 D
एक द्धर्शेर्ष  आघथक  ित्र   (EEZ)  र्ि सभर्द्ी/सागयीम   िेत्र   िै   जो हक   सभर्द्  के  कानन  ऩय समक्त  याष्ट्र  कन्र्ेंशन   द्वाया र्श्चणत   िै   तथा     याज्म को  सभर्द्ी   ससाधन  के   प्रमोग  औय अन्र्ेर्षण  साथ  िी  जर  तथा ऩर्न  से उजा उत्ऩादन सफधी द्धर्शेर्ष  अघधकाय  प्रदान   कयता ि। मि  तट से 200  नाहटकर   भीर दय तक  द्धर्स्तत   िोता   ि।


5                                                                 www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
नॉहटकर   भीर  एक SI  इकाई निीॊ   ि।
1  नॉहटकर   भीर = 1.8km



Q :  36  A

रटयाइट   घभट्टी  भख्मत्   कनाटक,   कयर,   तघभरनाड,   भध्मप्रदश तथा  उडीसा  औय असभ  के   ऩिाड़ी   ित्र   भें  ऩामी जाती िै   मि उत्तय  प्रदश भें  निीॊ   ऩामी जाती।  अन्म दो मग्भ सत्म ि।
Q :37. A

नीरघगरय अन्नाभराई  से उत्तय   भें अर्श्चस्थत   ि। सतऩड़ा अजॊता से  उत्तय   भें अर्श्चस्थत   ि। इन  सबी भें से द्धर्ध्मन ऩर्त  सफसे उत्तय  भें अर्श्चस्थत   िै   |



Q :  38  C

अरणाचर    प्रदश  का   ित्रपर    83743   र्ग  हकरोभीटय   जफहक  असभ   का  िेत्रपर    79000   र्ग   हकराभीटय ि। अरणाचर   प्रदश की  सीभा  चीन,  म्माभाय  औय बटान  से घभरती ि। अरणाचर प्रदश  की   अर्श्चस्थघत 26.88°  N  से
29.30°  N  अिाॊश के   फीच िै   जफहक  उत्तयाखॊड   की अर्श्चस्थघत   28°43' N  से 31°27'N  अिाॊश के   फीच   ि।



Q :  39  D

याष्ट्रऩघत   प्रणर् भखजी ने  12  जनर्यी   2015  को खान  र् खघनज   द्धर्कास  एर् द्धर्घनमभन   (MMDR)  अघधघनमभ, 1957

को  सशोघधत कयन  सफधी  अध्मादश  ऩय सिभघत   प्रदान   की। मि अध्मादश रौि अमस्क की खानों  तथा  अन्म गय कोमरा   खघनजों   के   आर्टन   के   घरए  प्रघतस्ऩधी फोरी   की शरआत  के   घरए  भाग  प्रशस्त कयता ि।
MMDR  (सशोधन) द्धर्धमक   2014  के   उद्दश्म
●         खघनज   स्रोतों  के   आर्टन   की ऩायदघशता  भें सधाय।
●         इस तयि के   ससाधनों के   भल्म  का  सयकाय द्वाया  उघचत   हिस्सा प्राप्त कयना।
●         घनजी घनर्ेश  औय आधुघनक   तकनीकी  को आकद्धर्षत   कयना।
●         प्रशासघनक कामो  भें  दयी को सभाप्त   कयना,  दश की खघनज   स्रोतों का  शीघ्र   औय  इितभ द्धर्कास  को सिभ फनाना।


Q :  40  A

उष्णकहटफधीम  सदाफिाय   र्न ऩश्चिभी घाट   के   ऩश्चिभी   ढार,  ऩर्ोत्तय   ित्र   की  ऩिाहडमाॉ   तथा  अडभान-घनकोफाय द्वीऩ सभि   भें ऩाम जाते ि। उत्तय  प्रदश भें  ऩणऩाती   र्न  ऩाम जाते ि। कथन 2  औय  3  सिी   ि।


Q :  41  A

नार्स्टय   फगार   औय असभ  भें  शाभ के   सभम तेज गयज के   साथ िोन   र्ारी   र्र्षा  ि। इसका  स्थानीम  बार्षा भें  हदम गम  नाभ  कार  फसाखी  से  इसक  स्र्बार्   को  सभझा  जा  सकता  ि। मे   फसाख  (अप्रर-भई) भे  िोन   र्ारी घटना/आऩदा   ि। इसकी  फौछाय चाम,  जूट  औय चार्र की खती के   घरए राबदामक  ि। असभ भें इन झझार्ातों   को
‘ फायदोरी घछड़ा ’ के   नाभ से जानते ि।



6                                                                 www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q :  42  C

रार घभट्टी दक्कन  ऩठाय  के   ऩर्ी र् ऩश्चिभी  बाग के   कभ  र्र्षा ित्रों   भें,  हिस्टरीम आग्नेम चट्टानों  द्वाया  घनघभत

ि। साथ िी ऩश्चिभी घाट  का  द्धऩडभाॊट   ित्र   का रफा   द्धर्स्तत   अघधकत   ित्र   रार फरई  घभट्टी का ि। भदा  का रार यग   हिस्टरीम र् रऩाॊतरयत चट्टानो   भें रोि की उऩश्चस्थघत   द्वाया  द्धर्कघसत  िआ   ि। मि िाइड्रट   (जरमोश्चजत) िोन

ऩय  ऩीरा   हदखाई दता  ि। मि अऩेिाकत  कभ उऩजाऊ िोता   िै   तथा इसभ घसचाई की  आर्श्मकता  िोती   ि। इसभ घरनशीर रर्णों   की  अघधकता  िोती   ि। ऩयन्त  पास्पारयक  अम्र,   काफघनक  मौघगक  र् जैद्धर्क  ऩदाथ  की  कभी यिती ि।


Q :  43  A

प्रथभ तथा  हद्वतीम   कथन सत्म ि। मि ित्र   गोदार्यी, कष्णा  औय ऩेन्नेऱ   नहदमों   के   अऩर्ाि ित्र   भें आता ि।



Q :  44  A

उच्चार्च    दो  द्धफदओ    के    फीच  ऊचाई  भें  अतय  िोता    ि। जफ सति   अऩेिाकत  सऩाट  िोती    िै    तफ  इसे   घनम्न उच्चार्च   किते ि। इसक द्धर्ऩयीत   ऩर्तीम ित्र   उच्च   उच्चार्च्च   िोते   ि। ऩ्र्ी के   उच्चार्च   को उनक  द्वाया  फनाम गम  घनभाण तथा आकाय के   आधाय ऩय तीन  बागों   भें द्धर्बाश्चजत  हकमा जाता  ि।
प्रथभ  श्रणी   के   उच्चार्च्चों   की  द्धर्शेर्षता टक्टोघनक   प्रेट (द्धर्र्तघनक  प्रेट) िै   तथा इनका स्थाघनक   द्धर्स्ताय अघधक

ि। भिाद्वीऩीम   तथा  भिासागयीम  प्रेटों   को  उनक  चट्टान   औय खघनज   सयचना  के   आधाय  ऩय  द्धर्बाश्चजत   हकमा जाता ि। इस  प्रकाय भिाद्वीऩ   तथा सभर्द्   फेघसन  प्रथभ  िभ के   उच्चार्च   के   उदाियणएा   ि।
हद्वतीम   िभ के   उच्चार्च   का घनभाण प्रेटों   के   द्धर्र्तन   से िआ   ि। र्े प्रेट के   टक्कय मा  द्धर्सयण   का ऩरयणाभ  ि। उदाियण स्र्ऱऩ ऩर्त प्रणारी, सागयीम कटक आहद।
ततीम िभ के   उच्चार्च   का  घनभाण  अघधकाॊशत् प्रेट द्धर्र्तन   के   परस्र्ऱऩ सतिों   के   कटार्  तथा स्थानाॊतयण के कायण िआ   ि। द्धर्घशि  बू दृश्म ततीम िभ के   उच्चार्च्च   का उदाियण  ि।


Q :  45  D

तघभरनाड  के   नेर्ेरी   भें  घरग्नाइट  की खाने  ि। घसगयौरी   भध्मप्रदश भें  िै   घसगयनी   तेरगाना   के   खम्भन श्चजरे   भें

ि। तरचय   उड़ीसा भें ि।



Q :  46  D

बायत भें गजयात तफाक,  सती तथा भगपरी   का  प्रभख उत्ऩादनकता ि। कच्छ दरदरी   बघभ   िै   जफहक  दश्चिण-ऩर्ी बाग उऩजाऊ भदान ि।

गजयात भें तेर औय  प्राकघतक  गस उत्ऩादन के   ित्र   िैं   जैसे करोर, खॊबात तथा अकरश्वय।



Q :  47 D

योजर्ड,  भिोगनी,  ऐनी   तथा  एफोनी  आहद सदाफिाय   र्नों   की  कछ  प्रजाघतमाॉ ि। चॊदन उष्णकहटफधीम ऩणऩाती   र्न

की  प्रजाघत ि। दर्दाय ऩर्तीम र्न की  प्रजाघत ि।



7                                                                 www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q :  48  B
तघभरनाड ने  380MW  िभता   के   ऩर्न टफाइन  की स्थाऩना  कन्माकभायी के   ऩास भप्ऩनइर   ऩेरगडी   ित्र   भें की िै जोहक दश  भें  सफसे  अघधक िभता   की ऩर्न  टफाइन  ि। मि द्धर्श्व   भें  किीॊ   बी एक िी  स्थान  ऩय  ऩर्न  पाभ (wind  farm)  िभता   के   फड   बडायों   भें से एक ि। बताऩीम  ऊजा के   सबाद्धर्त  ित्र   उत्तय-ऩश्चिभ   हिभारम ऩर्तभारा
भें िैं   (जम्भ तथा  कश्भीय भें  ऩगा  घाटी, औय  हिभाचर प्रदश भें  भघनकयण ित्र)।



Q :  49  B

ऩीट  भदा  अघधक र्र्षा तथा  उच्च   आर्द्ता  र्ार उन ित्रों   भें ऩामी जाती िै, जिाॉ   र्नस्ऩघत   की  अच्छी र्द्धि   िोती   िो। श्चजससे  फड़ी भात्रा भें  भत  जैद्धर्क ऩदाथ इकठ्ठ िो  जाते िैं   जो हक   भदा को ऺभस  र् जैद्धर्क  ऩदाथ  प्रदान कयते ि। काफघनक/जैद्धर्क   ऩदाथ इस  भदा भें 40से   50%  तक ऩाम जाते ि। मि भदा गाढ़ तथा कारे  यग   की िोती   ि। कई
स्थानों  ऩय मि िायीम   बी िोती   ि। मि द्धफिाय  के   उत्तयी   बाग,  उत्तयाॉचर  के   दश्चिणी   बाग तथा ऩश्चिभ   फगार,  उडीसा

र् तघभरनाड के   तटीम बागों   ऩामी जाती ि।



Q :  50  B

तीनों   ऩनद्धफजरी   ऩरयमोंजनाम चनाफ   नदी  ऩय सचाघरत   ि।



Q : 51.C
फॉक्साइट  जो   एल्मभीघनमभ  का  एक   अमस्क  िैं, द्धर्श्व   भें  एल्मभीघनमभ  का  भख्म   स्रोत   ि।  मि अघधकतय AL(OH)3  औय  AL(OH)  से  घनष्कद्धर्षत   हकमा जाता   ि। एल्मभीघनमभ उत्ऩादन   की  रागत  भें द्धर्द्युत    शद्धक्त    का मोगदान रगबग  20% से 40% तक  िोता   िैं, अत्  सस्ती  द्धर्द्युत   शद्धक्त   की उऩरजधता  एल्मभीघनमभ उद्योगों   को आकद्धर्षत   कयती िै   र् एल्मभीघनमभ उद्योगों   के   घरए मि  एक भित्र्ऩण स्थानीमकयण  कायक ि।



Q : 52.D

जर  अऩर्ाि प्रणारी के   आधाय ऩय  बायतीम  अऩर्ाि प्रणारी  को  अयफ सागयीम अऩर्ाि  औय  फगार   की  खाड़ी का अऩर्ाि  भें द्धर्बाश्चजत  हकमा जाता  ि। र्े एक  – दसय   से  हदल्री रयज, अयार्री   औय  सऺार्द्ी   के   भाध्मभ से द्धर्बक्त

ि। इस अऩर्ाि  प्रणारी के   ऩर् भें उत्ऩन्न िोन   र्ारी   नहदमाॉ   अऩना जर फगार   की खाड़ी भें  घगयाती ि।

अत: दोनों कथन  सिी   ि।



Q : 53.C
जफ  नहदमाॉ   ऩिाड़ी   से  उत्ऩन्न  िोती   िैं   औय सबी  हदशाओ भें  प्रर्ाहित  िोती   िैं, तो मि  अऩर्ाि प्रघतऱऩ  अयीम (radial)  अऩर्ाि प्रघतऱऩ  किराता   ि। जैसा  की  अभयकटक ऩिाड़ी   से  घनकरन  र्ारी   नहदमाॉ   प्रदघशत   कयती  ि। ज्र्ाराभखी   ऩर्त बी  आभतौय ऩय अयीम अऩर्ाि प्रघतऱऩ  प्रदघशत   कयते ि। अन्म बगबीम  दृश्म जो अयीम अऩर्ाि प्रघतऱऩ प्रदघशत   कयते िैं   उनभें  डोभ औय रेकोघरथ प्रभख  ि।





8                                                                 www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
जफ  नहदमों   की  प्राथघभक सिामक नहदमाॊ   एक दसय   के   सभानाॊतय  प्रर्ाहित िोती   िैं, औय  हद्वतीमक   सिामक   नहदमाॊ
उनको  सभकोण  ऩय घभरती  िैं   तो मि  जारीनभा (trellis)  अऩर्ाि  प्रघतऱऩ  किराता   ि। घसिबभ   (छोटानागऩय ऩठाय) के   ऩयान र्घरत ऩर्त  ऩिाड़ों   जारीनभा (trellis)  अऩर्ाि प्रघतऱऩ प्रदघशत   कयते ि।

जफ नदी  अऩन जर को सबी  हदशाओ से  हकसी झीर  मा गत भें उत्सश्चजत   कयती  िैं, तो मि प्रघतऱऩ  अघबकन्र्द्ीम
(centripetal) प्रकाय का  िोता   ि।
र्ि   की शाखाओ के   सभान अऩर्ाि प्रघतऱऩ र्द्भाकघतक   (dendritic)  किराता   ि। उदाियण के   घरए उत्तयी   भदान  की नहदमाॉ।   र्ी-आकाय   की  घाहटमों   भें र्द्भाकघतक   अऩर्ाि प्रघतऱऩ फनता  िैं, उसक  घरए   चट्टान बेद्य   औय  घछर्द्   मक्त निीॊ   िोना   चाहिए।



Q : 54.B

उष्णकहटफधीम  ऩणऩाती   र्न बायत भें सफसे व्माऩक ऱऩ  भें ऩाए जान र्ार र्न ि। इनको भानसनी   र्न बी किा जाता  ि। उष्णकहटफधीम  सदाफिाय   र्नों   को  सदाफिाय   इसघरए  किा   जाता  िैं   क्मोंहक   इस  ऩेड़ों के   ऩत्त   झड़न   का
कोई घनश्चित   सभम निीॊ   िोता   ि।

कथन  चाय सिी   ि।



Q : 55.D

दोनों कथन सिी   ि।



Q : 56.B

जीर्भडर   आयश्चित   प्रदशों को  उनक अिाॊश  की बभध्म यखा से  दयी के   फढ़ते िए   िभ भें  यखने ऩय अगस्त्मभराई
(कयर) – नीरघगरय (कयर, तघभरनाड, कनाटक) - घसभरीऩार (ओहडशा) - नोकयक   (भेघारम)।



Q : 57.A

फाॊग्रादश   सीभा से रगे याज्म घनम्न  िैं   –
1. ऩश्चिभ   फगार
2. असभ
3. द्धत्रऩया
4. भेघारम
5. घभजोयभ



Q : 58.C

भानसन  दो शाखाओ भें ऩिचता   िैं   –
1.       अयफ सागयीम  शाखा
2.       फगार   की खाड़ी शाखा



9                                                                 www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
तघभरनाड तट  दश्चिण   ऩश्चिभ   भानसन  की फगार   की  खाड़ी शाखा  के   सभानाॊतय श्चस्थत  ि। मि दश्चिण-ऩश्चिभ

भानसन की  अयफ सागय   शाखा  के   र्द्धि   छामा ित्र   भें बी श्चस्थत  ि। मिी  कायण िैं   की तघभरनाड तट  दश्चिण ऩश्चिभ   भानसन के   भौसभ के   दौयान शष्क यिता  ि।


Q : 59.A

दीघकारीन ऩर्ानभान - भौसभ का मि ऩर्ानभान 10 हदनों से एक भौसभ के घरए िोता िैं



Q : 60.C

दोनों कथन सिी   ि।



Q : 61.D

कऩास दश के   अि  शष्क ित्रों   भें खयीप के   भौसभ भें उगाई जान र्ारी   एक  उष्णकहटफधीम पसर ि। कऩास  को ऩष्ऩन कार  के    दौयान  साप   आसभान  की  आर्श्मकता िोती   ि। बायत  द्धर्श्व    का  रगबग 8.3 प्रघतशत  कऩास उत्ऩाहदत कयता िैं   औय  चीन, अभयीका  औय ऩाहकस्तान   के   फाद कऩास  के   उत्ऩादन भें द्धर्श्व   भें  चौथ स्थान ऩय ि। बायत भें कऩास कर   पसर ित्र   के   5.5 पीसदी  बाग  भें फोमा जाता ि। बायत भें भिायाष्ट्र, गजयात, आध्र  प्रदश,

ऩजाफ  औय िरयमाणा   याज्म अग्रणी उत्ऩादक  ि।



Q : 62.B

बायत भें  कद्धर्षमोग्म   मोग्म  बघभ   की कापी  फड़ी हिस्सेदायी ि। घनम्न उत्ऩादकता बायत भें  कभ  कद्धर्ष   उत्ऩादन  का भख्म   कायण ि।


Q : 63.A
कनायी  घचहड़मा (एक  ऩिी) को खानों भें काफन   भोनोआक्साइड   गस  की उऩश्चस्थघत   का ऩता  रगान के   घरए उऩमोग हकमा जाता  ि। कनायी  घचहड़मा   काफन   भोनोआक्साइड   गस  की िर्ा   भें 0.15 प्रघतशत  उऩश्चस्थघत   ऩय बी  प्रघतहिमा कयती  ि। र्तभान  भें कऩघनमों   द्वाया  खानों भें  काफन   भोनोआक्साइड   गस  की उऩश्चस्थघत   का ऩता  रगान के   घरए जहटर   उऩकयणों  का उऩमोग   हकमा जाता  िै, रेहकन कछ खघनक   अबी बी ऩश्चिमों   ऩय िी  बयोसा कयते ि।



Q : 64.C

बायत भें कोमरे   के   बडाय भें  से  अघधकाॊश द्धफटघभनस   प्रकाय  के   ि। मि द्धफटघभनस   कोमरा   गोंडर्ाना   कार के   दौयान

िी फना था।  िाराॊहक   ततीमक कार के   दौयान घनघभत   घरग्नाइट प्रकाय का  कोमरा   बी बायत भें ऩामा जाता ि।

तीसया कथन, इसक  बडाय दाभोदय, गोदार्यी, भिानदी औय सोन  घाटी भें अर्श्चस्थत   िै   ,सिी   ि।








10                                                              www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q : 65.C

घभघश्रत   कद्धर्ष   भें पसरों  औय  ऩशऩारन  ऩय सभान ध्मान   हदमा जाता  ि। घनर्ाि   कद्धर्ष   भें  स्थाघनक ऱऩ से उत्ऩाहदत पसर का  अघधकाॊश उऩबोग  कय घरमा जाता िैं   जैसे  स्रेश  औय फन कद्धर्ष   मा स्थान्तरयत कद्धर्ष।

गिन कद्धर्ष   भें र्ाश्चणश्चज्मक   अनाज  की कद्धर्ष   भध्म अिाॊशों  के   अि  शष्क बघभ   के   आतरयक  बागों   भें  की जाती  ि। गि, मिाॉ   की  प्रभख पसर िै, िाराॊहक   भक्का, जौ, जई  औय याई जैसी  अन्म  पसरें बी  उत्ऩाहदत की जाती   ि। इस  प्रकाय की  कद्धर्ष   भें  खत  का  आकाय फित   फड़ा  िोता   िै, अत: मिाॉ   जुताई  से रेकय  कटाई तक सम्ऩण   खती

भशीनीकत िोती   ि।

जिाॉ   ऩय  कर्षक  कर्र   सश्चजजमों   की  कद्धर्ष   कयते  िैं, उसको  ट्रक    पाघभग  के   नाभ  से  जाना  जाता ि। साभान्मतमा फाजाय से  ट्रक   पाभ की  दयी एक  ट्रक   द्वाया  यात बय भें तम  कयन श्चजतनी  दय िोती   िैं, इसघरए इसको ट्रक   पाघभग किते ि।



Q : 66.C
शष्क  ऩणऩाती   र्न   दश के   द्धर्शार  ित्र   भें परे िए   िैं      जिाॉ   र्र्षा  70 से 100 सेभी तक िोती   ि। शष्क  भौसभ के   प्रायब   भें  ऩेड़  ऩयी तयि  से अऩन ऩत्त   घगया दते  िैं   औय शष्क भौसभ  के   दौयान   र्न द्धर्शार  चयागाि की तयि हदखाई दते  िैं, श्चजसभे  चायों ओय नग्न  ऩेड़ िोते   ि। तद, ऩरास, अभरतास, फेर, खैय, धार् आहद इन  र्नों   भें ऩाए जान र्ार कछ साभान्म ऩेड़ ि।



Q : 67.B

नदा दर्ी जीर्भडर   आयश्चित   प्रदश  उत्तयाखॊड   भें ि। अन्म दोनों  मग्भ सिी   ि।



Q : 68.C

दोनों कथन सिी   ि।



Q : 69.B

एक  सागयीम  फेघसन भें  आन  र्ार उष्णकहटफधीम  चिर्ात   के   नाभों  की सची  घनधारयत कयन  के   घरए एक सख्त प्रहिमा  िै   श्चजसको    उष्णकहटफधीम  चिर्ात ित्रीम   सघभघत  द्वाया   अऩनी  र्ाद्धर्षक   / हद्वर्ाद्धर्षक   फठक  भें  घनधारयत हकमा  जाता   ि। चिर्ातों    के    नाभकयण   के    घरए   ऩाॊच   उष्णकहटफधीम   चिर्ात    ित्रीम    घनकाम   िैं, श्चजनभ ईएससीएऩी/डजल्मएभओ   टाइपन  कभेटी, उष्णकहटफधीम  चिर्ातों   ऩय  डजल्मएभओ/ईएससीएऩी   ऩनर, आयए-I दश्चिण-ऩश्चिभ   हिद भिासागय   के   घरए  उष्णकहटफधीम चिर्ात कभेटी, आयए- IV  िरयकन   कभेटी, आयए-V  दश्चिण प्रशाॊत   औय  दश्चिण-ऩर्ी   हिद भिासागय   के   घरए उष्णकहटफधीम   चिर्ात  कभेटी।

प्रत्मेक  ित्रीम   सघभघत अऩन   र्ाद्धर्षक   अघधर्ेशन  भें  छि र्र्षों  के   घरए तपान  के   नाभों  की एक  ऩर् नाघभत   सची घनधारयत कयती  ि। तपान के   नाभों  की ऩर् घनहदि   सची इसक  सदस्मों द्वाया  प्रस्ताद्धर्त  की जाती  िैं   श्चजनभ   उत्तयी
/ भध्म  अभेरयका  औय कयद्धफमाई   ित्र   से याष्ट्रीम   भौसभ द्धर्ज्ञान   औय  जर द्धर्ज्ञान   सेर्ाएॊ  शाघभर ि। अन्म िेत्रों   भें
नाभकयण  प्रहिमा  रगबग कयद्धफमन    ित्र    के    जैसे  िी ि। साभान्मतमा, उष्णकहटफधीम    चिर्ातों    का  नाभकयण

ित्रीम   स्तय ऩय घनमभों  के   अनसाय यखा जाता  ि।

11                                                              www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
मि  फात ध्मान   दन  मोग्म िै   हक   उष्णकहटफधीम   चिर्ातों   / िरयकन   का नाभ  हकसी द्धर्शेर्ष  व्मद्धक्त के   आधाय ऩय
मा र्णभारा   अनिभ   भें हकसी   बी र्यीमता के   आधाय ऩय  निीॊ   हकमा जाता  ि। चमघनत  उष्णकहटफधीम चिर्ात   /

िरयकन   के   उसक नाभ  ऩय यख जाते  िैं   श्चजससे  उस ित्र   के   रोग ऩरयघचत  िों।

जाहिय  िै, एक  उष्णकहटफधीम चिर्ात / िरयकन   के   नाभकयण  का भख्म   उद्दश्म   भरत: रोगों   के   घरए ऱऩ  से िै श्चजससे   र्ो  उसको आसानी से सभझ  सक औय माद  यख सक; परत: उष्णकहटफधीम चिर्ात / िरयकन   रोगों   को आऩदा जोश्चखभ   के   फाय   भें जागऱकता, तमारयमों, प्रफधन   औय आऩदा भें  कभी  के   घरए मोगदान  कय सक।



Q : 70.D

घसश्चक्कभ   कर्र   ऩश्चिभ   फगार   की  सीभा  को  छता  िैं   औय  भेघारम कर्र   असभ  की  सीभा  को  छता  ि। जफहक

अन्म बायतीम  याज्म दो मा  दो से  अघधक बायतीम  याज्मों के   साथ सीभा साझा  कयते ि।



Q : 71.C

थोरयमभ को ऩयभाणु ईंधन  के   ऱऩ  भें उऩमोग निीॊ   हकमा जाता  िै   क्मोंहक   बायत के   ऩास थोरयमभ से ऩयभाणु ऊजा उत्ऩन्न  कयन के   घरए प्रौद्योघगकी  निीॊ   ि।

थोरयमभ  एक  यहडमोधभी तत्र् ि।



Q : 72.B

दश भें उऩरजध   जर भें  से  अघधकाॊश कद्धर्ष   उऩमोग के   घरए  प्रमोग हकमा जाता  ि। कथन दो सिी   ि।


Q : 73.A
ज्र्ायनदभख, उच्च   ज्र्ाय  के   ित्र   िैं, उच्च   ज्र्ाय  के   ित्रों   भें तरछट  सबर् निीॊ   िो ऩाता ि। इस  प्रकाय डल्टा के घनभाण भें  अर्योध  िोता   ि। ज्र्ायनदभख  उऩजाऊ  बघभ   ित्र   बी  निीॊ   िै, क्मोंहक   र्ो  नदी द्वाया  राम  गए सभि तरछट से यहित िोते   ि।

नभदा  औय ताऩी  रयफ्ट   र्री   से िोकय   फिती िै   तथा  इनका  चट्टान  स्तय बी  कठोय ि। र्े तरछट से  यहित िोते
िै   परत: घनिऩ निीॊ   कय   ऩाते।



Q : 74.A

नदी प्रर्द्धत्त   हकसी नदी भें भौसभी जर प्रर्ाि   क आमतन  की भाऩ िोता   ि



Q : 75.C

दोनों कथन सिी   ि।





12                                                              www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q : 76. C
●   ऩर्ी तटीम भदान चिर्ातों   से  अघधक प्रबाद्धर्त िै   | फगार   की खाड़ी भें  चिर्ात अयफ  सागय   की तरना   भें अघधक उत्ऩन्न  िोते   िैं   | मि  अनऩात रगबग 4:1 िै   |
●   ऩश्चिभी  तटीम भदान  जरभग्न  तटीम भदानों के   उदिायण   िैं   |मि   द्धर्श्वास   हकमा जाता  िै   हक    ऩौयाश्चणक
शिय   द्वायका   जो हकसी सभम  ऩश्चिभी  तट  ऩय भख्म   बघभ   ऩय श्चस्थत था ,अफ   ऩानी  भें  डफा िआ   िै|
●   जरभग्न  [ऐसा तट जिाॉ   ऩय अर्सादों का घनिऩण  हकमा जाता  िै   ऩयन्त  तट  यखा के   स्थर की  ओय फढ उसे  प्रघतगाभी (Retrograding  )तट   किते िै   ] िोन   के   कायण  ऩश्चिभी तटीम  भदान  अफ एक सकीण ऩट्टी भात्र    िै   औय  ऩत्तनों  एर् फदयगािों   के   घरए  प्राकघतक   ऩरयश्चस्थघतमाॊ प्रदान  कयता  िै   | मिाॉ   ऩय  प्राकघतक फदयगािों   भें काॊडरा, भजगाॉर्, जे.एर.एन.नार्िा   शेर्ा ,भभगाओ,भगरौय   ,कोचीन   शाघभर िैं   |
●   उत्तय  भें गजयात के   तट से दश्चिण   भें कयर के   तट तक परे ऩश्चिभी  तटीम  भदान  को घनम्नघरश्चखत   बागों भें  द्धर्बाश्चजत  हकमा जाता  िै- गजयात  का कच्छ औय कहठमार्ाड़  का तट  , भिायाष्ट्र  का  कोंकण  औय गोर्ा तट,कनाटक   औय कयर  के   िभश: भाराफाय   तट |
●   ऩश्चिभी  तटीम  भदान  भध्म भें सकीण िै   ऩयन्त  उत्तय   औय  दश्चिण   भें  चौड़ िो जाते िैं   | इस  तटीम  भदान
भें फिन  र्ारी   नहदमाॉ   डल्टा  निीॊ   फनती  िैं| भाराफाय   तट  की द्धर्शेर्ष  स्थराकघत   कामर   िै   श्चजसे   भछरी ऩकड़न  औय अत:स्थरी   नौकामन के   घरए  प्रमोग हकमा जाता  िै   | मे ऩमटकों के   घरए द्धर्शेर्ष   आकर्षण   का कर्द्    िै    | कयर   भें  प्रत्मेक र्र्ष  प्रघसि ‘नेिऱ    ट्रापी  र्राभकारी’(नौका    दौड़  ) का    आमोजन    ‘ऩन्नाभदा कामर’   भें हकमा जाता  िै   |
●   ऩश्चिभी  तटीम भदान  की तरना   भें ऩर्ी  तटीम भदान चौड़ा िै   औय उबय तट  का उदिायण  िै   |
●   ऩर्   की ओय फिन  र्ारी   औय  फगार   की  खाड़ी भें  घगयन र्ारी   नहदमाॉ   मिाॉ   रम्फे-चौड़  डल्टा फनती  िैं   |
इसभ भिानदी,गोदार्यी,कष्णा,कार्ेयी   का डल्टा शाघभर  िै   |
●   उबया तट  िोन   के   कायण  मिाॉ   ऩत्तन औय  ऩोताश्रम  कभ   िैं| मिाॉ   ऩय  भिाद्वीऩीम   शेल्प  की  चौड़ाई  500
हकरोभीटय िै   श्चजसक  कायण मिाॉ   ऩत्तनों औय ऩोताश्रमों  का  द्धर्कास भश्चश्कर   िै   |



Q : 77.C

घसघचत   बघभ   (कद्धर्ष   मोग्म  बघभ) का  एक  फड़ा बाग  िायीमता   औय  रर्णता   (रगबग   8 घभघरमन   िक्टमय) तथा
जर जभार् (रगबग   7 घभघरमन   िक्टमय) से  प्रबाद्धर्त ि।



Q : 78. A
●   अक्टफय   भाि के   उत्तयाि   भें  ताऩभान  तेजी  से  घगयन रगता िै   | ताऩभान भें मि  घगयार्ट  उत्तयी   बायत भें द्धर्शेर्ष  तौय ऩय दखी जा सकती  िै   |
●   भानसन  की घनर्तन  ऋत भें भौसभ उत्तयी   बायत भें  सखा िोता   िै   जफहक   प्रामद्वीऩ के   ऩर्ी बागों   भें र्र्षा
िोती   िै   |



Q : 79.C

घभनीकॉम द्वीऩ  सभि   9 हडग्री  चैनर द्वाया  कन्नानोय   द्वीऩ   से अरग िोता   ि।





13                                                              www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q : 80.D
भोट  तौय ऩय बायत का अिाॊशीम  औय  दशाॊतयीम   द्धर्स्ताय    रगबग 30 हडग्री   ि। उत्तय   से  दश्चिण    तक    इसका र्ास्तद्धर्क   द्धर्स्ताय रगबग 3214 हकभी  िै   जफहक  ऩर् से ऩश्चिभ   मि 2,933 हकभी भें  परा िैं; मि   अतय   इस त्म  ऩय आधारयत िै   हक   दो दशान्तयों के   फीच दयी  ध्रुर्ों   की ओय जान  ऩय कभ  िो जाती िै   र् दो अिाॊशों   के   फीच

की  दयी प्रत्मेक स्थान ऩय एक सभान  यिती  ि।

मि अतय इस  त्म  ऩय आधारयत िै   हक   िै   ऩ्र्ी  ऩय एक हडग्री  अिाॊश  की भध्माह्न   रफाई   111.2 हकभी मा  69

भीर की  दयी के   फयाफय  िोती   ि।



Q : 81.C

सबी तीनों   कथन सिी   ि।



Q : 82.C

दोनों कथन सिी   ि।



Q : 83.C

भानसन  का घनर्तन  प्रामद्वीऩ  के   दश्चिणी   आध बाग  से तेजी से तथा उत्तयी   आध बाग  से धीय-धीय िोता   ि।



Q : 84.C

स्थान्तरयत कद्धर्ष   घनर्नीकयण के   भाध्मभ से भदा अऩयदन को फढ़ाती ि।

चैक  डभ  का  घनभाण  जर गघत को  कभ  कयक इसकी  अऩयदन  िभता   को  कभ  कयता  ि। 15-25 प्रघतशत  ढार र्ारी   बघभ   को कद्धर्ष   के   घरए  प्रमोग निीॊ   हकमा जाना  चाहिए।


Q : 85.C

सबी तीनों   मग्भ सभेघरत  ि।

कनाटक  भें घशभोगा रौि अमस्क का एक  भित्र्ऩण स्रोत  ि।

झायखॊड भें झरयमा अऩन  उच्च   गणर्त्ता   र्ार भेटरश्चजकर   कोर के   घरए  प्रघसि ि। भगनीज    ओहडशा  के   कारािाॊडी   श्चजरे  के   खोंड़ोराइट   घनिऩों से प्राप्त हकमा जाता  िै   ।

Q : 86.B

रेटयाइट  भदा  उच्च   ताऩभान   औय उच्च   र्र्षा  र्ार ित्रों   भें  द्धर्कघसत िोती   िैं   तथा  र्र्षा से  चूने  औय घसघरका घनिाघरत   िो जाते िैं, तथा रोि के   आक्साइड  औय एल्मभीघनमभ  मौघगक प्रचुय   भात्रा भें  भदा  भें  शेर्ष   यि जाती ि।

अन्म दोनों कथन  सत्म ि।



14                                                              www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q : 87.D

सबी कथन सत्म िैं   ।



Q : 88.B
सागयीम  रर्णता   साभान्मता  गियाई   फढ़न  के   साथ  फढ़ती  िैं, एक  द्धर्शेर्ष   ित्र   जिाॉ   तेजी  से  रर्णता   फढ़ती  िै
‘िरोक्राइन’   किराता   िैं, शेर्ष   अन्म  कायकों के   श्चस्थय यिन  ऩय सभर्द्ी   जर की  फढ़ती  रर्णता   इसक घनत्र्  भें र्द्धि   का कायण फनती  ि।
अत: कथन  1 गरत ि।

फगार   की खाड़ी भें  नदी  के   जर की आभद से  रर्णता   कभ  ऩामी  जाती  िैं   जफहक  उच्च   र्ाष्ऩीकयण  के   कायण तथा नदी के   ताज  ऩानी  की कभ आभद के   कायण  अयफ सागय   भें फगार   की खाड़ी से  अघधक रर्णता   ऩामी जाती
ि। अत: कथन  2 सत्म ि।
रर्णीम   जर सागयीम  औय ताज  जर का  घभश्रण   ि। मि ताज  ऩानी  से  अघधक रर्णीम, रेहकन सभर्द्ी   जर  से

कभ  रर्णीम   ि। मि ताजा  ऩानी  के   साथ  सभर्द्ी   जर के   घभश्रण   से  जैसे  ज्र्ायनदभख भें  मा  रर्णीम   जीर्ाश्भ जरबतों भें िो सकता ि। भग्रोर् भित्र्ऩण  रर्णीम   जर के   प्रभख  प्राकघतक र्ास ि।


Q : 89.B

जूट  अबी बी  अघधकतय ऩर्ी  याज्मों जैसे ऩश्चिभ   फगार   औय घनचरे  असभ भें  उत्ऩाहदत हकमा जाता  ि। दसया   कथन सिी   ि।

Q : 90.A

ऩश्चिभी द्धर्िोब  की  आर्द्ता   भें र्द्धि   उत्तय   भें कश्चस्ऩमन   सागय   औय  दश्चिण   भें  पायस  की खाड़ी से  िोता   ि। ऩश्चिभी द्धर्िोब को उत्तय  बायत भें यफी   पसरों के   घरए  अत्मघधक राबदामक भाना जाता ि।


Q : 91.C

मयघनमभ   के   घनिऩ  धायर्ाड़ चट्टानों भें ऩाए जाते ि। द्धर्श्व   भें  सफसे  अघधक भोनोजाइट घनिऩ  कयर के   ऩरक्कड़ औय कोल्रभ  श्चजरे  भें, आध्र  प्रदश   के   ऩरक्कड़   र् कोल्रभ श्चजरे  औय उड़ीसा  के   भिानदी नदी डल्टा  भें ऩाए जाते

ि।



Q : 92.C

कथन 1 औय  3 उल्ट   ि।



Q : 93.A

उऩयोक्त   दी गई  शत चाम उगान  के   घरए  आदश ि। यफय   की खती  के   घरए 200 से 300 सेभी  तक  बायी र्र्षा की आर्श्मकता िोती   ि। जूट ऩिाड़ी   ढरानों   भें निीॊ   उत्ऩाहदत हकमा जाता  ि।


15                                                              www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q : 94.C

भक्का का उऩमोग  खाद्य   ऩदाथ के   साथ-साथ   चाय के   घरए   बी  हकमा जाता  िैं, मि अि-शष्क   जरर्ाम   ऩरयश्चस्थघतमों औय घनम्नस्तयीम भदा  भें उगामा  जाता  ि। भक्का बायत  के   कर   कद्धर्षत   ित्र   के   3.6 प्रघतशत  बाग  ऩय फोमा जाता
ि। भक्का  की  खती   हकसी  द्धर्घशि ित्र   भें कहर्द्त   निीॊ   ि। मि ऩर्ी औय  उत्तय-ऩर्ी   ित्रों   को छोड़कय सम्ऩण  बायत

भें फोमा जाता ि।



Q : 95.D

ऩर्ी याज्म  अच्छी  औय बायी  र्र्षा  के   ित्र   ि। घसचाई  सद्धर्धाओ   के   द्धर्कास को  इसन फाघधत  हकमा  ि। मिाॉ   खतों

का  आकाय छोटा  िै   श्चजससे   कद्धर्ष   के   उन्नत   साधनों  का  प्रमोग निीॊ   िो  सका ि। साियता के   घनम्न  स्तय  औय अधद्धर्श्वास   ने कद्धर्ष   औय  द्धर्कास   के   नए ऱऩों  की शऱआत को फाघधत हकमा  ि।


Q : 96.C

सबी द्धर्कल्ऩ  सिी   ि।



Q : 97.D

फाजया अध-शष्क  ित्रों   जैसे याजस्थान, िरयमाणा, गजयात भें उगाई जान र्ारी   प्रभख र्र्षा  आधारयत  अनाजों भें से एक ि। गजयात, आध्र  प्रदश, तघभरनाड भगपरी   के   प्रभख उत्ऩादक  प्रदश ि।
भक्का का उऩमोग  खाद्य   ऩदाथ के   साथ-साथ   चाय के   घरए बी हकमा जाता िैं, मि अध-शष्क जरर्ाम   ऩरयश्चस्थघतमों औय घनम्नस्तयीम भदा भें उगामा  जाता  ि। भध्म प्रदश, याजस्थान, कनाटक, आॊध्र प्रदश  प्रभख   उत्ऩादक  प्रदश ि।

ज्र्ाय भध्म र् दश्चिण   बायत के   अि  शष्क ित्रों   भें भख्म   खाद्य   पसर ि।



Q : 98.A

Q : 99. B

फागर्ानी मा परोत्ऩादन कद्धर्ष (Orchard farming) इस तयि की जरर्ाम का प्रभख व्मर्साम िै |
ऩशऩाल्म कद्धर्ष (Patoral farming) मिाॉ ऩय सबर् निीॊ िै क्मोंहक शीत ऋत भें र्नस्ऩघतमाॉ औय घासें फित अघधक भात्रा भें र्द्धि निीॊ कय ऩाती िैं |

Q : 100.C

रटाना   औय  जरकम्बी  बायत भें सजार्टी  उद्यान   ऩौधों के   ऱऩ  भें राम  गए थ। रेहकन दोनों अफ एक  खतया  फन गए ि। रटाना   को 'फगार   के   आतक' के   ऱऩ भें बी जाना जाता ि।



Copyright © by Vision IAS
All  rights  are  reserved.  No  part  of  this  document  may  be  reproduced,  stored  in  a  retrieval  system  or transmitted in  any  form or  by  any means,  electronic,  mechanical,  photocopying,  recording or otherwise,
without prior permission of Vision IAS

16                                                              www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
