GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1566

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Q.1  :d
Q.4  :b

Antioxidants are a group of substances that prevent the damage caused by  the oxidation of fatty acids and proteins by  oxygen free radicals.
Free radicals are molecules produced when your body breaks down food, or by environmental exposures like  tobacco smoke and radiation. Free radicals can damage
cells, and may play a role in heart disease, cancer and other diseases.
Antioxidants play important functions in the body. Antioxidants restrict the damage that reactive oxygen free radicals can cause to the cell  and cellular components.
They are of primary biological value in giving protection from certain diseases. Some of
the diseases that have their origin in deleterious free radical reactions are atherosclerosis, cancer, inflammatory joint diseases, asthma, diabetes etc.

Option D is correct


Q.2  :d

Phytochemicals is a general name for  wide variety of compounds produced by  the in plants.
Phytochemicals are non-nutritional and potentially bio  active compounds which include antioxidants and are beneficial to us in many ways. Hence, option 2 is incorrect. They may protect DNA and other cell  parts from oxidation, detoxify environmental pollutants, deactivate carcinogens, boost the immune system, or act in as yet unknown ways to prevent or delay onset of cancer,




















Q.5  :a
Since the  amount  of   dissolved  oxygen  in water is fairly low  compared to the amount of oxygen in  the air, the rate of  breathing  in aquatic organisms is  much faster than that seen in  terrestrial  organisms.  Although the assertion   is    correct,   the   explanation   is incorrect. Hence, this option is  not the right choice.
Carbon monoxide has  210  times  greater affinity for  haemoglobin than oxygen. A small environmental concentration will  thus cause toxic levels  of  carboxyhaemoglobin. Hence, this option is incorrect.
The   affinity of  haemoglobin depends on   pH
value of pigment.
So  correct options is B





Restriction   enzymes    are    produced    by bacteria  as  a  defense  mechanism against phages.   The     enzymes  act   like     scissors, cutting up the DNA of the phage and thereby inactivating  it.   Importantly,  restriction enzymes do   not cut randomly; rather, they cut at specific DNA target sequences, which is  one of  the key features that make them suitable for  DNA manipulation
In       biochemistry,   ligase      (from    the Latin  verb  ligāre  —  "to   bind"  or   "to   glue together")       is          an       enzyme      that can   catalyse   the   joining  of    two   large molecules by  forming a new chemical bond.
A polymerase is  an enzyme that synthesizes long chains or polymers of nucleic acids. Diving enzyme is not used in DNA cutting.
heart disease, cataracts, and other diseases related to the foods we  eat or don’t eat. Option 3 is correct.
Hence, option d is the correct option.
Hence, the correct option is A


Q.6  :b


Q.3  :c




Vitamin K Helps in the clotting of blood and is a part of metabolic processes.
Vitamin E is Source of antioxidant, helps protect the cells against free radicals, is excellent for  skin and hair.
Vitamin  C  Acts as  an  antioxidant, immune booster, helps in  the formation of  collagen, helps in  the absorption of  iron, helps  fight infection.
Options 1 and 2 functions are interchanged. Hence, only 3 is correct.
Asexual reproduction preserves the genetic information; therefore there is hardly any possibility of formation of unique genetic makeup, which is possible only if there variations are possible.On the other hand, sexual reproduction allows variation and therefore unique genetic makeup.
Genetic engineering involves alteration the DNA of an organism with an aim to alter one or more traits in that organism.

Hence, Option B is correct. Q.7  :b
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1566

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in






Q.8  :d














Q.9  :c
All of these are the examples of biofertilizer except agro bacterium, which is a pathogen.





Bio-control is  the method of  checks and balances, wherein the undesirable living organisms are  kept  under  check, ensuring that that desirable ones are not killed.
All   the  three  organisms can  be  used  as agents of  bio-control. For   example,  Bacillus thuringiensis is  a bacterium; Trichoderma is fungus; and Nucleopolyhedrovirus is virus- all are used as bio-pesticides.





Macronutrients are those nutrients which are needed in  large proportions. Among the 16 nutrients needed by  plants, 13 are provided by   the  soil. Out   of  those 13, 6 are  macro- nutrients, which include N, P, K, Ca,  S, Mg. Macro  nutrients   are   further   divided  into primary (nitrogen (N),  phosphorus (P),   and potassium (K))  and secondary(calcium  (Ca), magnesium (Mg),  and sulfur (S)).





























Q.12 :d
Cereals include a  wide variety of  food  like wheat etc. If we  shift our diet from grain to meat then the demand of  cereals would increase, rather than decrease. It is  because it  takes about 3-10 Kg  of  grains to produce just 1 Kg  of  meat by   animal  farming.  The statement is  true for   reducing the demand but has no   direct  correlation  with declining productivity gains.  So,   statement  1  is   not relevant.
It is a well  known that genetic engineering can be used for  altering crop genes which can be helpful in overcoming the declining productivity of cereals/grains. Statement 2 is correct
There is  an emerging consensus among the scholars that  ‘single cell   protein’ (SCP)   can be used for  overcoming malnutrition due to lack  of   food  grains.  SCP   are  produce  by growing some  types  of  microbes on   waste water. These are helpful from two ways- meeting protein demand and reducing environmental impact.
Hence the answer is option  B
Micronutrients are those elements essential for   plant growth which are  needed  in  only very   small   (micro)   quantities    .   These elements  are  sometimes  called minor elements or  trace elements, but use of  the term micronutrient is  encouraged by  the American Society of  Agronomy and the  Soil Science   Society   of    America.   The micronutrients are  boron (B),   copper  (Cu), iron (Fe), chloride (Cl),  manganese (Mn), molybdenum (Mo)  and zinc (Zn).
1.  Apiculture is bee-keeping and has been an age-old cottage industry.
2.  Aviculture is rearing of birds. Hence, the statement is incorrect.
3.  Bee-keeping is relatively easy, but does require some specialized knowledge. Average time requirement is few  hours.The statement 2 is not entirely true.
4. Bee-keeping can be practiced in any area where there are sufficient bee pastures of some wild  shrubs, fruit orchards and cultivated crops.

Q.10 :a



















Q.11 :b
Tissue culture is a technique by  which whole plants could be regenerated from explants, called as totipotency.
This  technique is used in the commercial production of some plants like  apple, banana etc.
This  technique can also be used for  the recovery of healthier plant from the diseased one because the meristem of a diseased plant remains intact and can be used for generating the healthier one.
This  technique can also be used for combining the features of two plants by fusing there protoplast.

Q.13 :a




Inbreeding increases homozygosity and helps in evolving pure line  in any animal. Though, it helps in accumulation of superior genes, but continued inbreeding, especially close inbreeding usually reduces fertility and even productivity, called in breeding depression.
Out-crossing is the practice of mating of animals within the same breed, but having no common ancestors on  either side of their pedigree up to 4-6  generations. It is the best breeding technique and a single outcross often helps to overcome inbreeding depression.
Cross-breeding method involves mating
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1566

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

between males and females of different breeds.


Q.14 :d




Tissue is defined as a cluster of cells, which perform same function and are arranged and designed so as to give the highest possible efficiency of function. A tissue is a cellular organizational level intermediate between cells and a complete organ.
Tissue are broadly grouped in to four basic types: connective, muscle, nervous, and epithelial.
All the options in the questions are examples of tissues.
Q.17 :c



Animal                Respiratory Organs
1. Fish                        Gills
2. Mosquito          Skin
3. Earth worm      Skin
4. Dog                        Lungs
5. Frog                  Skin  and Lungs
Hence, 3 and 5 were incorrectly matched.



Q.18 :c

Q.15 :d


Silicosis is  a non-curable respiratory disease caused by   inhaling silica dust.  There is  no specific   treatment    for     silicosis.   Severe silicosis may need to have a lung transplant. Silica dust  forms during mining, quarrying, tunneling, and  working with certain  metal ores.  Silicosis is   prevalent  among  workers engaged   in    occupations  such   as   stone crushers,   quartz   mining  and   processing, foundries, sand blasting, ceramic industries, gem cutting and polishing, slate and pencil industries,     glass     manufacturing,    and construction workers.
Trachea is  the windpipe which connects to the    lungs.   The      silica   dust    does    not accumulate in  trachea and block it.  Silicosis is   the  condition in   which the  silica dust accumulates in alveolar sacs inside the lungs where the dust cannot be removed by  mucus or  coughing. This  reduces the lungs ability to extract oxygen from the air.
























Q.19 :b
Congenital disease: It is a condition existing at birth and often before birth, or that develops during the first month of life (neonatal disease), regardless of causation. Of these diseases, those characterized by structural deformities are termed "congenital anomalies" and involve defects in or damage to a developing fetus. For  example: Hare-lip, clubfoot, mongolism etc.
Hormonal disease: Undersecretion or over secretion of harmones led to disorder
referred to as glandular or hormonal disease. For  example: Goitre, diabetes ,dwarfism etc. Diseases caused by  the entry and development of living organisms such as virus, bacteria, protozoans, worms or fungi into the body tissue , is known as infectious diseases. E.g.  AIDS, Cholera,Malaria,ring worm, Filaria etc,
Correct match:

Q.16 :a


Blue baby syndrome (or  simply, blue baby also can be called methemoglobinemia) occurs when newborn babies have cyanotic heart defects.
In recent years, owing to excess use of chemical fertilisers, the nitrate level has gone up in several parts of India. The  high nitrate level in water can cause serious health problems. Particularly among infants, it can cause blue-baby syndrome.
The  group at greatest risk  is bottle fed infants. Breastfeeding protects babies from methaemoglobinaemia.
1. Malaria : Anopholes mosquito

2. Filaria : Culex mosquito

3.Yellow fever : Aedes mosquito

4. Bubonic Plague : Rat flea

5. Encephalitis : Culex species


Q.20 :d

Vaccine: It consists of dead or weakened bacteria or virus that stimulate the production and antibodies by  the blood. Serum: It consists of antibodies that have
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1566

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in







Q.21 :a
been produced in the body of another person or animal who has gained immunity and then injected into the patient.
Q.26 :a


White blood cells protect the body from infections
Blood cells are manufactured in the bone marrow from cells called stem cells









Q.22 :a
Bacteria are among the smallest living organism.
Bacterial cell  is prokaryotic. Nucleolus is absent.
Cell  wall  is composed of mainly chitin.





The  cell  wall  is a tough, flexible but sometimes  fairly rigid layer.

The  primary cell  wall  of most plant cells is semi-permeable and permits the passage of small molecules and small proteins. Key nutrients, especially water and carbon dioxide, are distributed throughout the plant from cell  wall  to cell  wall. The  pH is an important factor governing the transport of molecules through cell  walls.

Q.27 :b

Q.28 :b












Q.29 :c






All cells are bound by  a cell  membrane called plasma membrane or cell  membrane. It encloses a liquid substance known as protoplasm
Not  all but in majority of the cells ,nucleus lies in the centre. However,it may also be in periphery of the cell  as in the case of plant cells





Cells continuously increases in their number and size . This  result in growth of organism. At the same time older cells die.


Q.23 :b


















Q.24 :b















Q.25 :d


There are two types of plastids – chromoplasts (coloured plastids) and leucoplasts (white or colourless plastids). Plastids containing the pigment chlorophyll are known as chloroplasts. Chloroplasts are important for  photosynthesis in plants. Chloroplasts also contain various yellow or orange pigments in addition to chlorophyll. Leucoplasts are primarily organelles in which materials such as starch, oils  and protein granules are stored.
Like the mitochondria, plastids also have their own DNA and ribosomes.





Lymphocytes are manufactured in the bone marrow and multiply in the Thymus and Spleen.

Mitochondrian and chloroplast are the cell organelles containing DNA other than nucleus. Hence they are called ‘Semi autonomous’ organelles where they can synthesize some of its essential proteins with partial dependence on  ‘Nucleus’.

Q.30 :b









Q.31 :d




Microorganisms have high degree of adaptability and can survive in almost all
kind of environments,like hot springs,ice cold waters,saline water, desert soil  or even in marshy land.





Danish scientist Hans Christian Gram devised a method to differentiate two types of bacteria based on  the structural differences
in their cell  walls. In his  test, bacteria that retain the crystal violet dye(Stain) do  so because of a thick layer of peptidoglycan and are called Gram-positive bacteria. In
contrast, Gram-negative bacteria do  not retain the violet dye and are colored red or pink. Compared with Gram-positive bacteria, Gram-negative bacteria are more resistant against antibodies because of their impenetrable cell  wall. These bacteria have a wide variety of applications ranging from medical treatment to industrial use and
Swiss cheese production.
Bacillus, Staphyloccus and Streptococcus retain stain and are Gram P positive whereas E.Coli,  Salmonella and Spirillum are Gram negative
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1566

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in


Q.32 :d

Q.33 :d
1. Autotrophic Nutrition(autos: self; trophos: food)

2. Heterotrophic Nutrition(heteros: different;
trophos: food)















Q.34 :c










Q.35 :d



Q.36 :b








Q.37 :c
Viruses are usually smaller than bacteria Their presence can be determined only by observing the effect they have on  their hosts, or by  viewing them under an electronic microscope.
They replicate only inside living cells.
It is impossible to culture outside the specific hosts cells.
Unlike other Microorganisms, viruses do  not have a cellular structure.





The  life  of every animal starts off from a single cell  known as the zygote.
The  zygote divides prolifically to give rise to the embryo.
After development of embryo cells exit from cell  cycle.









The  first menstrual bleeding is called Menarche. Stoppage of menstruation at are usually between 45 years and 55 years is termed menopause.
- Green plants, algae and certain bacteria manufacture their own food through photosynthesis.


- The  organisms, which depend on  the other organism for  their food, are called heterotrophs.

- Amoeba, frogs and human beings are heterotrophic in nature.

- Organism that derive food from dead decaying organisms are called saprotrophs eq. fungus.


Q.41 :d

Q.42 :a

Bile does not have any digestive enzymes but it creates an alkaline medium which is essential for  the action of pancreatic enzymes.

The  pancreatic juice contains three enzymes.

• Trypsin—converts peptones and proteoses to smaller peptides.

• Amylase—converts starch into maltose.

• Lipase—converts fats into fatty acids and glycerol.


Q.43 :d

Q.44 :c







Q.38 :c
All new cells arise by  division of pre-existing cells. These statements are crux of cell theory.
Q.45 :a


Arteries carry blood from heart to various parts of body.
Veins bring blood from various parts of body to the hearts.
Capillaries are thin vessels between the
Cell  wall  is found in plant cell. Only  centrosome is a part of animal cell  only which participates in cell division and help in spindle formation during cell division.
artery and veins. The  capillaries allow the exchange of materials between blood and tissues.

Q.46 :b

Q.39 :d Q.40 :d Nutrition:





Q.47 :a
Blood Platelets (Thrombocytes) participate  in
Blood Clotting.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1566

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in




Q.48 :d Q.49 :d Q.50 :d Q.51 :d Q.52 :d Q.53 :d
Leukemia is also called blood cancer.
(P = plasma; PRP = platelet rich plasma; WBC = leukocytes; RBC = red blood cells) by  gravity along the wall  of the chamber. The  component to be removed can be selected by  moving the level of the aspiration device at the right. In this example, plasma is being removed.

OPV was discovered by  Albert Sabin.


Q.54 :c

















Q.55 :d Q.56 :b Q.57 :c
Ribosomes from bacteria, archaea and eukaryotes (the three domains of life  on Earth) differ in their size, sequence, structure, and the ratio of protein to RNA. The  differences in structure allow some antibiotics to kill bacteria by  inhibiting their ribosomes, while leaving human ribosomes unaffected.
The  unit of measurement is the Svedberg unit(S). Basically 70S and 80S ribosomes have different sedimentation coefficients meaning it takes a different amount of time to form a pellet when centrifuged.





Q.58 :a








Q.59 :a








It contracts the blood vessels present in the human skin. The  pupil of human eye is expanded and the level of sugar in blood is increased.





There are three small skeletons- milieus, incus and stapes in human middle ear, of which the stapes is the smallest skeleton found in human body.
Cone cells are photoreceptor cells in the retina of the eye that are responsible for

What is Apheresis?

The  process of apheresis involves removal of whole blood from a patient or donor. Within an instrument that is essentially designed as a centrifuge, the components of whole blood are separated. One of the separated portions is then withdrawn and the remaining components are retransfused into the patient or donor.

The  components which are separated and withdrawn include:

Plasma (plasmapheresis) Platelets (plateletpheresis) Leukocytes (leukapheresis)

In the diagram below, the process is illustrated. Whole blood is introduced into a chamber that is spinning, and the blood separates into components






Q.60 :c
color vision, they function best in relatively bright light, as opposed to roc  cells that works better in dim light.





The Appendix: This  small pouch attached to your large intestine, at the junction of the small intestine, no  longer aids in digestion, and none of the 1 in 20 people who have one removed seems to miss it. In plant-eating vertebrates, it remains part of the digestive system. And  a study in 2009 found that the human appendix mightbe useful, serving as an important storehouse for  beneficial bacteria, which can’t wait for  a chance a
case of diarrhea so they can rush to the gut and save you.
Wisdom Teeth: Little more than a pain for many people, wisdom teeth probably once
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1566

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in












Q.61 :d

Q.62 :b






Q.63 :d







Q.64 :a Q.65 :d Q.66 :a
served a function, scientists figure. But  the human jaw  has become smaller over time and the wisdom teeth just have nowhere to grow. It’s  also possible that dental hygiene is partly to blame. Before tooth brushing, a young adult would have lost many or most of his  teeth, and the incoming wisdom teeth would have been timely.







Mitochondria do  not remain fixed at a particular position in the cell.





- Plasma Protein Fibrinogen is essential for clotting of blood.
- Plasma Protein globulins aid in the defence mechanism of the body.
in the neck. Right-side and left-side heart failure also may cause shortness of breath and fatigue (tiredness).

The  leading causes of heart failure are diseases that damage the heart. Examples include coronary heart disease (CHD),  high blood pressure, and diabetes.

Outlook

Heart failure is a very common condition. About 5.8 million people in the United States have heart failure.

Both children and adults can have the condition, although the symptoms and treatments differ. This article focuses on  heart failure in adults.

Currently, heart failure has no  cure. However, treatments—such as medicines and lifestyle changes—can help people who have the condition live longer and more active lives. Researchers continue to study new ways to treat heart failure and its complications.

Q.67 :d Q.68 :b Q.69 :c

What Is  Heart Failure?

Heart failure is a condition in which the heart can't pump enough blood to meet the body's needs. In some cases, the heart can't fill with enough blood. In other cases, the heart can't pump blood to the rest
of the body with enough force. Some people have both problems.

The  term "heart failure" doesn't mean that your heart has stopped or is about to stop working. However, heart failure is a serious condition that requires medical care.

Overview

Heart failure develops over time as the heart's pumping action grows weaker. The  condition can affect the right side of the heart only, or it can affect both sides of the heart. Most cases involve both
sides of the heart.

Right-side heart failure occurs if the heart can't pump enough blood to the lungs to pick up oxygen. Left-side heart failure occurs if the heart can't pump enough oxygen-rich blood to the rest of the body.

Right-side heart failure may cause fluid  to build up in the feet, ankles, legs, liver, abdomen, and the veins






Q.70 :c
Mono Sodium Glutamate (MSG),  commonly known as Ajinomoto is used as food additives.





When days are short and dry,many plants stop making food.This makes the chlorophyll goes away. Then we  can see orange and yellow colors.
Leaves are nature's food factories. Plants take water from the ground through their roots. They take a gas called carbon dioxide from the air. Plants use sunlight to turn water and carbon dioxide into oxygen and glucose. Oxygen is a gas in the air  that we  need to breathe. Glucose is a kind of sugar. Plants
use glucose as food for  energy and as a building block for  growing. The  way plants turn water and carbon dioxide into oxygen and sugar is called photosynthesis. That means "putting together with light." A chemical called chlorophyll helps make photosynthesis happen. Chlorophyll is what gives plants their green color. As summer ends and autumn comes, the days get shorter and shorter. This  is how the trees "know" to begin getting ready for  winter.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1566

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in


























Q.71 :d

Q.72 :d



Q.73 :d
During winter, there is not enough light or water for  photosynthesis. The  trees will rest, and live  off the food they stored during the summer. They begin to shut down their food- making factories. The  green chlorophyll disappears from the leaves. As the bright green fades away, we  begin to see yellow and orange colors. Small amounts of these colors have been in the leaves all along. We just can't see them in the summer, because they are covered up by  the green
chlorophyll. autumn leaves scene The  bright reds and purples we  see in leaves are made mostly in the fall.  In some trees, like  maples, glucose is trapped in the leaves after photosynthesis stops. Sunlight and the cool nights of autumn cause the leaves turn this glucose into a red color. The  brown color of trees like  oaks is made from wastes left in the leaves.





Q.75 :d







Q.76 :b


















Q.77 :b
really controlled by  just one pair of genes, but that's basically how it works.





When you spin, the liquid in ears also spins. The  liquid continues to spin after you stop. Our  brain thinks we  are still  spinning.





Infectious disease is the mother term for contagious diseases which are a sub- classification.

Infectious disease encompasses diseases that can be transmitted via  physical, airborne, droplets, or via  bodily fluids while contagious diseases are mostly transmitted via  physical, droplet, and bodily fluids.
Infectious diseases can be contagious or non- contagious so isolation depends on  the disease while contagious diseases are solely quarantined and separated in a private room.













Q.74 :a
The  scales have different functions such as attracting the opposite sex for mating,warning the predators and hiding with the background of environment (camouflage).
Some male butterflies have scented scales on  their forewings,which release the pheromones to attract their mates.




That’s because the brown-eye gene is dominant, and the blue-eye gene is recessive. (Please note good chance not always)

Each colour is determined by  a pair of genes

Brown is dominant - but that means you can have one brown gene and one blue gene.

If the father has blue eyes then he has two blue genes (he must have as blue is recessive).

So  your child could have brown eyes (one brown gene and one blue, like  yours) or blue eyes (two blue genes like  its dad).

It's  much more complicated than this and not















Q.78 :d

Q.79 :d
















Q.80 :d
It can be observed that people sweat more before heavy rain. The  reason for  this is that when the climate is hot, the sweat gets evaporated easily. In this process, the heat in the body is absorbed and it will give relief. But  before heavy rain, the humidity in weather increases and sweat does not get evaporated. It stays on  the skin. Weather becomes hot when there are clouds in the
sky  as clouds stop the heat from the earth to go  into the weather.







The  gene is the first discovered to control a special leaf structure, which leads to more efficient photosynthesis.
The  gene regulates an asymmetric cell division.
According to scientis this gene Could Increase  Agricultural Yields by  50% (importance)
The  deduced amino acid sequence of scarecrow suggests that it is a member of a novel family of putative transcription factors.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1566

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

The  study of genetics is only a relatively recent development, yet it has provided some of the most powerful pieces of evidence for  evolution. One of the strongest confirmations of common descent comes from the study of gene sequences. Comparative sequence analysis examines
the relationship between the DNA sequences of different species. If the hypothesis of common descent is true, then species that share a common ancestor will have inherited that ancestor's DNA sequence and mutations unique to that ancestor. More closely-related species will have a greater fraction of identical sequence and more shared substitutions when compared to more distantly-related species. The  sequencing of the human genome only happened around
10 years ago, yet it has provided much insight into human evolution and our relatedness with other species. Much more evidence of evolution can be found in genetics that is too much to fit here.






Q.83 :b







Q.84 :b
eventually, the pesticide may be rendered ineffective or even kill other wildlife or the very grass it was designed to protect.





Intercellular spaces are the spaces between plant cells where the cell  walls do  not quite come together.





only 2nd statement is correct
The  property or quality that distinguishes living organisms from dead organisms and inanimate matter, manifested in functions such as metabolism, growth, reproduction, and response to stimuli or adaptation to the environment originating from within the organism.
The  most important point about life  is that living organisms can reproduce.

Q.81 :a




























Q.82 :d


How  similar two organisms are can help people figure out how closely they are related.Similarities are often easy to see when one looks at two organisms that evolved from a common ancestor, and until recently, looking at physical features and behavior was the only way to determine how closely related two organisms are. However, now scientists can also analyze DNA to discover how closely organisms are related. Every living creature has DNA, which has a lot of inherited information about how the
body builds itself. Scientists can compare the DNA of two organisms; the more similar the DNA, the more closely related the organisms. This  method can also help when looks are deceptive. One example of looks being deceptive is:  The  bat and the crow both have wings, and the squirrel does not. From this, one may think that bats and crows are more closely related than bats and squirrels, while the opposite is indeed the case.





Pests are following the rules of evolution: the best-adapted survive. Every time chemicals are sprayed on  a lawn to kill weeds or ants for example, a few  naturally resistant members of the targeted population survive and create a new generation of pests that
are poison-resistant. That generation breeds another more-resistant generation;

Q.85 :c

Q.86 :a




















Q.87 :d






Research carried out at AIIMS has shown that the population of India, even though similar
in broader terms with the Caucasian population, has many novel HLA genes not occurring in that population. The  diversity of HLA genes in the Indian population is extremely vast, he adds. Therefore, the existing pool of 19.6 lakh bone marrow
donors across the world is not of much use to
India.
The  process we  use now is simpler than the older method of tapping the spine for  the bone marrow, requiring hospitalisation for the donor. It is like  a blood donation, and yet can be intrusive.





In areas where the JE virus is common, encephalitis occurs mainly in young children because older children and adults have already been infected and are immune.
The  virus causing Japanese encephalitis is transmitted by  mosquitoes belonging to the Culex tritaeniorhynchus and Culex vishnui groups, which breed particularly in flooded rice fields. The  virus circulates in ardeid birds (herons and egrets). Pigs are amplifying hosts, in that the virus reproduces in pigs
and infects mosquitoes that take blood
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1566

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in











Q.88 :a






Q.89 :d
meals, but does not cause disease. The  virus tends to spill  over into human populations when infected mosquito populations build up explosively and the human biting rate increases (these culicines are normally zoophilic, i.e. they prefer to take blood meals from animals).





HIV 1 are most prevelent in the world including India.
disease develops into the life-threatening dengue hemorrhagic fever, resulting in bleeding, low  levels of blood platelets and blood plasma leakage, or into dengue shock syndrome, where dangerously low  blood pressure occurs. Dengue is transmitted by several species of mosquito within the genus Aedes Aegypti. The  virus has four different types; infection with one type usually gives lifelong immunity to that type, but only short- term immunity to the others. Subsequent infection with a different type increases the risk  of severe complications. As there is no commercially available vaccine, prevention is
Indian surgeon’s cheaper kidney transplant protocol

A treatment protocol that drastically reduces the cost of kidney transplants, developed by a Hyderabad-based nephrologist, has been adopted successfully in several developing countries.
The  new protocol involves administering low doses of equine-based drug and managing the patient carefully.
Drugs account for  the high cost of kidney transplants. To ensure that the body accepts a foreign organ and to avoid rejection, patients are given antibodies that suppress immunity. Right now, these antibodies are usually derived from horses and rabbits. The rabbit-origin drugs are expensive and






Q.91 :a

Q.92 :b









Q.93 :c
sought by  reducing the habitat and the number of mosquitoes and limiting exposure to bites.






MSG = monosodium glutamate is a salt of glutamic acid (an amino acid) and not a Trans fat
Its  used as a taste enhancer creates the
UMAMI flavor.

















Q.90 :d
multiple doses are usually given. If the same antibodies derived from horses are given, the cost would come down drastically and a
single dose would be sufficient.
The  one-time cost of the equine-based drug is Rs.  35,000. The  rabbit-derived drugs meant for  the same purpose cost more than Rs.  1 lakh.
This  is a proven technology but the procedure is not getting due recognition in western countries now. Even in India, there are only four or five  centres that employ this method.





ELISA is a method that is to test several deceases like  HIV, Dengue.
Dengue fever also known as break-bone fever is an infectious tropical disease caused by  the dengue virus. Symptoms include fever, headache, muscle and joint pains, and a characteristic skin rash that is similar to measles. In a small proportion of cases the
Virus: A microorganism that is smaller than a bacterium, and that cannot grow or reproduce apart from a living cell. A virus invades living cells and uses their chemical machinery to keep itself alive and to replicate itself. They donot have a cell membrane and are rather covered by  a layer of protein.


Viruses
Smaller (20-400 nanometers)
No cells: simple protein structure; no  cell  wall or membrane; no  ribosomes, DNA/RNA enclosed in protein coat
Hijacks a host cell, forcing it to make copies of viral DNA/RNA; new viruses released from host cell.

No known cures. Vaccines can prevent illness; symptoms may be treatable.


Unknown; do  not meet all traditional standards for  life.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1566

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Q.94 :d















Q.95 :d


Kolleru lake is a freshwater lake, so the fish found in this lake are accustomed to living in high water concentration solution or highly diluted solution with salinity of about 0.05%.
If they are placed in Bay  of Bengal, which has relatively very high salinity, they will
shrink, because water moves from low concentrated solution to the one having high concentration- This  phenomenon is known as osmosis.

Q.98 :c




Both DNA and RNA are two types of nucleic acids found in living systems. Generally, DNA acts as the genetic material in most of the organisms.
RNA are of various kinds like  transfer or t- RNA, messenger or m-RNA,  ribosome  RNA. The  RNA functions in converting genetic information from genes into the amino acid sequences of proteins. However, in viruses genetic information is stored in RNA. Hence both the statements are correct.

There are some micro-organisms which are capable of performing photosynthesis, like cyanobacteria, photosynthetic prokaryotic bacteria. Therefore, statement 1 is incorrect. Plant can perform photosynthesis even in the presence of artificial light. Hence, in
incorrect.
At deep sea levels, there is little to no sunlight, photosynthesis is not a possible means of energy production, leaving some creatures with the quandary of how to produce food for  themselves. For  examples
Q.99 :c


Nucleic acids, which
include DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) and RNA (ribonucleic acid), are made from monomers known as nucleotides. Each nucleotide has three components: a 5-carbon sugar, a phosphate group, and a nitrogenous base. The DNA does not include potassium base and hence is incorrect.








Q.96 :c










Q.97 :d
the giant tube worm, this answer comes in the form of bacteria. These bacteria are capable of chemosynthesis and live  inside the giant tube worm, which lives on hydrothermal vents.





Fungi are heterotrophic eukaryotic organisms. They use decaying organic matter as food and are therefore called as saprophytes.
Members of Animalia kingdom are multicellular eukaryotic heterotrophic.





A congenital disorder is a condition existing at birth and often before birth, regardless of causation. A congenital disorder may be the result of genetic abnormalities.
Sickle cell  anemia is an autosome linked recessive trait that can be transmitted from parents to the offsprings when both the parents are carrier for  the gene.
Hemophilia is a sex linked recessive disease, which shows its transmission from the unaffected female carrier to some of the male progeny.
The  cause of Down’s syndrome is the presence of an additional chromose.
Q.100 :c

In particular, coral mining, agricultural and urban runoff, pollution (organic and inorganic), overfishing, blast fishing, disease, and the digging of canals and access into islands and bays are localized threats to
coral ecosystems. Broader threats are sea temperature rise, sea level rise
and pH changes from ocean acidification, all associated with greenhouse
gas emissions. In 1998, 16% of the world's reefs died as a result of increased water temperature.
Water temperature changes of more than
1–2  °C (1.8–3.6 °F) or salinity changes can kill some species of coral. Under such environmental stresses, corals expel their Symbiodinium without them coral tissues reveal the white of their skeletons, an event known as coral bleaching.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1566

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Q.1     a         b         c         d Q.2     a         b         c         d Q.3     a         b         c         d Q.4     a         b         c         d Q.5     a         b         c         d Q.6     a         b         c         d Q.7     a         b         c         d Q.8     a         b         c         d Q.9     a         b         c         d Q.10   a         b         c         d Q.11   a         b         c         d Q.12   a         b         c         d Q.13   a         b         c         d Q.14   a         b         c         d Q.15   a         b         c         d Q.16   a         b         c         d Q.17   a         b         c         d Q.18   a         b         c         d Q.19   a         b         c         d Q.20   a         b         c         d Q.21   a         b         c         d Q.22   a         b         c         d Q.23   a         b         c         d Q.24   a         b         c         d Q.25   a         b         c         d Q.26   a         b         c         d Q.27   a         b         c         d Q.28   a         b         c         d Q.29   a         b         c         d Q.30   a         b         c         d Q.31   a         b         c         d Q.32   a         b         c         d Q.33   a         b         c         d Q.34   a         b         c         d Q.35   a         b         c         d
Q.36   a         b         c         d Q.37   a         b         c         d Q.38   a         b         c         d Q.39   a         b         c         d Q.40   a         b         c         d Q.41   a         b         c         d Q.42   a         b         c         d Q.43   a         b         c         d Q.44   a         b         c         d Q.45   a         b         c         d Q.46   a         b         c         d Q.47   a         b         c         d Q.48   a         b         c         d Q.49   a         b         c         d Q.50   a         b         c         d Q.51   a         b         c         d Q.52   a         b         c         d Q.53   a         b         c         d Q.54   a         b         c         d Q.55   a         b         c         d Q.56   a         b         c         d Q.57   a         b         c         d Q.58   a         b         c         d Q.59   a         b         c         d Q.60   a         b         c         d Q.61   a         b         c         d Q.62   a         b         c         d Q.63   a         b         c         d Q.64   a         b         c         d Q.65   a         b         c         d Q.66   a         b         c         d Q.67   a         b         c         d Q.68   a         b         c         d Q.69   a         b         c         d Q.70   a         b         c         d
Q.71   a         b         c         d Q.72   a         b         c         d Q.73   a         b         c         d Q.74   a         b         c         d Q.75   a         b         c         d Q.76   a         b         c         d Q.77   a         b         c         d Q.78   a         b         c         d Q.79   a         b         c         d Q.80   a         b         c         d Q.81   a         b         c         d Q.82   a         b         c         d Q.83   a         b         c         d Q.84   a         b         c         d Q.85   a         b         c         d Q.86   a         b         c         d Q.87   a         b         c         d Q.88   a         b         c         d Q.89   a         b         c         d Q.90   a         b         c         d Q.91   a         b         c         d Q.92   a         b         c         d Q.93   a         b         c         d Q.94   a         b         c         d Q.95   a         b         c         d Q.96   a         b         c         d Q.97   a         b         c         d Q.98   a         b         c         d Q.99   a         b         c         d Q.100 a         b         c         d
