GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1564

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

1. Which of the following statements is/are true about X-ray and infrared waves :-

1. Both waves are longitudinal.

2. Both travel at the same speed in a vacuum.

3. Both are electromagnetic waves.
4. Both waves have the same wavelength. Select the correct answer using the code given
below.

(a)  2 and 3 only      (b)  1 and 2 only

(c)  1, 2 and 3 only   (d)  1, 2, 3 and 4


2. Consider the following statements:

1. Proton therapy is a type of external beam radiotherapy using ionizing radiation.

2. In comparison to normal x-ray radiation, protons are about 60% less harmful for  the body.

3. In comparison to proton therapy, x-ray therapy causes less damage to the skin and surface tissue.

4. Unlike X-ray proton beam is difficult to control. Which of the above statements is/are correct?
(a)  1 and 2            (b)  1, 2 and 3

(c)  1, 3 and 4         (d)  1, 2, 3 and 4


3. Rainbow is produced when sunlight fall  on  drops of rain. Which of the following physical phenomena is/are responsible for  this?

1. Diffusion

2. Refraction

3. Internal reflection

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1 and 2 only              (b)  2 only

(c)  2 and 3 only              (d)  1, 2 and 3


4. Which of the following best describes the underlying principle that allows radiometric dating to be used as an absolute dating technique?
(a)  The  decay rate of naturally occurring radioactive elements into other elements is predictable.

(b)  The  strength of the electrical charge of radioactive elements is a measure of how long they have been radioactive.

(c)  The  proportions of beta and alpha particles emitted from rock change as a consequence of age and temperature.

(d)  The  half-life of radioactive elements can be determined by  the magnetic field created in the surrounding rocks.


5. Two  thin blankets are more warmer than one single thick blanket.Which of the following is correct about this?


(a)  It is because the two thin blankets together will be thicker.

(b)  It is because surface area of two blankets is more than one single blanket.

(c)  It is because friction between blankets creates additional heat.

(d)  It is because there is air  between them.


6. A constellation is a:


1. group of stars

2. recognizable shape in the sky

3. group of asteroids

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1 only              (b)  1 and 2 (c)  2 and 3           (d)  3 only

7. When elements are heated they loose heat back to its surroundings by  radiation and also they change their color. Which of the following statements is most probable reason behind this phenomena?


(a)  Amount of absorbed energy is related to temperature.

(b)  Rate of radiated energy is related to
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1564

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

temperature.

(c)  Wavelength of radiated energy is related to temperature.

(d)  Rate of absorbed energy is related to temperature.


8. Which of the following phenonmenon occur due to the principle of Total Internal Reflection?

1. Transmission of data through optical fibre.

2. Magnification using a simple optical microscope.

3. A distant patch of road appearing to be wet on  a hot summer day.
4. A pencil immersed in water looks bent. Select the correct answer using the code given
below.

(a)  1, 2 and 3 only     (c)  1 and 3 only

(b)  2, 3 and 4 only     (d)  1 and 4 only



9. Which of the following statements is/are true about behaviour of sun's magnetic field?

1. The  magnetic field on  the sun reverses completely after a period of time.
2. In the "solar max", sun's magnetic field is highest. Select the correct answer using the code given
below.

(a)  1 only                      (b)  2 only

(c)  Both 1 and 2          (d)  Neither 1 nor 2



10. For  what accomplishment did  Einstein receive the Nobel Prize in Physics?

(a)  The  theory of special relativity

(b)  The  theory of general relativity

(c)  The  discovery of law  of photoelectric effect

(d)  Both a and b


11. Stars always twinkle but planets do  not.Which of the following statements is true about this?
(a)  Because they do  not produce any light. (b) Because they do  not have nuclear fusion. (c)  Because they are closer to Earth.
(d)  Because sometimes stars undergo fusion at lower temperature which is called "cold fusion".





12. During the day the sky  is blue but during the sunset sky  becomes red.Which of the following reason is correct regarding this?

(a)  The  red color reflects off of the retinas in our eyes during sunset.

(b)  The  red color has shorter wavelength so it penetrates the atmosphere.

(c)  More of the short wavelength blues and greens are scattered.

(d)  Longer wavelength red color is scattered so it reaches to our eyes.


13. Consider the following statements:

1. Electrolysis cannot be performed using AC
current.

2. Only  DC current can be stored in accumulator cell.

3. Electromagnet can only be prepared using AC
current.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1 and 2 only                       (b)  1 and 3 only

(c)  2 and 3 only                       (d)  1, 2 and 3

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

14. There is an enormous amount of power running through high voltage wire. But  birds sit safely on electric power lines without getting electrocuted. Which of the following reasons is/are correct about this?

1. There is no  voltage difference across the bird's body.

2. Bird's body is an insulator.

3. There's no  reason for  electrons to take a detour
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1564

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

through the bird.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1 and 2 only       (b)  2 and 3 only

(c)  1 and 3 only       (d)  1, 2 and 3


15. With  the objective of providing safe and clean drinking water to the children studying in water deficient rural schools, under Jalmani Programme,
100 per cent financial assistance is provided to states to install standalone water purification systems in rural schools. Which of the following technologies has/have been identified by  the committee under the chairmanship of Secretary.
Department of Science and Technology, Government of India, to identity suitable water treatment:-

1. Ion  exchange

2. Ultra-Violet Radiation

3. Membrane filtration

4. Reverse Osmosis

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1 and 2 only           (b)  2 only

(c)  1, 2 and 4 only       (d)  1, 2, 3 and 4


16. Which of the followings can be cited as the advantages of Digital TV transmission over analog TV transmission?

1. The  number of channels will be more through the digital route.

2. It will provide a better picture quality.

3. It can also provide non-television services to consumers.

4. Viewing will be without interruptions caused by rain and wind.

5. It uses channel separated signals instead of multiplexed signal used in analog TV which results in better audio-video quality.

(a)  1, 2, 3, 4 and 5    (b)  2, 3, 4 and 5 only

(c)  3 only                    (d)  1, 2 and 3 only
17. When cool air  flows from a high mountain region to a region of lower elevation, which of the following statements is/are true?


1. The  air  will increase in moisture content.

2. The  air  will condense, forming large amounts of dew.

3. The  air  will undergo adiabatic warming.

4. The  air  will undergo adiabatic cooling.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1 and 3 only    (b)  1 and 4 only

(c)  3 only                (d)  2 and 4 only


18. The  Earth rotates towards the east. As viewed from the North Star Polaris, the Earth turns counter- clockwise.What is the reason behind the rotation of earth?


(a)  No force is needed because there is no  resistive force trying to slow the earth down.

(b)  Gravitational attraction from the moon is the reason behind the rotation.

(c)  Gravitational attraction from the sun is the reason behind the rotation.

(d)  Earth rotates because there is an equilibrium in our solar system.


19. A rechargeable cordless telephone handset feels warm to the touch after sitting in its charger for  a while. Which of the following best explains why the rechargeable battery in the handset warms up as it
is charged?

(a)  Heat is generated within the battery due to inefficient transformation of electrical energy into chemical potential energy.

(b)  Increased electric current in the wiring excites and heats the surrounding molecules.

(c)  Heat is generated by  the battery as high-energy chemical bonds are formed during the process of charging.

(d)  Electric currents produce electro magnetic radiation, which can be felt in the form of heat.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1564

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

20. If you go  into a theatre then you will find  that ceiling is?

(a)  Curved like  a convex mirror so that it converges all the sound to a point to avoid reverberations.

(b)  Curved like  a concave mirror so that it converges all the sound to a point to avoid reverberations.

(c)  Curved like  a convex mirror so that it diverges the sound from a point source in parallel directions to avoid reverberations.

(d)  Curved like  a concave mirror so that it diverges the sound from a point source in parallel directions to avoid reverberations.


21. Which of the following statements exemplifies
Newton's first law  of motion?


(a)  A bumper car will reverse direction when it collides with another car.

(b)  A gust of wind from the north will push a pile  of leaves south.

(c)  A hockey puck gliding on  ice  will continue moving until friction slows it.

(d)  A baseball thrown across a field will fall  in an arc to the ground.


22. Consider the following statements:

1. Electrometer is a device used to test whether an object is carrying a charge or not.

2. Earthing is the process of transferring of charge from a charged object to the earth

3. The  rubbing of a glass rod on  silk  makes them both positively charged due to production of charge.

Choose the correct option:

(a)  1 and 2                (b)  2 only

(c)  3 only                    (d)  2 and 3


23. Consider the following statements about Indian
Atomic Energy Programme (IAEP):

1. The  main objective of the Indian Atomic Energy programme is to provide reliable nuclear weapons for  country’s defence.

2. First stage of IAEP involves the use of natural
uranium as a fuel, with heavy water as moderator.

3. Second stage of IAEP uses plutonium as a fuel, obtained from the first stage.

4. Third stage of IAEP uses Thorium as a fuel for nuclear power generation.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1 and 3 only       (b)  2 and 3 only

(c)  1, 2 and 4 only   (d)  2, 3 and 4 only


24. With  broadband connections, there are a number of choices that include DSL modem and Cable modem. Which of the following statements is/are differences between DSL modem and Cable modem?


1. The  cable modem is tied to the phone line  while the DSL modem is tied to the TV box.

2. Cable modems can offer faster speeds than DSL
modems.

3. DSL modems get more reliable speeds than cable modems.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1 and 2 only       (b)  2 and 3 only

(c)  1 and 3 only       (d)  1, 2 and 3


25. What are the forces acting on  an arrow moving towards its target?

1. Gravity

2. Friction

3. Muscular force.

(a)  3 only            (b)  1 and 3 only

(c)  1, 2, 3            (d)  1 and 2 only


26. Consider the following statements:

1. Tyndall effect is the phenomenon of scattering of light by  the colloidal particles

2. The  color of the scattered light depends on  the size of the scattering particles.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1564

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

3. The  atmosphere generally is more effective in scattering light of longer wavelengths.

Choose the following options: (a)  1 and 2           (b)  2 and 3
(c)  1 and 3           (d)  all of these


27. A basic touch screen has three main components: a touch sensor, a controller, and a software driver. Which of the following statements is true about the resistive touch screen system?


(a)  It consists of a metallic panel that calculates the friction of touch event.

(b)  It uses two transducers placed along the x and y axes of the monitor's glass plate.

(c)  It consist a layer that stores electrical charge is placed on  the glass panel of the monitor.

(d)  It consists of a normal glass panel that is covered with two metallic layers.


28. Joule’s heating is the heat released by  the passage of electricity through a conductor. Which of the following instruments work on  the principle of Joule’s heating?

1. Electric water heater.

2. CFL bulb.

3. Incandescent bulb.

4. Electric fuse.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1 and 3 only       (b)  1, 2 and 4 only

(c)  2, 3 and 4 only   (d)  1, 3 and 4 only



29. Argon, Nitrogen gases are filled in electric bulbs. What is the possible reason behind this?

(a)  To prevent darkening by  preventing cyclic redeposition of tungsten back on  the filament.

(b)  To block harmful UV radiation.

(c)  To produce light of a higher luminous efficacy and color temperature.
(d)  To slow down the evaporation of the filament of the bulb.


30. The  toaster is typically a small electric kitchen appliance designed to toast multiple types of bread products.Which of the following is/are required to know the power of a toaster :-

1. Resistance of the toaster's insulation.

2. Dimensions of the toaster.

3. Voltage applied to the toaster and the toaster's temperature.

4. Current through the circuit and the voltage applied to the toaster.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1 and 4 only         (b)  3 only

(c)  4 only                   (d)  1 , 2 , 3 and 4


31. Of the following which is the closest definition of a laser?

(a)  A device that produces extremely intense light

(b)  A device that projects electrons at high speed

(c)  A device that polarizes photons, propelling them by  magnetic repulsion

(d)  A device that produces coherent light with a narrow range of wavelengths


32. Once a conclusion is reached on  the safety of phones for  adults additional research will need to be carried out to find  out the effects on  children because :-

(a)  Not  all children can afford a mobile phone. (b)  Children might react differently to radiation.
(c)  The  number of children using mobile phones has increased significantly.

(d)  Children cannot have used phones for  as long as adults.


33. Which of the following reason  is correct about sky's blue color :-

(a)  All other colors are reflected from the retinas in
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1564

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

our eyes.

(b)  The  blue color has longer wavelength so it penetrates the atmosphere.

(c)  Other wavelengths tend to scatter off of particles in the atmosphere.

(d)  Shorter wavelengths is absorbed by  the gas molecules and radiated.


34. The  human voices are more clearly heard at dusk rather than during day time because of the phenomenon of

(a)  Refraction of sound    (b)  Diffraction of sound

(c)  Scattering of sound    (d)  Reflection of sound


35. Although sound travels in a straight line, we  are able to hear the voices of people sitting in a room beside us if the windows/doors are open. It is because of the

(a)  Refraction of sound waves       (b)  Reflection of sound waves

(c)  Interference of sound waves   (d)  Diffraction of sound waves


36. Consider the following statements about microwave ovens.

1. They are called micro because they use electromagnetic waves such as micro waves to cook food.

2. They use the system of rotating disk as they need rotational energy for  cooking.

3. The  physical contact is essential for  cooking through micro wave ovens.

Which of the following statements are true? (a)  2 and 3 only              (b)  1 only
(c)  1 and 2 only              (d)  1 and 3 only


37. Consider the following statements-

1. The  UV spectrum is divided into to three bands.

2. The  UV-A band is the least energetic band.

3. The  UV-B band is more energetic and is damaging to both plant and animal life.
Which of the above statement is/are correct? (a)  1 and 2 only     (b)  2 and 3 only
(c)  1 and 3 only      (d)  1, 2, 3


38. Scuba diving is a form of underwater diving in which a diver uses a scuba set to breathe underwater. When a scuba diver exhales, a normal bubbles coming out of mouth and rise to the surface of the water. Which of the following statements best describes what happens to the air  bubbles as they rise to the surface?


(a)  The  number of molecules in the bubbles increases, and the diameter of the bubbles increases.

(b)  The  number of molecules in the bubbles decreases, and the diameter of the bubbles decreases.

(c)  The  number of molecules in the bubbles remains the same, and the diameter of the bubbles increases.

(d)  The  number of molecules in the bubbles remains the same, and the diameter of the bubbles decreases.


39. Two  objects of different masses, dropped from same height, falling freely near the surface of moon would?

1. Have same velocities at any instant.

2. Experience same accelerations.

3. Experience forces of same magnitude.

4. Have same potential energies.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1 , 2 and 3 only                        (b)  1, 2  only

(c)  2 only                                           (d)  1, 2, 3 and 4


40. Seawater is water from a sea or ocean. Sea water contains about 3.5% by  weight of salt so the density of seawater is greater than that of fresh water.Which of the following statements is correct about a boat ?

(a)  Boat will float higher in fresh water than in seawater.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1564

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

(b)  Boat will float lower in fresh water than in seawater.

(c)  Boat will float at the same level in both. (d)  Floating will depend upon its shape.

41. We  employ a parallel circuit in our homes because:

(a)  Different equipments need different amounts of current

(b)  In a series circuit, if one component fails, none of the components works

(c)  It is difficult to locate the malfunctioning component in a series circuit.

(d)  All of these


42. If the pressure on  ice  is increased more than the normal pressure, it will?

(a)  Melt  at a higher temperature than zero degree
Celsius

(b)  Melt  at a temperature lower than zero degree
Celsius

(c)  Will not melt at all

(d)  Melting point will decrease if the pressure is greater than the surface tension of water


43. Which organisation publishes the magazines  The Science Reporter and Science Ki Dunia (An Urdu quarterly)?

(a)  Indian Science Writers’ Association

(b)  National Council for  Science and Technology
Communication

(c)  The  National Institute of Science Communication and Information Resources

(d)  None of the above


44. What we  are seeing when we  see an object is a reflected light from object. Light of different wavelengths looks like  different colors to us. Which of the following statements is main reason behind different colors of objects?


(a)  Light hits an object and some wavelengths are
absorbed by  that object and some are reflected.

(b)  Light is actually a combination of many colors, We  can see the different colors of the objects because objects act like  prisms.

(c)  Light moves through the atmosphere in a straight line, it continues to go  straight until it bumps into
any object.

(d)  Some light scattered when it hits an object only some particular wavelengths are left in the direct beam that reaches to our eyes.


45. Consider the following statements:

Assertion (A): Rockets are generally launched vertically.

Reason (R): The  range of a projectile motion is maximum at 90 degree.

In the context of the above two statements, which one of the following is correct?

(a)  Both A and R are true and R is the correct explanation of A

(b)  Both A and R are true but R is not a correct explanation of A

(c)  A is true but R is false

(d)  A is false but R is true


46. Consider the following statements regarding induction stove?

1. Cooking occurs due to heat energy produced by the resistance provided by  vessel to the eddy currents generated in the vessel.

2. Heating is more uniform than provided by  any other method.

3. Copper vessel is not used on  such a stove as it is
a good conductor & hence no  resistance is produced.


Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1 only                      (b)  1 and 2

(c)  2 and 3                   (d)  None of the above


47. If action is always equal to the reaction, then also horse is able to pull  the cart, because:
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1564

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

(a)  Action and reaction operate on  the cart hence it moves.

(b)  Action and reaction operate on  two different bodies.

(c)  The  direction of action and reaction is same, hence the cart moves.

(d)  The  acceleration of horse and cart is different.


48. Consider the following statements:

(a)  Sound is a longitudinal wave where the individual particles in the medium move in a direction parallel to the direction of propagation of the disturbance.

(b)  In a transverse wave, the individual particles in the medium move in a direction perpendicular to the direction of propagation of the disturbance.

Choose the correct option:

(a)  1 only                  (b)  2 only

(c)  1 and 2               (d)  None of them


49. Digital Light Processing, or DLP, uses a small computer chip, Digital Micromirror Device (DMD), with thousands of mirrors on  it.Liquid Crystal Display, known as LCD, works by  putting a bulb inside the television which produces light, this light is then transferred to millions of crystals.Which of the following statements is/are differences between LCD tv and DLP tv :-

1. LCD has better color saturation than DLP.

2. LCD is of a higher quality than a DLP of the same size.

3. LCD is a low  heat display, and low  energy consumption set than DLP.

4. DLP has no  screen door effect.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1 and 2 only         (b)  3 and 4 only

(c)  1 and 4 only         (d)  1, 2, 3 and 4


50. Consider the following statements:

1. Magnetism is caused by  the alignment of magnetic fields produced by  the spinning electrons in an atoms in one direction
2. Upon heating, the magnet starts becoming more powerful

3. Iron, Manganese and cobalt are some common magnets

Choose the correct option: (a)  1 only     (b)  1 and 2 (c) 3 only      (d)  2 and 3

51. Which of the following statements is/are true about critical temperature :-

1. Above which a substance cannot be vaporized.

2. Above which the substance cannot be liquified.

3. At which the density is a minimum.
4. At which solid, liquid, and vapor are in equilibrium. Select the correct answer using the code given
below.

(a)  4 only                    (b)  1 and 3 only

(c)  2 only                    (d)  2 and 3 only


52. Consider the following statements

1. Asteroids are a group of celestial bodies which orbit the sun in a belt between Mars and Jupiter

2. Meteors are heavenly bodies which occasionally enter and hit  the earth surface

3. Comets are members of our solar system which orbit the sun in highly elliptical orbits

Choose the correct option:

(a)  1 and 3                 (b)  2 and 3

(c)  1 and 2                 (d)  All of these


53. Which of the following statements is/are correct about Remote Sensing (RS)  instruments?

1. Radiometer and Spectrometer are examples of active RS instruments.

2. RADAR, LIDAR are examples of passive  RS
instruments

(a)  1 only                 (b)  2 only
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1564

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

(c)   1 and 2             (d)  None


54. Which of the following best describes the most widely accepted theory of the solar system's evolution :-

(a)  A small star grew as it consumed comets, eventually becoming large enough to ignite fusion reactions and attract planetary bodies.

(b)  A star existing within the Milky Way Galaxy pulled in comets and interstellar dust traveling through its gravitational field.

(c)  The  remnant elements of the explosion of a massive star coalesced, forming planets that circled the hydrogen core of the exploded star.

(d)  A spinning cloud of interstellar dust and gas shrank under the force of gravity, producing a central star and revolving planetesimals.


55.   Consider the following statements about Optical fibers:

1. The  refractive index of the material of the core is higher than that of the cladding.

2. Light is propagated down an optical fiber by dispersion and total internal reflection.

3. Both audio and video signals can be transmitted through them.

4. They have a disadvantage as they produce sparks.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct? (a)  1 and 3 only          (b)  2 and 3 only
(c)  2, 3 and 4 only     (d)  1, 2 and 4 only


56. While it is stressful to watch a movie on  TV in a dark room, it is not while watching a movie in a theatre. Consider the following reasons:

1. In theatre we  receive analogue pictures while on
TV we  receive images in pixels.

2. In theatre the view is almost completely occupied by  the screen unlike that in case of TV.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1 only                             (b)  2 only
(c)  Both 1 and 2                 (d)  Neither 1 nor 2


57. Electromagnetic waves are formed when an electric field couples with a magnetic field. The magnetic and electric fields of an electromagnetic wave are perpendicular to each other and to the direction of the wave. Light, microwaves, x-rays TV and radio transmissions are all kinds of electromagnetic waves.Which of the following statements is true about them :-

(a)  In radio waves, visible light, and x-rays amplitude cannot be same with each other.

(b)  In radio waves, visible light, and x-rays intensity cannot be same with each other.

(c)  In radio waves, visible light, and x-rays temperature cannot be same with each other.

(d)  In radio waves, visible light, and x-rays wavelength cannot be same with each other.


58. Consider the following statements:

1. A speed with mach number of greater than 1 is called supersonic speed

2. The  speed of sound remains almost the same for all frequencies in a given medium under the same physical conditions

3. The  speed of sound in air  increases with increasing temperature

Choose the correct option:

(a)  1 and 3              (b)  1 and 2

(c)  2 and 3              (d)  all of these

Which of statements given below is/are correct?

59. The  cloudy nights are warmer than clear nights because:

(a)  The  clouds prevent radiation of heat from the ground and the air

(b)  Clouds absorb sunlight in the day and radiate the same in night

(c)  Clouds make the atmosphere damp and generate heat

(d)  The  clouds obstruct the movement of air  which creates heat
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1564

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

60. Consider the following reasons as to why we  use tankers with elliptical cross-section instead of tankers with rectangular cross section to carry liquid fuels:

1. Centre of gravity for  elliptical cross section is lower than rectangular and hence it prevents the tanker from toppling.

2. Lesser amount of metal sheet is required for  the same volume for  an elliptical cross section.

3. Elliptical section provides maximum stability against liquid movement inside the tank on  account of lateral acceleration.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1 only                                 (b)  1 and 3 only

(c)  2 and 3 only                      (d)  1, 2 and 3


61. Semiconductors are present in most of the modern electronic devices that we  use. Which of the following statements is/are true regarding semiconductors?

1. Resistivity of semiconductors is more than insulators but less than conductors.

2. Most commonly used semiconductor elements are
Silicon and Germanium.

3. Diode, transistor and capacitor are the most commonly used semiconductor devices.

Select the correct answer using the codes given below.


(a)  1, 2 and 3                  (c)  2 only

(b)  2 and 3 only            (d)  1 and 3 only


62. Radio telescopes are better than optical telescopes.Which of the following statements is/are correct about this ?

1. They can detect faint galaxies which no  optical telescope can.

2. They can work even in cloudy conditions.
3. They can work during the day and night. Select the correct answer using the code given
below.
(a)  1 and 3 only          (b)  1 and 2 only

(c)  2 and 3 only          (d)  1, 2 and 3


63. Amidst the recent revelations about BLACK HOLES,  consider the following statements.

1. A black hole is a region of space-time where gravity prevents anything, including light, from escaping.

2. Black holes are detected by  the x-rays bursts they emit during absorbing large quantities of matter.

3. There Black holes can continue to grow in mass but can never loose its mass.

4. There are close to nil chances of earth encountering a black hole in its entire predicted lifetime of 10 million years.

Which of the above statements are correct? (a)  1, 2, 4             (b)  2, 3, 4
(c)  1, 3                  (d)  1, 4


64. While standing on  sand a person sinks to a greater depth than when he is lying flat  on  the sand. It is because?

(a)  The  thrust exerted while lying is less than that when the person is standing.

(b)  The  greater area in contact with surface leads to greater reaction from the ground, which prevents from sinking.

(c)  The  pressure exerted while standing is greater when compared to that when lying.

(d)  Force applied is inversely proportional to the area.


65. Consider the following statements:

Assertion (A): While landing, the rear wheels of an airplane touch the ground first.

Reason (R): The  only reason is that because of two wheels located apart at adequate distance, it is much easier to control skidding/ going off the runway of the plane just in case there are unequal friction forces on  two sides.

In the context of the above two statements, which one of the following is correct?
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1564

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

(a)  Both A and R are true and R is the correct explanation of A

(b)  Both A and R are true but R is not a correct explanation of A

(c)  A is true but R is false

(d)  A is false but R is true


66. A quantum computer is a computation device that makes direct use of quantum mechanical phenomena. Which of the following statements is/are true about these computers?

1. Quantum computers and digital computers both are based on  transistors.

2. Quantum computers and digital computers require data to be encoded into binary digits (bits).

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1 only                  (b)  2 only

(c)1 and 2                 (d)  None of these


67. Several lights are connected in a parallel circuit and one of the lights burns out.Which of the following describes how the burning out of the light affects the other lights in the parallel circuit?

(a)  Charge still  flows through the burned out light, providing the lights in the other branches of the circuit with electricity.

(b)  The  other lights continue to draw the same current since neither resistance or voltage is affected in those branches of the circuit.

(c)  Current is increased in the other branches of the circuit so the lights will brighten as a result of the increased flow  of charge.

(d)  The  branches of the circuit draw less charge overall because the burned out light no  longer draws a charge,reducing the brightness of the lights.


68. Gamma rays are similar to X rays in which of the following ways?


1. They have neither rest mass nor charge.

2. They can be bent in an electric field.

3. They originate within the nucleus.
4. They are of low  energy.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1 only                 (b)  1 and 3 only

(c)  1 and 4 only       (d)  2 and 3 only


69. The  pendulum at its mean position has the:

(a)  the maximum Potential energy and the minimum kinetic energy

(b)  the maximum Potential energy and the maximum kinetic energy

(c)  the minimum Potential energy and the minimum kinetic energy

(d)  the minimum Potential energy and the maximum kinetic energy


70. Which of the following is true about solar cells?

1. Silver is used in making solar cells.

2. Silicon is available in abundance.

3. It is highly efficient device. (a)  1, 2, 3                 (b)  2, 3 (c)  1, 2                     (d)  1, 3

71. Which of these is a manifestation of the gravitational pull  between the heavenly bodies and the earth?

(a)  The  formation of waves

(b)  The  rotation of earth on  its axis

(c)  The  formation of tides

(d)  The  volcanoes


72. In Plasma television two panels of glass contains tiny cells which are filled with noble gas while LCD television, on  the other hand, constitute of two transparent layers, one of which is made up of tiny pixels filled with liquid crystals. Which of the following statements is/are differences between Plasma tv and LCD tv?

1. Compared to LCD, Plasma has a slower refresh rate.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1564

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

2. LCD weigh less and produces less heat.

3. LCD uses lower electricity compared to Plasma.

4. LCD television face the issue of screen burn-in of static images But  Plasma doesn’t have this problem.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1 and 2 only         (b)  2 and 3 only

(c)  3 and 4 only         (d)  1 , 2 , 3 and 4


73. No matter how far  you stand from the object , your image is erect. The  object is likely to be

1. Plane mirror

2. Convex mirror

3. Concave mirror.

4. Concave lens

(a)  1 only                   (b)  1, 2 (c)  1, 3                       (d)  1, 4

74. 3G and WiFi are communication technologies that provide wireless internet access and services to users.Which of the following statements is/are true about their differences?

1. 3G networks have a much larger coverage than
WiFi networks.

2. WiFi networks tend to be slower than 3G
networks.
3. 3G networks are more reliable than WiFi networks. Select the correct answer using the code given
below.

(a)  1 and 3 only      (b)  2 and 3 only

(c)  1 only                (d)  3 only


75. The  magnetism of a common bar magnet results from:

(a)  The  oscillating polarization of atoms in the magnet.

(b)  The  alignment of magnetic fields generated by spinning electrons in the magnet.
(c)  The  vibration of the atomic nuclei in the magnet.

(d)  the magnetic field produced by  electrons orbiting the nucleus in opposite directions.


76. Consider the following statements:

1. The  audible range for  human ear is 200 to 20000
Hz.

2. The  number of vibrations per unit time is called frequency and its unit is hertz.

3. The  frequency of sound determines the pitch of the sound, with increasing frequency making the sound less shrill.

Choose the correct option:

(a)  1 only                     (b)  2 only

(c)  2 and 3                 (d)  All of these


77. A brick is sliding on  a horizontal surface. Which of the following increases the magnitude of the frictional force?

(a)  Putting a second brick on  the top

(b)  By decreasing the surface area of contact

(c)  By decreasing the mass of the brick

(d)  By applying graphite on  the brick


78. It is difficult to balance a stationary two wheeler rather then a moving vehicle.Which of the following statements is/are true about this :-

1. Gravitational force decreases in case of moving particles.

2. Vehicle's speed opposes other forces like  wind etc.

3. Force exerted by  engine helps in balancing.

4. Line  connecting the centre of gravity of the object towards the earth changes in case of moving
vehicle.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1 only                 (b)  2 and 4 only

(c)  3 only                 (d)  4 only
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1564

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

79. Consider the following statements:

1. A convex lens diverges a beam of parallel light rays

2. The  degree of convergence or divergence achieved by  a lens is called power

3. The  power of a lens is the reciprocal of the focal length.

Which of statements given below is/are correct? (a)  1 and 2                (b)  2 and 3
(c)  1 and 3                (d)  all of these


80. A heavy box is at rest on  an inclined plane. The box begins to slide down the inclined plane when a small force is applied to the box. The  force is removed as soon as the box begins to slide. The speed of the box increases as the box slides down the inclined plane. Which of the following is the most likely cause of this increasing speed?


(a)  The  force of gravity on  the box is less when the box is not moving than when the box is moving.

(b)  The  force of gravity on  the box is greater when the box is not moving than when the box is moving.

(c)  The  force of friction on  the box is less when the box is not moving than when the box is moving.

(d)  The  force of friction on  the box is greater when the box is not moving than when the box is moving.


81. Which of the following statements is/are requirements of wind energy to be established?

1.  Wind speed more than 15 km/hr.

2.  Small area of land.

3. Low level of maintenance.

(a)  1 only                   (b)  1 and 3 (c)  1 and 2                (d)  None

82. The  fluid  friction or drag depends on:

1. Relative speed of the object with respect to the fluid

2. The  nature of the fluid
3. The  weight of the object

4. The  shape of the object

Choose the correct option:

(a)  1 and 4          (b)  1, 2 and 4 (c)  1, 3 and 4       (d)  All of these

83. Capillary attraction, or capillarity, is the ability of a liquid to flow  in narrow spaces without the assistance of,  and in opposition to external forces
like  gravity. While Water rises with a curved up meniscus in a capillary tube but mercury level goes down with a curved down meniscus. Which of the following statements is true about this?


(a)  Because the weight of the mercury pulls it down into the tube.

(b)  Because mercury has a stronger cohesive force between its atoms than adhesive force to the walls of a capillary tube.

(c)  Because mercury has a weak cohesive force between its atoms than adhesive force to the walls of a capillary tube.

(d)  Because the weight of the air  forces the mercury down into the tube.


84. Interaction of electromagnetic radiation with matter resulting in the dissociation of that matter into electrically charged particles is called:

(a)  Photo-chemical dissociation

(b)  Photo-ionisation

(c)  Electro-convulsion

(d)  Photo-Chemical Effect


85. Which of the following is true about QR Codes?

1. QR code is an abbreviation for  Quick Response
Code.

2. It is the trademark for  a type of matrix barcode.

3. It was first designed for  the telecom industry in
Japan.

4. It has greater storage capacity than standard UPC (Universal Product Code) barcodes.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1564

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

(a)  1, 2 and 3             (b)  2, 3 and 4

(c)  1, 2 and 4             (d)  All of the above


86. The  pressure on  the swimmer exerted by  water will decrease when he is diving

1. Horizontally towards the shore

2. Vertically downwards

3. Vertically upwards

4. Horizontally away from the shore

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  3 only                (b)  1 and 3 (c)  2 only                (d)  2 and 4

87. Consider the following statements:

1. The  weight of a person decreases as he moves from the poles to the equator.

2. If the earth stops rotating then a person standing at the equator will gain weight.

3. If the earth’s rotation speed is increased then a person standing at the equator will lose weight.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1 and 2 only              (b)  1 and 3 only

(c)  2 and 3 only              (d)  1, 2 and 3


88. Consider the following statements

1. The  loudness or softness of a sound is determined basically by  its amplitude.

2. The  timber of sound is that characteristic which enables us to distinguish one sound from another having the same pitch and loudness.

Which of the above statement(s) is/are correct? (a)  1 only                    (b)  2 only
(c)  Both 1 and 2        (d)  None


89. Consider the following statements:
1. An echo is a reflected sound which we  hear after the actual sound.

2. The  sensation of sound persists in our ear for  0.5 second.

3. Reverberations are repeated echoes which result in the persistence of sound.

Which of the statement given below is/are correct? (a)  1 and 2           (b)  1 and 3
(c)  2 and 3           (d)  all of these


90. The  correct sequence of speed of sound in the different media at 298K is

(a)  gas> liquid > solid

(b)  Solid> liquid > gas

(c)  Solid > gas and liquid

(d)  Solid = Liquid = gas


91. Why  is it difficult to see through fog?

(a)  Rays of light suffer Total Internal Reflection due to presence of water droplets

(b)  Rays of light are scattered by  water droplets

(c)  Rays of light are refracted by  the water droplets

(d)  Light is absorbed by  the particles in the fog


92. Consider the following statements:

1. The  abrupt increase in the current in the household circuit is called short circuiting.

2. The  fuse wire has a high melting point

3. The  fuse protects the circuit in cases of short circuiting and overloading.

Which of the statement given below is/are correct? (a)  1 and 2             (b)  1 and 3
(c)  2 and 3             (d)  all of these


93. The  reason for  bending of light as it enters another medium is

(a)  The  light is a transverse wave
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1564

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

(b)  Light does not require a material medium to propagate

(c)  The  speed of light changes as it enters from one medium to another

(d)  None of these


94. Consider the following statements about spectrum of light.

1. VIBGYOR is the order of visible light in the order of increasing wavelength.

2. Infra-red light is invisible light.

3. Ultra-Violet light has more frequency than violet light.

Which of the following statements are true? (a) 2 and 3 only                       (b)  1 and 3 only
(c)  1 and 2 only                       (d)  All of the above


95. Consider the following statements regarding
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI):

1. MRI scanning uses X rays in magnetic field to produce images of body parts.

2. While MRI scanning cannot produce the pictures of bone, Computerized Tomography (CT scan) can produce the pictures of bone.

3. Jewellery and other wearable metallic accessories are not allowed during MRI since it will interfere with the magnetic field.

Which of the statement given below is/are correct? (a)  3 only                         (b)  1 and 2 only
(c)  2 and 3 only             (d)  1 and 3 only


96. A force may have the following effects on  a body:

1. Change in the shape of a body

2. Change in the direction of a moving body

3. Change in the speed of the body

Choose the correct option:

(a)  Only  3                   (b)  2 and 3
(c)  1 and 3                (d)  All of these


97. Sodium vapour lamp are used in streets and not mercury vapour lamp. Which of the following statements is/are true about this :-

1. Sodium vapour lamps produce yellow light which is able to cover large area compared to white light.

2. Sodium vapour lamps produce yellow light which is more visible in the night compared to white light.

3. Sodium vapour lamps produce yellow light which
is more visible in the fog  and rain compared to white light.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.

(a)  1 only             (b)  2 only

(c)  3 only             (d)  1, 2 and 3


98. Lightning is a massive electrostatic discharge caused by  unbalanced electric charges in the atmosphere.Which of the following statements is/are true about this :-

1. It is result of cloud striking itself which has a negative charge at its bottom and the top has a positive charge.

2. It is result of an electrical discharge occurs within clouds and the ground.

3. It is result of a cloud with negative charge strikes with a cloud with positive charge.

Select the correct answer using the code given below

(a)  1 only         (b)  2 only

(c)  3 only         (d)  1, 2 and 3


99. How  is heat suddenly generated to the extent of
50,000 Fahrenheit during lightning:

(a)  Because clouds act like  charged capacitors. (b)  Because lightning is essentially an electrical
discharge through gases.

(c)  Because current is very high at the time of lightning.

(d)  Because voltage is very high at the time of
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1564

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

lightning.


100. Arrange the following electromagnetic radiations in decreasing order of energy:

1. Gamma rays

2. Ultraviolet rays

3. X-rays

Select the correct answer using the codes given below.

(a)  1-3-2                  (b)  1-2-3 (c)  2-1-3                  (d)  3-1-2
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1564

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Q.1     a         b         c         d Q.2     a         b         c         d Q.3     a         b         c         d Q.4     a         b         c         d Q.5     a         b         c         d Q.6     a         b         c         d Q.7     a         b         c         d Q.8     a         b         c         d Q.9     a         b         c         d Q.10   a         b         c         d Q.11   a         b         c         d Q.12   a         b         c         d Q.13   a         b         c         d Q.14   a         b         c         d Q.15   a         b         c         d Q.16   a         b         c         d Q.17   a         b         c         d Q.18   a         b         c         d Q.19   a         b         c         d Q.20   a         b         c         d Q.21   a         b         c         d Q.22   a         b         c         d Q.23   a         b         c         d Q.24   a         b         c         d Q.25   a         b         c         d Q.26   a         b         c         d Q.27   a         b         c         d Q.28   a         b         c         d Q.29   a         b         c         d Q.30   a         b         c         d Q.31   a         b         c         d Q.32   a         b         c         d Q.33   a         b         c         d Q.34   a         b         c         d Q.35   a         b         c         d
Q.36   a         b         c         d Q.37   a         b         c         d Q.38   a         b         c         d Q.39   a         b         c         d Q.40   a         b         c         d Q.41   a         b         c         d Q.42   a         b         c         d Q.43   a         b         c         d Q.44   a         b         c         d Q.45   a         b         c         d Q.46   a         b         c         d Q.47   a         b         c         d Q.48   a         b         c         d Q.49   a         b         c         d Q.50   a         b         c         d Q.51   a         b         c         d Q.52   a         b         c         d Q.53   a         b         c         d Q.54   a         b         c         d Q.55   a         b         c         d Q.56   a         b         c         d Q.57   a         b         c         d Q.58   a         b         c         d Q.59   a         b         c         d Q.60   a         b         c         d Q.61   a         b         c         d Q.62   a         b         c         d Q.63   a         b         c         d Q.64   a         b         c         d Q.65   a         b         c         d Q.66   a         b         c         d Q.67   a         b         c         d Q.68   a         b         c         d Q.69   a         b         c         d Q.70   a         b         c         d
Q.71   a         b         c         d Q.72   a         b         c         d Q.73   a         b         c         d Q.74   a         b         c         d Q.75   a         b         c         d Q.76   a         b         c         d Q.77   a         b         c         d Q.78   a         b         c         d Q.79   a         b         c         d Q.80   a         b         c         d Q.81   a         b         c         d Q.82   a         b         c         d Q.83   a         b         c         d Q.84   a         b         c         d Q.85   a         b         c         d Q.86   a         b         c         d Q.87   a         b         c         d Q.88   a         b         c         d Q.89   a         b         c         d Q.90   a         b         c         d Q.91   a         b         c         d Q.92   a         b         c         d Q.93   a         b         c         d Q.94   a         b         c         d Q.95   a         b         c         d Q.96   a         b         c         d Q.97   a         b         c         d Q.98   a         b         c         d Q.99   a         b         c         d Q.100 a         b         c         d
