GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1550

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Q.1  :d

Q.2  :d

It required that three not two of the six  members of the Viceroy’s executive council were to be Indian.


Q.3  :c

Article 109(1) of the constitution provides that A Money Bill shall not be introduced in the Council of States. Article 110(3) gives power to speaker to decide whether a bill is a money bill or not whose decision shall be final. Article 249(1) provides that if the Council of States has declared by  resolution supported by  not less than two-thirds of the members present and voting that it is necessary or expedient in the national interest that
Parliament should make laws with respect to any matter enumerated in the State List  specified in the resolution, it shall be lawful for  Parliament to make laws for  the whole or any part of the territory of India with respect to that matter while the resolution remains in force.


Q.4  :c

Governor is the chief executive head of the state.  Office of Governor of state is not an employment under the central  government.   Office of   governor  is   not  under  the  direct  control of   central  government.  It   is   an independent constitutional office and is not under the control of or subordinate to the central government.


Q.5  :d

Earlier social media was not used by  government as a tool now it has been increasingly used by  the government for  awareness programs.


Q.6  :d

1. Can only discuss the budget.

2. Can’t participate.


Q.7  :d

Q.8  :c

The  decision of the State Public Grievance Redressal Commission under this section shall be binding.


Q.9  :c

It provides for  the appointment of appropriately trained teachers, i.e, teachers with requisite entry academic qualifications.


Q.10 :a

under article 358, any law  or  any executive action are immune during national emergency from imposing article
32. Article 358 also says that “nothing in  article 19 shall restrict the power of  the State as defined in  Part III to make  any law   or   to  take  any  executive  action…”. In  part III,  State  includes parliament as  well   as state legislature. Government can suspend fundamental rights in  any part or  whole country irrespective of  the area that comes under national emergency.


Q.11 :c
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1550

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

The  term untouchability has not been defined in the constitution.


Q.12 :d

Double Membership

A person can not be a member of both Houses of Parliament at the same time. Thus, the Representation of
People Act (1951) provides for  the following:

1. If a person is elected to both the Houses of Parliament, he must intimate within 10 days in which House he desires to serve. In default of such intimation, his  seat in the Rajya Sabha Becomes vacant.
2. If a sitting member of one House is also elected to the other House, his  seat in the first House becomes vacant.
3. If a person is elected to two seats in a House, he should exercise his  option for  one. Otherwise, both seats become vacant.

Similarly, a person cannot be a member of both the Parliment and the state legislature at the same time. If a person is so elected, his  seat in Parliament becomes vacant if he does not resign his  seat in the state legislature within 14 days.


Q.13 :a

Q.14 :c

Radon is a product of radioactive decay of uranium. Thus underground Uranium mines have high concentration of Radon gas. Radon has been linked to lung cancer and is especially hazardous for  smokers, who already have a higher risk  of lung cancer. Workers are exposed to radon decay products in various underground mining operations, including uranium, fluorspar, iron and tin. Radon is about eight times heavier than air, so it stays close to the ground. It'll travel 1,000 miles in just a few  days in a light breeze. And  as it drifts along, it deposits on  the vegetation below the radon daughters, which are the radioactive byproducts.


Q.15 :b

In case of option 2, he holds office, during the pleasure of Governor.


Q.16 :c

The  World Social Forum is an annual meeting of civil  society organizations, first held in Brazil, which offers a self- conscious effort to develop an alternative future through the championing of  counter-hegemonic globalization. Some consider the  World Social Forum to  be  a  physical manifestation  of  global civil   society, as it  brings together  non  governmental  organizations,  advocacy  campaigns  as  well    as  formal  and  informal  social movements seeking international solidarity.


Q.17 :c

Money Bill can be introduced only by  a Minister.


Q.18 :a

Q.19 :c

In case of Statement 2, both centre and the state can make legislations, as in case of National Emergency, the state list  becomes the concurrent list.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1550

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Q.20 :d

1. Canadian Model

2. According to the Convention


Q.21 :d

According to Articles 12 and 36, the term State, for  the purposes of the chapters on  Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles, includes all authorities within the territory of India. It includes the Government of india, the Parliament, the Government and legislature of the states. It also includes all local or other authorities such as Municipal Corporations,  Municipal Boards, District Boards, Panchayats etc.


Q.22 :a

As the length increases and the cross sectional area decreases, the resistance increases. Hence the heating effect is more pronounced as it is directly proportional to the resistance of the conductor.


Q.23 :b

Natural sinks

Scientists have identified areas on  the earth that have the capacity to take in the greenhouse gases and clean the air  around us. These areas are known as ‘natural sinks’. Some of these natural sinks are forest cover (trees, vegetation), oceans, and soil  to some extent, all of which have the ability to take in carbon dioxide. In fact, soil  may also provide a removal mechanism for  methane. Trees and other land plants absorb carbon dioxide and serve as a storehouse, or ‘sink’, of carbon. Forest biomass accumulates carbon over decades and centuries making the carbon accumulation potential in forests large. Forests offer the possibility of taking in significant amounts of additional carbon in relatively short periods of
time.


Q.24 :b

Q.25 :d

Speaker appoints the chairman of  all  the parliamentary committees of  the Lok  Sabha and supervises their functioning. He  himself is  the chairman of  the  Business Advisory Committee, the  Rules Committee and the General Purpose Committee.


Q.26 :b

Article 359 authorises the president to suspend the right to move any court for  the enforcement of Fundamental
Rights during a National Emergency. Fundamental Rights as such are not suspended, but only their enforcement.

However, the suspension of enforcement relates to only those Fundamental Rights that are specified in the Presidential order. The  44th Amendment Act,  1978 provided that the President cannot suspend the right to move the Court for  the enforcement of fundamental rights guaranteed by  Articles 20 to 21.

It also provided that only those laws which are related with the emergency are protected from being challenged and not the other laws and the executive action taken only under such a law, is protected.

Hence, statements 2 and 3 are wrong.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1550

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Q.27 :b

Ozone is a pale blue gas, slightly soluble in water and much more soluble in inert non-polar solvents such as carbon tetrachloride or fluorocarbons, where it forms a blue solution.
Ozone is a powerful oxidizing agent, far  stronger than O2.
It is also unstable at high concentrations, decaying to ordinary diatomic oxygen


Q.28 :d

Q.29 :d

FD: who is a parent or guardian to provide opportunities for  education to his  child or,  as the case may be, ward between the age of six  and fourteen years

FR: Right to education , 21A  article
DPSP:Article 45 originally mandated the State to provide free and compulsory education to children between the ages of six  and fourteen years, but after the 86th Amendment in 2002, this has been converted into a Fundamental Right and replaced by  an obligation upon the State to secure childhood care to all children below the age of six.
46. Promotion of educational and economic interests of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other weaker sections The  State shall promote with special care the educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of the people, and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from social injustice and all forms of exploitation


Q.30 :b

Any question regarding disqualification arising out of defection is to be decided by  the presiding officer of the House. Originally, the act provided that the decision of the presiding officer is final and cannot be questioned in any court. However, in Kihoto Hollohan case (1993), the Supreme Court declared this provision as unconstitutional on  the ground that it seeks to take away the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court and the high courts. It held that the presiding officer, while deciding a question under the Tenth Schedule, function as a tribunal. Hence, his  decision like  that of any other tribunal, is subject to judicial review on  the grounds of mala fides, perversity, etc.


Q.31 :a

Abolition and creation  of legislative councils can be done by  simple majority only. whereas  DPSP's require special majority but not ratification of states. lastly although Supreme courts and high courts require special majority and ratification of states but conferment of more jurisdiction on  supreme court can be done by  simple majority.


Q.32 :d

Q.33 :cSecond Schedule                                                                       Salary of President, Governors, Chief Judges, Judges of High  Court and Supreme court, Comptroller and Auditor General

Q.34 :c

Grievances based on  non implementation of Directive Principles cannot be challenged in Court.


Q.35 :d

Q.36 :d

Article 87(1) of the Constitution provides:- "At the commencement of the first session after each general
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1550

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

election to the House of the People and at the commencement of the first session of each year the President shall address both Houses of Parliament assembled together and inform Parliament of the causes of its summons."


Q.37 :d

The  purpose of Article 32 is to provide a guaranteed, effective, quick and inexpensive remedy for  the protection of the fundamental rights. Only  the Fundamental Rights guaranteed by  the Constitution can be enforced under Article 32 and not any other non-fundamental rights.Article 32 cannot be invoked simply to determine the constitutionality of an executive order or a legislation unless it directly infringes any of the fundamental rights.
Moreover, in case of the enforcement of Fundamental
Rights, the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court is original but not exclusive. It is concurrent with the jurisdiction of the high court under Article 226. It means when the Fundamental Rights of a citizen are violated, the aggrieved party has the option of moving either the high court or the Supreme Court directly.
Hence, both the statements are wrong.


Q.38 :d

Coalition government was formed at  state  level first. At  national  level, coalition came  only in  1997 under Morarji Desai prime ministership. India uses proportional representational system in the election process of the president. Under article 352(2) and 352(4), president can issue a proclamation to revoke the emergency.


Q.39 :d

Q.40 :d

President can appoint a commission to investigate into the conditions of SCs,  STs  and other backward classes. President appoints the attorney general of India and determines his  remuneration.

Q.41 :b

Under article 84, a person shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in Parliament unless he is,  in the case of a seat in the Council of States, not less than thirty years of age and, in the case of a seat in the House of the People, not less than twenty-five years of  age. Article 331 says that the President may, if he is  of  opinion that the Anglo-Indian community is not adequately represented in the House of the People, nominate not more than two members  of  that  community to the  House of  the  People. Current 15th  lok   sabha  has  two nominated members - Smt. Ingrid Mcleod, and Dr.  Charles Dias. Constitution does not prescribe that members should be from different states.


Q.42 :d

Q.43 :b

Few  parts of constitution e.g. Article 5, 6, 7, 8 ,9, 60, 324  came into force on  November 26, 1949 itself.

The  Indian independence act, 1947 and Government of India act, 1935 were repealed on  26th January, 1950 with the commencement of the constitution.


Q.44 :c

1 is correct e.g. enemy aliens don’t enjoy protection against arrest and detention under article 22.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1550

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Aliens do  not enjoy all the civil  and political rights as citizens do.


Q.45 :c

The  cohesive forces between liquid molecules are responsible for  the phenomenon known as surface tension. The   molecules at the surface do   not have other like   molecules on   all  sides of  them and consequently they cohere more strongly to those directly associated with them on  the surface. This  forms a surface "film"  which makes it more difficult to move an object through the surface than to move it when it is completely submersed.

Hot  water is a better cleaning agent because the lower surface tension makes it a better "wetting agent" to get into pores and fissures rather than bridging them with surface tension. Soaps and detergents further lower the surface tension.


Q.46 :b



Not deemed as amendment


Q.47 :c

Started in  1948 by  the US-based Institute of  Supply Management, the Purchasing Managers' Index, or  PMI. PMI or  a Purchasing Managers' Index (PMI)  is  an indicator of  business activity --  both in  the manufacturing and services sectors. It is  a survey-based measures that asks the respondents about changes in  their perception of some key business variables from the  month before. It  is  calculated separately for   the manufacturing and services sectors and then a composite index is constructed.

Recent report Indicate that India's PMI is increasing while China's decreasing.


Q.48 :a

Governor summons in option 1. In case of option 3, the presiding officer declares the house adjourned.


Q.49 :c

Hyderabad was integrate by  the means of police action while Junagarh by  referendum. Nagaland was part of Indian union and was separated later from Assam.
4 is incorrect. The basis for  creating these new states was socio-political and not linguistic. In Sikkim referendum was used while army was used to integrate Goa

Q.50 :a

Q.51 :c

Article 164 of the constitution provides that in the States of Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and Odisha, there shall be a Minister in charge of tribal welfare who may in addition be in charge of the welfare of the Scheduled Castes and backward classes or any other work.
Parliament may, by  law, form within the State of Assam an autonomous State comprising (whether wholly or in part) all or any of the tribal areas specified under schedule six.  Many tribes (like  Karbi Anglong and North Cachhar tribal people) are demanding status of autonomous state. Meghalaya was initially an autonomous state before it was given full status of state.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1550

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Q.52 :a

A remedy under Article 32 is in itself a Fundamental Right and hence, the SupremeCourt may not refuse to exercise its writ  jurisdiction. On  the other hand, a remedy under Article 226 is discretionary and hence, a high court may refuse to exercise its writ  jurisdiction. Hence, statement 1 is correct.
Unlike the other four writs, Quo-Warranto can be sought by  any interested person and not necessarily by the aggrieved person. Hence, statement 2 is not true.


Q.53 :a

A proclamation declaring financial emergency must be approved by  both the Houses of Parliament within two months from the date of its issue. However, if the proclamation of Financial Emergency is issued at a time when the Lok Sabha has been dissolved or the dissolution of the Lok Sabha takes place during the period of two months without approving the proclamation, then the proclamation survives until 30 days from the first sitting of the Lok Sabha after its reconstitution, provided the Rajya Sabha has in the meantime approved it.
Once approved by  both the Houses of Parliament, the Financial Emergency continues indefinitely till it is revoked. This  implies two things:

1. there is no  maximum period prescribed for  its operation; and
2. repeated parliamentary approval is not required for  its continuation.

A resolution approving the proclamation of financial emergency can be passed by  either House of Parliament only by  a simple majority, that is,  a majority of the members of that house present and voting.
A proclamation of Financial Emergency may be revoked by  the president at anytime by  a subsequent proclamation. Such a proclamation does not require the parliamentary approval.


Q.54 :a

in the famous Mandal case, 1992 the scope and extent of article 16(4) which provides for  reservation of jobs in favour of  backward classes, has been examined thoroughly by  the Supreme Court. It upheld the constitutional validity of 27% reservation for  the OBCs  with certain conditions: a) the advanced sections among the OBCs  (the creamy layer) should be excluded from the list  of beneficiaries of reservation; b)  no  reservation in promotion; c) A permanent statutory body should be established to examine complaints of over-inclusion and under-inclusion in the list  of OBCs.  Pursuant to this direction of SC, the government of India enacted the national commission for backward classes act, 1993 for   setting up a national commission for   Backward Classes  at the centre as a permanent body.


Q.55 :a


First statement enforces art 43
2nd statement enforces article47
3rd statement enforces art 40.



Q.56 :c


In statement 1, the 7th Amendment act of 1956 facilitated the appointment of the same person as a
Governor for two or more states
In statement 2, the judges of the high court of the states are appointed by the President.


Q.57 :c

Malaria is caused by  a parasite that is passed from one human to another by  the bite of infected Anopheles
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1550

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

mosquitoes. After infection, the parasites (called sporozoites) travel through the bloodstream to the liver, where they mature and release another form, the merozoites. The  parasites enter the bloodstream and infect red
blood cells.

The  parasites multiply inside the red blood cells, which then break open within 48 to 72 hours, infecting more red blood cells. The  first symptoms usually occur 10 days to 4 weeks after infection, though they can appear as early as 8 days or as long as a year after infection. The  symptoms occur in cycles of 48 to 72 hours.

Most symptoms are caused by:

The  release of merozoites into the bloodstream
Anemia resulting from the destruction of the red blood cells
Large amounts of free hemoglobin being released into circulation after red blood cells break open


Q.58 :b

The  Fundamental Duties in  the Indian Constitution are inspired by  the Constitution of  erstwhile USSR.  In 1976, the Congress Party set up the Sardar Swaran Singh Committee to make recommendations about fundamental duties, the need and necessity of  which was felt during the operation of  the internal emergency (1975–1977). The   Congress Government at Centre accepted these recommendations and enacted the 42nd Constitutional Amendment Act  in 1976. The  Fundamental Duties are confined to citizens only and do  not extend to foreigners. Like  the Directive Principles, the fundamental duties are also non-justiciable. The  Constitution does not provide for  their direct enforcement by  the courts. Moreover, there is  not legal sanction against their violation. Article
51A(g) mentions a duty to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers and wildlife and to have compassion for  living creatures


Q.59 :a

Muzaffarnagar riot camps


Q.60 :b

Mandatory CSR
Concept of one person company ('OPC') introduced.
Indian Companies are compulsorily required to have March 31 as the financial year end date. CEO/CFO  included as 'Key  Managerial Personnel'
Private Companies can have up to 200 shareholders(earlier 50)
Concept of 'small company' introduced - to mean a company, which is not a 'public company' and having a paid up capital not exceeding Rs 50 lakhs or such amount, not exceeding Rs 5 crores, as may be prescribed OR having sales turnover not exceeding Rs 2crores or such amount not exceeding Rs 20 crores, as may be prescribed.


Q.61 :a

Q.62 :d

Loss of citizenship by  deprivation means termination of citizenship by  the central government if the citizen has obtained the citizenship by  fraud, shown disloyalty to the constitution, communicated with the enemy during war, has been staying out of India for  seven years continuously or within 5 years of registration or naturalisation been imprisoned in any country for  two years.


Q.63 :a

Q.64 :d
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1550

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Q.65 :d

Preamble is a part of the constitution. It has been amended once in 1976 by  42nd amendment and three words i.e. socialist, secular and integrity were added. It is non justiciable i.e. can’t be enforced in a court of law


Q.66 :b

In statement 1, the instructions has to be provided to children belonging to linguistic minority areas only and statement 3 is article 47 which is included in the part 4 of the constitution.


Q.67 :b

Can’t be challenged in the courts.


Q.68 :d

The  office of ‘whip’, is mentioned neither in the Constitution of India nor in the Rules of the House nor in a
Parliamentary Statute. It is based on  the conventions of the parliamentary government.

Every political party, whether ruling or Opposition has its own whip in the Parliament. He  is appointed by  the political party to serve as an assistant floor leader.


Q.69 :d

Q.70 :a

The  Parliament and not the President makes such a delegation.


Q.71 :c

Adjournment is done by  presiding officer of the House and it does not affect the bills  or any other business pending before the House.

Prorogation is done by  the president of India and it also does not affect the bills  or any other business pending before the House. However, all pending notices (other than those for  introducing bills) lapse on  prorogation and fresh notices have to be given for  the next session.


Q.72 :a

India enacted its constitution in 1950 and Pakistan in 1956. Pakistan remained a British dominion until 1956.


Q.73 :b

Q.74 :c

Statement  1, Provisions relating to the administration of tribal areas in Sixth applies only to Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura, Mizoram.

Statement 2, In I.R. Coelho V/s State of Tamil Nadu (2007), Supreme Court ruled that, the laws included in ninth schedule are open to judicial review.


Q.75 :b
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1550

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Statement 2 is correct. Article 31A  saves five  categories of laws from being challenged and invalidated on  the ground of contravention of the fundamental rights conferred by  Article 14 and Article 19. Article
31B  saves the acts and regulations included in the Ninth Schedule from being challenged and invalidated on  the ground of contravention of any of the fundamental rights.
Article 31C  states that no  law  that seeks to implement the socialistic directive principles specified in Article 39(b) or (c)  shall be void on the ground of contravention of the fundamental rights conferred by Article 14 or  Article 19. The  42nd Amendment Act,  1976 extended the scope of Article
31C  by  including within its protection any law  to implement any of the directive principles specified in Part IV of the Constitution and not merely in Article 39 (b)  or (c).  However, this extension was declared as unconstitutional by  the Supreme Court in the Minerva Mills case, 1980. Hence, statement 1 is incorrect.


Q.76 :b Q.77 :c Q.78 :a
1. The  Presidential rule is subjected to Judicial review.

2. Burden lies on  the center to prove that relevent material exist to justify the imposition of the President's rule.

3. The  state legilative assemby can be dissolved only after the Parliament has approved the PR.


Q.79 :a

Gender Inequality Index Rank, 2013 UNDP: 127TH rank India.
The  Gender Inequality Index (GII) is an index for  measurement of gender disparity that was introduced in the 2010 Human Development Report 20th anniversary edition by  the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).  According to the UNDP, this index is a composite measure which captures the loss
of achievement within a country due to gender inequality. It uses three dimensions to do  so:
reproductive health, empowerment, and labor market participation.
The  new index was introduced as an experimental measure to remedy the shortcomings of the previous indicators, the Gender Development Index (GDI) and the Gender Empowerment Measure (GEM),  both of which were introduced in the 1995 Human Development Report.
India ranks 114 out of 142 countries in World Economic Forum’s 2014 gender gap index. The  index was first introduced by  the World Economic Forum in 2006 as a framework for  capturing the magnitude of gender-based disparities and tracking their progress. The  index benchmarks national gender gaps on economic, political, education and health criteria


Q.80 :d

Article 29 grants protection to both religious minorities as well  as linguistic minorities. Moreover, the scope of
this article includes minorities as well  as the majority.
However, the protection under Article 30 is confined only to minorities (religious or linguistic) and does not extend to the majority section of citizens, as was the case under Article 29.
Hence, both the statements are wrong.


Q.81 :d

1. power does not extend to death penalty cases but allows in the case of life  imprisonment.
2. does not extend to punishments or sentence given by  a Court Martial.
3. is bound by  the advice of his/her Councils of Ministers.
4. is subject to judicial review.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1550

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in


Q.82 :d

A Money Bill can be introduced only in the Lok Sabha on  the recommendation of President. Any question about a bill is money bill or not, the decision of the speaker shall be final; every Money Bill has to be certified by  the speaker as such a Bill (Article 110). Only  a minister can introduce money Bill.
Money Bill can be rejected and approved but can’t be returned for  reconsideration by  the president. Whereas ordinary bill can be returned for  reconsideration by  the President.


Q.83 :d

Starred Questions require an  oral answer and  hence,  supplementary question can follow whereas Unstarred Questions requires a written answer and hence, supplementary question cannot follow. Maximum 20 Questions are included in  the list  of  Starred Questions for  a particular day, and the list  is printed on  white paper.
Not  more than 230 Questions can be placed on  the Unstarred list  for  a particular sitting. This   list  is printed on  white paper.  Minimum of  15 clear days notice is  required for  tabling Unstarred Questions. Short Notice Questions answered orally.Not more than 230 Questions can be placed on  the Unstarred list for  a particular sitting. This  list  is printed on  white paper.  Minimum of 15 clear days notice is required for tabling Unstarred Questions. Short Notice Questions answered orally.


Q.84 :c

Q.85 :c
When wood is burnt in a limited supply of oxygen, water and volatile materials present in it get removed and charcoal is left behind as the residue. Charcoal burns without flames, is comparatively smokeless and has a higher heat generation efficiency.

Q.86 :a

All the statements are right.





Q.87 :b
Burning coke in the absence of air  wont create CO2. Carbon dioxide is prepared

by  treating any metallic carbonate with dilute mineral acids, or

CaCO3 + 2 HCl ==> CaCl2 + H2O + CO2

by  heating carbonates of metals other than alkali metals.

Heat MgCO3 ==> MgO + CO2
Burning methane releases only carbon dioxide and water. Q.88 :c

-


Q.89 :c
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1550

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Q.90 :a

Plant Protection Code (PPC),  a set of guidelines for  regulating the chemical inputs in tea cultivation, was rolled out on  January 1, 2015. The  aim is to make Indian tea a safe and healthy drink.
The  PPC is a comprehensive document, which deals with safe usage of crop protection products and methodologies that would be followed to reduce pesticide residues in tea.
The  code encourages tea growers to critically review their plant protection formulations (PPF),  which are a list  of chemicals that are used in tea. The  code is based on  the Codex Alimentarius, which is a set of international food standards and guidelines.


Q.91 :d

A person who is not a member of the state legislature can be appointed as chief minister for  6 months, within which time, he should be elected to the State Legislature. The  term of the chief minister is not fixed as he holds office during the pleasure of the Governor.


Q.92 :a

The  projected climatic changes in the Arctic, particularly the projected decrease in sea-ice extent and thickness, will result in increased accessibility to the open ocean and surrounding coastal areas. This  is very likely to make it easier to exploit marine and coastal species, over a larger area and for  a greater proportion of the
year. Decreased extent and thickness of sea ice and increased sea water temperatures will, however, also result in changes in the distribution, diversity, and productivity of marine species in the Arctic and so will change the environment for  hunters and indigenous peoples.


Q.93 :c

1. It is a yellow-green gas.
2. It has the highest electron affinity. (Fluorine is most electronegative)
3. Chlorine is a strong oxidizing agent.
4. Free chlorine is rare on  Earth.



Q.94 :b

The  state can impose reasonable restrictions on  the exercise of the freedom of speech and expression on  the ground of sovereignty and integrity of India, security of the state, friendly relations with foreign states, public order, decency or morality, contempt of court, defamation, and incitement to an offence.


Q.95 :b

Constitution doesn’t deals with the problem of acquisition or loss of citizenship subsequent to its commencement; however it has empowered parliament to make laws on  such matter and Citizenship act of
1955 deals with the ways of acquiring citizenship not constitution.


Q.96 :b

Q.97 :d

While launching the proposed new National Air Quality Index (AQI), the Union Minister of State for  environment, Prakash Javadekar, said this government won’t allow a ‘business as usual’ scenario. Formulating the Index was taking the Swachh Bharat (Clean India) campaign a step further, he said and added that that the AQI was a ‘One Number-One Colour-One Description’ for  people to judge air  quality.

Mr Javadekar said a team of 20 experts has created a comparable and comprehensive index to indicate the
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1550

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

quality of air  in a city and its impact on  health. The  AQI report will be put up on  the website of the Central
Pollution Control Board (CPCB)  to seek public comments for  45 days after which it will be finalised.

The  AQI will consider eight pollutants PM(particulate matter)10, PM 2.5, Nitrogen dioxide, Sulphur dioxide, carbon monoxide, ozone, lead and ammonia for  which National Ambient Air Quality Standards are prescribed.

The  government had set up an expert committee following reports of Delhi having the worst air  quality in the world so that India could evolve its own standards for  pollution index in cities. Though the CPCB and state pollution control boards have been operating the National Air Monitoring Programme covering 240 cities, the AQI is an attempt to effectively disseminate air  quality information to the people.


Q.98 :a

Whenever the office of the Speaker falls vacant, the Lok Sabha elects another member to fill the vacancy. The date of election of the Speaker is fixed by  the President.

Whenever the Lok Sabha is dissolved, the Speaker does not vacate his  office and continues till the newly- elected Lok Sabha meets.


Q.99 :c

Ripening is a process in fruits that causes them to become more palatable. In general, a fruit becomes sweeter, less green, and softer as it ripens. Even though the acidity of fruit increases as it ripens, the higher acidity level does not make the fruit seem tarter, which can lead to the misunderstanding that the riper the fruit the sweeter. This  is attributed to the Brix-Acid Ratio.
Use of ethylene for  ripening of the fruit is a common practice in different countries but due to high cost and scarcity in terms of its availability, many developing countries like  use low-cost calcium carbide to ripen fruit. Calcium carbide reacts with water to produce acetylene, which acts as an artificial ripening agent.


Q.100 :c

Himadri Station is India's first Arctic research station located New  research station in Arctic .

IndARC  Established in August 2014. Designed and developed by  scientists from the National Centre for  Antarctic and Ocean Research (NCAOR)  and National Institute of  Ocean Technology (NIOT),  the observatory has been deployed in the Kongsfjorden fjord of the Arctic, roughly halfway between Norway and the North Pole.

In 1981 the Indian flag unfurled for  the first time in Antarctica, marking the start of Southern Ocean expeditions under  the  environmental  protocol of   the  Antarctic Treaty (1959). Dakshin Gangotri the  first permanent settlement was built in 1983 and named Dakshin Gangotri. In 1989 it was buried and was later excavated and is being used again. Dakshin Gangotri was the first scientific base station of  India situated in  Antarctica, part of the Indian Antarctic Program. It  is  located at a distance of  2,500 kilometres (1,600 mi)  from the South Pole.It was abandoned in 1988-1989 after it was submerged in ice. It was succeeded by  the Maitri, which was set up in a moderate climatic zone at a distance of 90 km  and

made operational in 1990.Dakshin Gangotri was finally decommissioned on  25 February 1990 and subsequently turned into a supply base.

Maitri: The  second permanent settlement, Maitri, was put up in  1989 on  the Schirmacher Oasis and has been conducting experiments in geology, geography  and medicine. India built a freshwater  lake around Maitri known as Lake Priyadharshini. Maitri accomplished the mission of geomorphologic mapping of Schirmacher Oasis.

Bharathi: India has demarcated an area beside Larsmann Hill at 69°S, 76°E for  its third settlement and second active research  station. The   survey has already been  completed and the  station is  operational. India has entered the elite group of  nine nations having multiple stations within the Antarctic Circle. Bharati is  proposed for  oceanographic research and will  collect evidence of  continental breakup to reveal the 120-million-year-old ancient history of the Indian subcontinent.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1550

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1550

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Q.1    a        b        c        d Q.2    a        b        c        d Q.3    a        b        c        d Q.4    a        b        c        d Q.5    a        b        c        d Q.6    a        b        c        d Q.7    a        b        c        d Q.8    a        b        c        d Q.9    a        b        c        d Q.10  a        b        c        d Q.11  a        b        c        d Q.12  a        b        c        d Q.13  a        b        c        d Q.14  a        b        c        d Q.15  a        b        c        d Q.16  a        b        c        d Q.17  a        b        c        d Q.18  a        b        c        d Q.19  a        b        c        d Q.20  a        b        c        d Q.21  a        b        c        d Q.22  a        b        c        d Q.23  a        b        c        d Q.24  a        b        c        d Q.25  a        b        c        d Q.26  a        b        c        d Q.27  a        b        c        d Q.28  a        b        c        d Q.29  a        b        c        d Q.30  a        b        c        d Q.31  a        b        c        d Q.32  a        b        c        d Q.33  a        b        c        d Q.34  a        b        c        d Q.35  a        b        c        d
Q.36  a        b        c        d Q.37  a        b        c        d Q.38  a        b        c        d Q.39  a        b        c        d Q.40  a        b        c        d Q.41  a        b        c        d Q.42  a        b        c        d Q.43  a        b        c        d Q.44  a        b        c        d Q.45  a        b        c        d Q.46  a        b        c        d Q.47  a        b        c        d Q.48  a        b        c        d Q.49  a        b        c        d Q.50  a        b        c        d Q.51  a        b        c        d Q.52  a        b        c        d Q.53  a        b        c        d Q.54  a        b        c        d Q.55  a        b        c        d Q.56  a        b        c        d Q.57  a        b        c        d Q.58  a        b        c        d Q.59  a        b        c        d Q.60  a        b        c        d Q.61  a        b        c        d Q.62  a        b        c        d Q.63  a        b        c        d Q.64  a        b        c        d Q.65  a        b        c        d Q.66  a        b        c        d Q.67  a        b        c        d Q.68  a        b        c        d Q.69  a        b        c        d Q.70  a        b        c        d
Q.71  a        b        c        d Q.72  a        b        c        d Q.73  a        b        c        d Q.74  a        b        c        d Q.75  a        b        c        d Q.76  a        b        c        d Q.77  a        b        c        d Q.78  a        b        c        d Q.79  a        b        c        d Q.80  a        b        c        d Q.81  a        b        c        d Q.82  a        b        c        d Q.83  a        b        c        d Q.84  a        b        c        d Q.85  a        b        c        d Q.86  a        b        c        d Q.87  a        b        c        d Q.88  a        b        c        d Q.89  a        b        c        d Q.90  a        b        c        d Q.91  a        b        c        d Q.92  a        b        c        d Q.93  a        b        c        d Q.94  a        b        c        d Q.95  a        b        c        d Q.96  a        b        c        d Q.97  a        b        c        d Q.98  a        b        c        d Q.99  a        b        c        d Q.100 a        b        c        d
