GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1565

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Q.1  :a

Sprinkling salt on  ice  makes it melt, which is why rock salt is used to make walkways and roadways safer after a snowstorm. The  reason it works is because it raises the melting point of ice. At a molecular level, the rate of freezing is lowered below the (constant) rate of melting, because the spacing between the water molecules is increased.
bauxite;
The  reuse of aluminum cans reduces air pollution by  99% and energy consumption by
95% compared with the production of virgin aluminum from bauxite; and
The  54 billion cans that the United States recycled in 2006 saved the equivalent of 15 billion barrels of crude oil.


Q.2  :b




High  boiling point
Low freezing point.
High  resistance to oxidation.
Tribo electric effect is contact electrification. For  example- Rubbing glass with fur.
Q.6  :c

- Magnetite chemically formulated as Fe3O4.

- Hematite – Fe2O3


Q.7  :a

Q.8  :d

Q.3  :a

Many chemical reactions release energy in the form of heat, light, or sound. These are exothermic reactions. Exothermic reactions may occur spontaneously and result in higher randomness or entropy (ΔS > 0)  of the system. They are denoted by a negative heat flow  (heat is lost to the
surroundings) and decrease in enthalpy (ΔH < 0).  In the lab, exothermic reactions produce heat or may even be explosive. There are other chemical reactions that must absorb energy in order to











Q.9  :d
Carbon black or lamp black is produced by such as tar, coal tar, vegetable oil etc.
It is a form of amorphous carbon. Lamp black was traditionally produced by  collecting root form oil lamps and used as kajal.
The  International Agency for  Research on cancer (IARC) finds that carbon black is possibly carcinogenic to humans.
proceed. These are endothermic reactions. Endothermic reactions cannot occur spontaneously. Work  must be done in order to get these reactions to occur. When endothermic reactions absorb energy, a temperature drop is measured during the reaction. Endothermic reactions are characterized by  positive heat flow  (into the reaction) and an increase in enthalpy (+ΔH).


Q.4  :d

Potassium permanganate has the ability to “oxidize” soluble manganese and iron in drinking water to an insoluble manganese dioxide and iron oxide that can be removed by  filtration.


Q.5  :c
A crystal or crystalline solid is a solid material whose constituent atoms, molecules, or ions are arranged
in an orderly repeating pattern extending in all three spatial dimensions.

Crystalline solids exhibit cleavage: that is,  when you break them, the nature of the break indicates the crystal structure. Thus, grinding a crystal of NaCl (which is cubic) inevitably produces small cubes of NaCl.

Noncrystalline solids such as glass break into randomly-shaped pieces.  Noncrystalline solids such as glass soften as the temperature increases and have no  sharply defined melting point. On  the other hand, quartz, which has the same chemical composition as glass but is crystalline, melts sharply at around 1650 degrees Celsius.

The  widespread use of recycled aluminum saves energy and reduces pollution, because mining and processing raw bauxite ore to extract the aluminum it contains is very energy and waste intensive. Specifically,

Each one ton of aluminum cans produced from recycled cans saves five  tons of
Q.10 :a


Under the  Kyoto Protocol, 37  industrialized countries and the European Community (the European Union-15, made up of  15 states at the time of  the  Kyoto negotiations)  commit themselves to binding targets  for  GHG emissions.  The    targets   apply  to  the  four
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1565

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

















Q.11 :c
greenhouse gases  carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous  oxide (N2O), sulphur hexafluoride (SF6), and two groups of  gases, hydrofluorocarbons   (HFCs)    and perfluorocarbons (PFCs).[50] The  six  GHG are translated   into  CO2    equivalents   in determining reductions in  emissions. These reduction  targets  are  in    addition to  the industrial   gases,    chlorofluorocarbons,   or CFCs,   which are dealt with under the 1987
Montreal    Protocol    on      Substances   that
Deplete the Ozone Layer.










Q.14 :d
elements with similar properties: under standard conditions, they are all odorless, colorless, monatomic gases with very low chemical reactivity. The  six  noble gases that occur naturally are helium (He), neon (Ne), argon (Ar),  krypton (Kr), xenon (Xe), and the radioactive radon (Rn).






In Biogas plant,it takes a few  days for  the decomposition process to be complete and generate gases like  methane, carbon dioxide, hydrogen and hydrogen sulphide.

Alpha glucose and beta glucose were among the first isomers discovered by  chemists. Both are important forms of glucose which are essential in human metabolism.

Alpha glucose and beta glucose both have the same number of carbon atoms, hydrogen atoms, and oxygen atoms. However, when these atoms are formed as molecules, they are arranged into two, different, structural compounds.

Alpha glucose is compact, yet its molecules can be easily taken apart. On  the other hand, the molecules of beta glucose are very
stable; hence they cannot be easily taken apart.

Starch is made up of chains of alpha glucose while cellulose, or fiber, is made up of chains of beta glucose.


Q.15 :b

1. dust

4. mist

Particulates are small pieces of solid material (for example, smoke particles from fires, bits of asbestos, dust particles and ash from industries) dispersed into the atmosphere. The  effects of particulates range from soot to the carcinogenic (cancer causing) effects of asbestos, dust particles
and ash from industrial plants that are dispersed into the atmosphere. Repeated exposure to particulates can cause them to accumulate in the lungs and interfere with the ability of the lungs to exchange gases.

The  tasty parts of the plants are usually made up of chains of alpha glucose while the hard parts of plants are usually made up of chains of beta glucose. Humans can easily digest starch, but we  cannot digest cellulose or fiber. Though this is the situation, cellulose or fiber can still  improve the function of our digestive system.



Q.12 :d

Lakes formed in limestone bedrock can neutralize the acidity of the rain, but lakes with granitic bedrock have limited capacity to neutralize the acid rain.




Q.16 :b


Q.13 :d



The  noble gases make a group of chemical
Dry  ice, sometimes referred to as "Cardice" or as "card ice"  is the solid form of carbon dioxide.
It is used primarily as a cooling  agent.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1565

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Its  advantages include lower temperature than that of water ice  and not leaving any residue (other than incidental frost from moisture in the atmosphere).
It is useful for  preserving frozen foods, ice cream, etc., where mechanical cooling is unavailable.
Q.22 :b

In some cases, the two recorders may be combined in a single unit.


Q.23 :c


Q.17 :d




The  heated air  inside the envelope makes it buoyant since it has a lower density than the relatively cold air  outside the envelope. Increasing the air  temperature inside the envelope makes it lighter than the surrounding (ambient) air. The  balloon floats because of the buoyant force exerted on  it. This  force is the same force that acts on objects when they are in water and is described by  Archimedes' principle.
As with all aircraft, hot air  balloons cannot fly beyond the atmosphere.













Q.24 :a
In graphite the carbon atoms are bonded into hexagonal sheets. These exist in layers,
which are not covalently connected to the surrounding layers but are instead connected together by  weak van der Waals forces much like  those of mica.  In diamond the carbon crystallizes into a face centered cubic lattice, and the material is covalently linked together as a whole.





When a strip of filter paper is soaked in
cobalt chloride solution, it is pink when damp and turns blue when dry.

Q.18 :d


Putting lead on  vessel will accumulate hot vapours and will help in raising temperature. Adding more salt will make high boiling point thus increasing maximum temperature reached before boiling.
Adding more oil will help in reach high temperature as oil has much high boiling point.

Q.25 :d




New  bitcoins are generated by  a competitive and decentralized process called "mining". But  Bitcoins are created at a decreasing and predictable rate. The  number of new bitcoins created each year is automatically halved over time until bitcoin issuance halts completely with a total of 21 million bitcoins in existence.

Q.19 :d









Q.20 :a

Q.21 :d


Gunmetal is resistant to corrosion from steam and salt water.
Gunmetal is a type of bronze.
Copper are Tin are ingredients of gun metal.








Sugar is most soluble in water because it is a polar molecule. water is also a polar molecule...if a solute will dissolve in a solvent is "like dissolves like" so polar water will dissolve polar molecules... nonpolar substances will dissolve other nonpolar substances.
Sugars have many polar oxygen–hydrogen
(-OH)  groups and are overall highly polar.

Q.26 :c



















Q.27 :d Q.28 :b Q.29 :c




Two  hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom makes a water molecule. Heavy water is also water, but it contains a higher proportion of the hydrogen isotope – deuterium.
Heavy water has a higher freezing and boiling point when compared to water. In terms of density, PH value, dynamic
viscosity, heat fusion, heat of vaporization, surface tension and refractive index, heavy water has higher values than that of water. Heavy water has a more tetrahedral shape, and the water has a broader structure. While water is essential for  all,  heavy water can be harmful to living organisms.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1565

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

The  major difference between diffusion and osmosis is primarily based on  the kind of matter that is being transported. In diffusion, it involves passive movement of any forms of chemical from one place to another; in osmosis, it mostly involves movement of water molecules from higher solute concentration to lower solute concentration.

Aside from what is stated above, there are other factors that distinguish diffusion from osmosis which are enumerated below:

Diffusion and osmosis differ in relation to the direction of movement that takes place. In diffusion, the molecules of the substance involve may disperse in any direction; in osmosis, the course of the water molecules follows only one path.
Diffusion can take place even without the involvement of a membrane whereas osmosis only happens from one porous membrane to another.
Diffusion is not limited to occur on  liquids, gases can also diffuse. However, osmosis can only arise in fluid  or liquid solutions.
The  speed of movement also differs between diffusion and osmosis wherein the latter disperses a lot  slower than the former. Diffusion may break up molecules in long distances. On  the other hand, osmosis
breaks up molecules in short distances.

























Q.31 :c

Q.32 :d







Q.33 :b
diffuse into the upper atmosphere. This  is a slow process and can take as long as five  to fifteen years. In the stratosphere unfiltered UV-radiation severs the chemical bonds releasing chlorine from the rest of the CFC. This  attacks the ozone molecule resulting in its splitting into an oxygen molecule and an oxygen atom. Despite the fact that CFCs  are evenly distribute over the globe, the ozone depletion is especially pronounced over the South Pole due to the extreme weather conditions in the Antarctic atmosphere.
The  presence of the ice  crystals makes the Cl- O bonding easier. The  ozone layer over countries like  Australia, New  Zealand, South Africa and parts of South America is also depleted. India has signed the Montreal Protocol in 1992, which aims to control the production and consumption of Ozone Depleting Substances.







The  body cannot manufacture these antioxidants so they must be supplied in the diet.


Q.30 :d



CFCs  (chloro-flurocarbons) are extremely stable, non-flammable, non-toxic and harmless to handle. This  makes them ideal for  many industrial applications like  aerosols, air  conditioners, refrigerators and fire extinguishers. Many cans, which give out foams and sprays, use CFCs.  (eg: perfumes, room fresheners, etc.) CFCs  are also used in making foams for  mattresses and cushions, disposable Styrofoam cups, glasses, packaging material for  insulation, cold storage etc. However their stability also
gives them a long life  span in the atmosphere. Halons are similar in structure to the CFCs  but contain bromine atoms
instead of chlorine. They are more dangerous to the ozone layer than CFCs.  Halons are
used as fire  extinguishing agents as they do





















Q.34 :a
an ideal crystal conducts better than a non- ideal crystal resulting in ideal crystals having good thermal conductivity, which is a measure of heat conduction. Diamond being an ideal crystal is thus a good thermal conductor.
Diamond has a unique atomic structure. Each of the Carbon atom's valence electrons is taken up in covalent bonding, so each electron is localised. This  means that no  one electron is free to pass an electric current through the Diamond - thus, Diamond cannot carry an electrical current; there is nothing to pass the current through.
not pose a harm to people and equipment exposed to them during fire  fighting.
The  CFCs  and the halons migrate into the upper atmosphere after they are released. As they are heavier than air  they have to be carried by  air  currents up to just above the lower atmosphere and then they slowly
For  any element:

Number of Protons = Atomic Number Number of Electrons = Number of Protons = Atomic Number
Number of Neutrons = Mass Number - Atomic Number
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1565

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Q.35 :b

Q.36 :a
Q.42 :a

Q.43 :b










Q.37 :d
When heat is passed through the metal (the process of conduction) the molecules are so tightly passed that the heat moves through the metal quickly.
Option (a)  is the reason behind good conduction of electricity.
Q.44 :c


Ships' hulls are under continuous attack
by  shipworm and various marine weeds, all of which have some adverse effect on  the ship, be it structurally, in the case of the worm, or affecting speed and handling in the case of the weeds. Earlier Lead was used,
but it was too heavy and did  not address the problem sufficiently. But  Copper has anti- bacterial properties and prevents the growth
1. Na2CO3 is a sodium salt of carbonic acid and it is also known as washing soda or soda ash.
2. NaHCO3 has long been known and is widely used salt and has many related names such as baking soda, bread soda, cooking soda.
of bacteria on  the ship and prevents it decay. While other functions like  providing strength etc. can be done by  other metals too. But, it preventing the growth of bacteria is the one that makes it unique for  the use in boats.



Q.38 :c




Virtual labs is an initiative by  Ministry of Human Resource and Development under the National Mission on  Education through ICT (NMEICT).
Q.45 :c


Poly-metallic sulphides – a great source of valuable minerals such as gold, silver and zinc - also contain valuable rare-earth metals, a commonly used ingredient in modern day electronic devices and gadgets.


Q.39 :c
Q.46 :c




















Q.40 :c

Q.41 :a
You have seen above that a candle or the LPG in the gas stove burns with a flame. However, you will observe the coal or charcoal in an ‘angithi’ sometimes just glows red and gives out heat without a flame. This is because a flame is only produced when gaseous substances burn. When wood or charcoal is ignited, the volatile substances present vapourise and burn with a flame in the beginning.
A luminous flame is seen when the atoms of the gaseous substance are heated and start to glow. The  colour produced by  each element is a characteristic property of that element.







Thin-film soar cells are less expensive. Advantages of c-Si  cells include a high efficiency rate of about 12% to 24.2%, high stability, ease of fabrication, and high reliability.








Q.47 :a
When liquid water is heated that means heat is taken. So,  it is endothermic reaction. Latent heat of vaporisation makes heat content in stem greater than in liquid water at 1000C.





The  technical definition of pH is that it is a measure of the activity of the hydrogen ion (H+). It is essentially a measure of acidity. The pH scale ranges from 0 -14. In the scale the reading `7' denotes the neutral point. A substance can be rated acidic or basic depending on  its pH value. It will be rated as acidic if it has a pH of less than 7 and basic if it is greater.
Normal rainwater has a pH of 5.6 (slightly acidic). This  is because it is exposed to the carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. The carbon dioxide gets dissolved in the rainwater and forms carbonic acid
(H{-2}CO{-3}).
Rainwater with ph value below 5.6 is considered as acid rain. There are both natural and non-natural sources of materials that cause pH  of rain water to
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1565

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in
































Q.48 :c




















Q.49 :a Q.50 :c Q.51 :d
change.
Increasing pollution results in acid rains. The primary air  pollutants are sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxide. These pollutants are
released into the air  due to many factors and burning fossil fuels (ex: coal) is one of the major causes.
Generally rainwater is pure and potable. The pH of drinking water falls in the range of 6.5-
8.
Therefore if the pH of rainwater centres around this value it is fit for  drinking. Also the pH of rainwater differs from place to place. This  is due to heavy pollution in one area and clean air  in another.
In the present scenario urbanization has increased its acidity. But  in case of rains whose pH generally falls around 5.6, it is potable, but it will be slightly acidic and corrosive.
But  in and around cities and other
industrially developed areas where the pH of rainwater tends to fall  drastically, rainfall is highly acidic and the water thereby becomes unfit for  consumption.





Typically, three drugs are used in lethal injection. Sodium thiopental is used to induce unconsciousness, pancuronium bromide (Pavulon) to cause muscle paralysis and respiratory arrest, and potassium chloride to stop the heart. In most states of USA, the intravenous injection is a series of drugs
given in a set sequence, designed to first induce unconsciousness followed by  death through paralysis of respiratory muscles and/or by  cardiac arrest through depolarization of cardiac muscle cells. The execution of the condemned in most states involves  three separate injections (in sequential order).









The  noble gases; helium (He), neon (Ne), argon (Ar),  krypton (Kr), xenon (Xe), radon (Ra) and element 118 (Uuo) occupy the rightmost group of the periodic table. Noble gases were also known as 'inert gases' and
'rare gases'; both these terms are now known not to be strictly correct. Some noble gases have been shown capable of forming
























Q.52 :c












Q.53 :d

















Q.54 :c
compounds mainly with fluorine. Argon and helium can not be considered rare as argon makes up about 1%  of our atmosphere and helium is the second most abundant element in the known universe.
The  extremely low  chemical reactivity of the noble gases is due them having a "complete valence shell". They tend not to gain or lose electrons. The  noble gases have high ionisation energies and negligible electro negativities. The  noble gases have very weak inter-atomic forces of attraction and very low melting points and boiling points. Noble
gases are mono atomic gases under normal conditions, even those with larger atomic masses than many normally solid elements.





In water, dissolved HCl dissociates into H+ and Cl–  ions. Moving ions can carry electric current.
In benzene, which is a non-polar solvent, HCl doesn't dissociate, so there's nothing to carry current.






Rate of reaction is affected by  temperature and surface of reactants. Higher the temperature will increase the rate of collision among molecules thus increasing rate of reaction.
Higher surface area will again increase chances of collision.
Pressure and amount of reactants have no impact on  rate of reaction. Higher the amount of reactants will only increase quantity of reaction and not the rate of reaction.





Aircraft tires are filled with nitrogen because nitrogen gas is mostly inert, meaning that it requires more energy to react with other substances. This  is important because at elevated temperatures, oxygen can react with rubber. Oxidized rubber is weaker than non-oxidized rubber, and weaker tires are not preferred.
Air has certain moisture content and it is generally very hard to remove this moisture.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1565

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

If an airplane tires were filled with air, at the flight altitude ice  would form inside the tires since the temperature
up there is about -30  degrees F. Landing with a chunk of ice  in the tire would make it out of balance and change the tire pressure. Tires would probably burst.
On  the other hand, nitrogen doesn't form a liquid till -173C and pure nitrogen has almost no  moisture.
Nitrogen being lighter than air  does not play a part in it being used in the airplane tyres.













Q.62 :b
Isobaric process is the process at constant pressure. So,  the graph will be parallel to x axis.
Isochoric process is the process at constant volume. So,  the graph will be parallel to y axis.
Adiabatic process is defined as process at constant temperature. This  graph will not be parallel to any axis.

Q.55 :d Q.56 :b Q.57 :d
LPG releases less CO2  per unit of energy than does coal or oil.
LPG consists of mainly methane, butane and propane.
LPG is heavier than air. LPG has very faint smell .

Byproducts of power generation

Byproducts  of   power plant operation need  to  be considered in  both the design and operation. Waste heat due to the finite efficiency of  the power cycle must be released to the atmosphere, often using a cooling tower,  or   river or   lake water as  a cooling medium. The  fuel gas from combustion of  the fossil fuels is  discharged to the air; this contains carbon dioxide  and   water   vapour,   as   well     as   other substances  such as nitrogen, nitrous oxides, sulfur oxides, and (in  the case of  coal-fired plants) fly  ash and mercury. Solid waste ash from coal-fired boilers is   removed.  Ash    generated   can  be  re-used  for building materials.

Q.63 :c














Q.64 :a




Sulphuric acid is a protonating agent. During electrolysis of a dilute aqueous solution of sulfuric acid its concentration remains same.
It is used to remove a molecule of water from organic compounds.
It is also an oxidizing agent.


Q.58 :d











Q.59 :a









Q.60 :b

Q.61 :b




Sunscreen works by  combining organic and inorganic active ingredients. Inorganic ingredients like  zinc oxide or titanium oxide reflect or scatter ultraviolet (UV) radiation. Organic ingredients like  octyl methoxycinnamate (OMC) or oxybenzone absorb UV radiation, dissipating it as heat.





Soaps are sodium or potassium salts of heavier fatty acids.
Common salt help in separating soap from the solution after saponification by decreasing solubility of Soap
Coal liquefaction is a process that converts coal from a solid state into liquid fuels, usually to provide substitutes for  petroleum products. Coal liquefaction processes were first developed in the early part of the 20th
century but later application was hindered by the relatively low  price and wide availability of crude oil and natural gas. Large scale applications have existed in only a few countries, e.g., Germany during WWII and South Africa since the 1960s. The  oil crises of the 1970s and the threat of depletion of conventional oil supplies sparked a renewed interest in the production of oil substitutes from coal during the 1980s.
There are two different methods for converting coal into liquid fuels:
Direct liquefaction works by  dissolving the coal in a solvent at high temperature and pressure. This  process is highly efficient, but the liquid products require further refining to achieve high grade fuel characteristics. Indirect liquefaction gasifies the coal to form a ‘syngas’ (a mixture of hydrogen and
carbon monoxide). The  syngas is then
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1565

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in



























Q.65 :d



Q.66 :c
condensed over a catalyst – the ‘Fischer- Tropsch’ process – to produce high quality, ultra-clean products.
In India:
A policy decision has been taken to promote coal liquefaction in the country from the energy security point of view. A gazette notification has been issued notifying coal liquefaction as one of the specified end uses for  the purpose of allotment of captive coal/lignite blocks to the entrepreneurs. Both direct and indirect methods of converting coal into oil have been tested commercially
in different countries. An experimental project using direct conversion technology with the coals of North-Eastern Coalfields has been successfully tested earlier by  Oil India Limited. This  was informed by  Shri  Pratik Prakashbapu Patil, Minister of State in the Ministry of Coal while replying a written question in Lok Sabha today.









Colligative properties of solutions are properties that depend upon the concentration of solute molecules or ions, but not upon the identity of the solute. Colligative properties include freezing point depression, boiling point elevation, vapor pressure lowering, and osmotic pressure.








Q.69 :d Q.70 :a Q.71 :a Q.72 :a












Q.73 :b

Q.74 :d
firmly will cause a catastrophic breakdown in the sparse structure, causing it to shatter like glass – a property known as friability; although more modern variations do  not suffer from this











Sugars are soluble in water while carbohydrates are insoluble in water. Sugars have a sweet taste while carbohydrates are not sweet.
Sugars are readily digested in the body while carbohydrates have to be broken down into simpler molecules before being digested.
The  chemical formula of sugars is C(H2O)y while that of carbohydrates is Cx(H2O)y.







An organic liquid will generally have a specific gravity less than that of water. Specific gravity is the ratio of density of a substance compared to the density of fresh water at 4 C.


Q.67 :b
Q.75 :b

Globally, about 96% of hydrogen is produced presently using hydrocarbons. About 4% hydrogen is produced through electrolysis of water.
Water softening is converting hard water into soft water. Water becomes hard if it contains salts like  calcium bicarbonate and
magnesium carbonate. These can’t be removed by  boiling or filtration.

Q.68 :c


Aerogel is a synthetic porous ultralight material derived from a gel, in which the liquid component of the gel has been replaced with a gas. The  result is a solid with extremely low  density and low  thermal conductivity. Despite their name, aerogels are solid, rigid, and dry  materials that do  not resemble a gel in their physical properties: The  name comes from the fact that they are made from gels. Pressing softly on  an
aerogel typically does not leave even a minor mark; pressing more firmly will leave a permanent depression. Pressing extremely

Q.76 :b




When compared to Almond milk, the Soya milk  comes with more proteins.
When Soya Milk delivers 110 calories per serve, the almond delivers only 90 calories. When almond milk  can render 30 milligram of the calcium needed, the Soya Milk can render 80 milligram of calcium.
A person having high cholesterol should take soya milk  than almond milk. This  is because Soya milk  has the capacity to lower cholesterol.
A person who needs more minerals and
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1565

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

vitamins should only go  for  Almond milk. The Soya milk  could restrict the absorption of minerals and vitamins.
own weight of water and forms a liquid that keeps the road wet.


Q.77 :c

Q.78 :c





Q.79 :d






Green is not one of them.





Because graphite flakes slip  over one
another, giving it its greasy feel, graphite has long been used as a lubricant in applications where “wet” lubricants, such as oil, can not be used. Technological changes are reducing the need for  this application.
Q.85 :a


Indian Institute of Technology Gandhinagar (IIT-GN) has undertaken a research to develop a commercially viable and cost effective process to produce Syngas, an alternative source for  making gasoline.
The  move is expected to benefit the expanding energy sector of India in reducing its carbon footprints.
Syngas or synthesis gas is a mixture of carbon monoxide and hydrogen gases in varying amounts. It can easily be converted into gasoline through a process called steam reforming.


Q.80 :c

Q.81 :a






Pencil cores are called “lead”, even though they don’t contain lead; rather, they are typically made of graphite powder with clay mixed in as a binding agent.
Q.86 :c


Methanol, also known as methyl alcohol, wood alcohol, wood naphtha or wood spirits, is a chemical with the formula CH3OH  (often abbreviated MeOH). Methanol acquired the name "wood alcohol" because it was once produced chiefly as a byproduct of the destructive distillation of wood.


Q.82 :d

Q.83 :d
Q.87 :d

Q.88 :b

Q.84 :b


It was in news because of NASA’s Mars Science Laboratory (MSL).   A distinctive property of salt, known as deliquescence, is its ability to suck in moisture directly from the air. The  microbes scavenge this sparse resource, ingesting tiny quantities of water from microscopic pores inside the crystalline matrix.
deliquescence,  the process by  which a substance absorbs moisture from the atmosphere until it dissolves in the absorbed water and forms a solution. Deliquescence occurs when the vapour pressure of the solution that is formed is less than the partial pressure of water vapour in the air. All
soluble salts will deliquesce if the air  is sufficiently humid. A substance that absorbs moisture from the air  but not necessarily to the point of dissolution is called hygroscopic. The  effectiveness of calcined calcium chloride in settling road dust is a result of its deliquescence. When spread in the form of a powder or flakes, it absorbs more than its













Q.89 :c

Q.90 :b
Because law  of conservation of energy must hold, this means that when water freezes, the process must give off the same amount of heat as it took to melt the ice.
An unusual property of ice  frozen at atmospheric pressure is that the solid is approximately 9%  less dense than liquid water. Ice  is the only known non-metallic substance to expand when it freezes.







Generally    solubility   of     solids   in     liquids increases with increase in  temperature.  But, there  are  certain  solid substances  whose solubility decreases  with increase  in temperature.    The       increase    in      kinetic energy that comes with higher temperatures allows   the   solvent   molecules   to   more effectively break apart the solute molecules that         are         held        together         by intermolecular  attractions.   The     increased
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1565

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

























Q.91 :d
















Q.92 :c








Q.93 :c







Q.94 :c
vibration (kinetic energy)of the solute molecules  causes   them  to  dissolve  more readily because  they are  less able to hold together.
For    Gases,  solubility decreases  as temperature increases. The   physical reason for  this is  that when most gases  dissolve in solution,  the  process  is   exothermic.   This means that heat is  released as the gas dissolves. This   is  very similar to the reason that  vapor  pressure  increases  with temperature. Increased temperature causes an  increase  in   kinetic  energy.  The    higher kinetic energy causes more motion in the gas molecules which break intermolecular bonds and escape from solution.
In  the case of  liquids, there are no   defined trends for  the effects of  temperature on  the solubility of liquids.





Oxalic acid  is  used in  bleaching of  leather, removal of ink,  photography, clothe printing. Acetic Acid  is  used as solvent, in  preparation of vinegar, acetone, and processing of food. Citric   Acid    is    used   in    washing  metals, processing   of    food  and   drugs,   in    cloth industry.
Benzoic  Acid    is   used  for    preservation   of medicine and food.
Sulphuric   Acid    is    used   in    accumulation batteries.





The  density of ice  is smaller than that of water.
Water has a high specific heat capacity. Water has a high surface tension.





Smoke and gel are already correctly mentioned in question.
Foam is gas in solid
Q.95 :b

In petroleum geology and chemistry, cracking is the process whereby complex organic molecules such as kerogens or heavy hydrocarbons are broken down into simpler molecules such as light hydrocarbons,
by  the breaking of carbon-carbon bonds in the precursors.


Q.96 :b

India  recently  signed  the  Minamata convention on  mercury which aims to protect human health  and  environment from the adverse effects of mercury.
Coal based  power plants  are  the  largest source of  mercury pollution as coal contains mercury naturally.
Mercury is  naturally present in  both coal and limestone which are the main raw materials cement  industry.  Hence  cement  industries are also sources of mercury pollution.
LED  bulbs do  not contain mercury. It  is  the CFL bulbs which contain mercury and causes mercury pollution.
Mercury is  naturally present in  gold and it  is also  used  in   the  mining process  of   Gold. Hence   Gold     mines   are   the   sources   of mercury pollution.


Q.97 :c

Primary ingredients of of brass are Copper&zinc. When brass exposed  to air  the hydrogen sulphide in the atmosphere is react with copper&zinc.
Copper reacts with sulphide ion  and forms cupric sulphide which is black in color where as zinc reacts with hydrogen and forms zinc hydroxide which is faint red in color. Hence brass gets discolored when it exposed to air.


Q.98 :b

Use of Iodine

Human food additive
Animal feed
Catalysis
Disinfectant and water treatment
Rust is iron oxide, a molecule consisting of iron and
oxygen. The  mass of the iron in the rust molecules comes from the original nail, but the mass of the oxygen has come from the air. When rust forms on iron, the mass of the iron object is increased by  the mass of the oxygen that has combined with some of





Q.99 :a
Medical and radiological use
Radiocontrast agent
the iron.
1. Vitamin D is manufactured by  both plants and animals. Vitamin D3 is particularly found on  the skin
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1565

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

of animals, as a byproduct of synthesis.
2. Vitamin D is not beneficial in all its forms. Vitamin D2,  one of the forms of vitamin D can be toxic to the body. Vitamin D3 is good for  the body.
3. You can get vitamin D from fortified foods or as pills. However, vitamin D3 is only available in the form of pills  or in liquids. They are rarely found in foods.
4. Supplements for  the two vitamins are sourced differently.
5. The  D2 form of the vitamin has a shorter shelf life compared to the D3 form.


Q.100 :d

Chemical reactions can occur only upon collisions between reactant molecules. However all the collisions do  not lead to the formation of products. Otherwise all the reactions could occur within a fraction of second since there are millions of collisions possible.
Only  those collisions taking place between molecules in   proper orientation and possessing certain  minimum amount of energy can lead to the formation of products.
GENERAL STUDIES Prelims Mock TEST No. 1565

VISION IAS ONLINE SYSTEM
www.visionias.in

Q.1     a         b         c         d Q.2     a         b         c         d Q.3     a         b         c         d Q.4     a         b         c         d Q.5     a         b         c         d Q.6     a         b         c         d Q.7     a         b         c         d Q.8     a         b         c         d Q.9     a         b         c         d Q.10   a         b         c         d Q.11   a         b         c         d Q.12   a         b         c         d Q.13   a         b         c         d Q.14   a         b         c         d Q.15   a         b         c         d Q.16   a         b         c         d Q.17   a         b         c         d Q.18   a         b         c         d Q.19   a         b         c         d Q.20   a         b         c         d Q.21   a         b         c         d Q.22   a         b         c         d Q.23   a         b         c         d Q.24   a         b         c         d Q.25   a         b         c         d Q.26   a         b         c         d Q.27   a         b         c         d Q.28   a         b         c         d Q.29   a         b         c         d Q.30   a         b         c         d Q.31   a         b         c         d Q.32   a         b         c         d Q.33   a         b         c         d Q.34   a         b         c         d Q.35   a         b         c         d
Q.36   a         b         c         d Q.37   a         b         c         d Q.38   a         b         c         d Q.39   a         b         c         d Q.40   a         b         c         d Q.41   a         b         c         d Q.42   a         b         c         d Q.43   a         b         c         d Q.44   a         b         c         d Q.45   a         b         c         d Q.46   a         b         c         d Q.47   a         b         c         d Q.48   a         b         c         d Q.49   a         b         c         d Q.50   a         b         c         d Q.51   a         b         c         d Q.52   a         b         c         d Q.53   a         b         c         d Q.54   a         b         c         d Q.55   a         b         c         d Q.56   a         b         c         d Q.57   a         b         c         d Q.58   a         b         c         d Q.59   a         b         c         d Q.60   a         b         c         d Q.61   a         b         c         d Q.62   a         b         c         d Q.63   a         b         c         d Q.64   a         b         c         d Q.65   a         b         c         d Q.66   a         b         c         d Q.67   a         b         c         d Q.68   a         b         c         d Q.69   a         b         c         d Q.70   a         b         c         d
Q.71   a         b         c         d Q.72   a         b         c         d Q.73   a         b         c         d Q.74   a         b         c         d Q.75   a         b         c         d Q.76   a         b         c         d Q.77   a         b         c         d Q.78   a         b         c         d Q.79   a         b         c         d Q.80   a         b         c         d Q.81   a         b         c         d Q.82   a         b         c         d Q.83   a         b         c         d Q.84   a         b         c         d Q.85   a         b         c         d Q.86   a         b         c         d Q.87   a         b         c         d Q.88   a         b         c         d Q.89   a         b         c         d Q.90   a         b         c         d Q.91   a         b         c         d Q.92   a         b         c         d Q.93   a         b         c         d Q.94   a         b         c         d Q.95   a         b         c         d Q.96   a         b         c         d Q.97   a         b         c         d Q.98   a         b         c         d Q.99   a         b         c         d Q.100 a         b         c         d
