VISIONIAS z™
www.visionias.in www.visionias.wordpress.com

ANSWERS & EXPLANATION GENERAL STUIDES (P) 2015 – Test 11 (1560)



Q 1.C

As per the new ordinance promulgated to bring changes into the Land Acquisition Act, the social impact assessment and mandatory consent is not required if the land is acquired for:
o  National security
o  Defence
o  Rural infrastructure including electrification
o  Industrial corridors
o  Housing for poor including PPP where ownership of land continues to be vested with the government

Q 2.D
o  As per the economic survey 2014-15, the Advance Estimates (AE) for the year 2014-15 show industrial growth of 5.9 per cent as per 2011-12 base year. All the given sectors have shown positive growth.
o  Mining and quarrying (2.3%), manufacturing (6.8%), electricity, gas etc. (9.6%) and construction (4.5).

Q 3.D
o  With the aim to make the industrial sector energy efficient, India's Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) launched its 'Perform, Achieve and Trade' (PAT) scheme on July 4. Those that fail to achieve targets will have to pay penalty. PAT has been launched under the National Mission for Enhanced Energy Efficiency, one of the eight missions under the umbrella National Action Plan on Climate Change, launched in June
2008.
o  PAT is a market based mechanism in which sectors are assigned efficiency targets. Industries which
over-achieve will get incentives in the form of energy saving certificates. These certificates are tradeable
and can be bought by other industries which are unable to achieve their targets.
o  These certificates will be tradeable at two energy exchanges: Indian Energy Exchange and Power
Exchange India. The price of these certificates will be determined by the market.
o  In its first cycle of three years, the scheme covers eight energy sector's ‘Thermal power, Aluminium, Cement, Fertilizer, Iron and Steel, Pulp and Paper, Textiles and Chlor-alkali. Together, these sectors account for 40 per cent of India's primary energy consumption.

Q 4.C
o  In various studies it has been observed that yields from organic farming are less because it is not based on chemical inputs, like fertilizers and pesticides, and HYV seeds.
o  For the very same reason the shelf life of organic food is also shorter. Similarly, the organic farming uses natural input therefore choice in production of off-season crops is limited.

Q 5.B
o  The Companies Act 2013, introduces the concept of an independent director. For every listed company, at least one-third of the directors should be independent.
o  The Act mandates the setting up of a National Financial Reporting Authority, which will monitor compliance with accounting and auditing standards. It will also have the power to investigate auditors.
o  The Act caps the tenure of a company auditor to a maximum period of 10 years; the old law had no such provisions.
o  Companies with a net worth of more than Rs.500 crore or turnover of more than Rs.1,000 crore or net profit of more than Rs.5 crore, should spend at least 2% of annual net profit towards CSR activities.


1                                      www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 6.B
o  The top three consumed food products are Rice, Wheat and Maize.
o  Potato comes fourth in the ranking. Potato is not a root but a tuberous stem.
o  It requires less amount of water compared to other basic food products, without compromising the nutrition value.
o  The diverse advantage of potato, the fourth largest consumed food in the world, after maize, rice and wheat is emphasised by studies that have shown potato containing less calories than pasta, rice and bread (less calories but comparable nutrition). The tuber consumes about 30 per cent less water to grow than rice and is being projected as a crop that can contribute to weight loss "if prepared and consumed healthy."•
o  The potato crop is normally hit by the most common late blight disease (caused by phytophthora infestans), scab, rhizoctonia, canker, blackleg, fusarium and viral diseases.

Q 7.D

Q 8.C
o  The Essential Commodities Act (ECA) was enacted by the Central Government in 1955 to control and regulate trade and prices of commodities declared essential under the Act. The Act is again in the limelight, as the Government is making it more stringent while bringing onions and potatoes under its purview.
o  The Act empowers the Central and state governments concurrently to control production, supply and distribution of certain commodities in view of rising prices. Hence 2nd Statement is incorrect.
o  The  measures  that  can  be  taken  under  the  provision  of  the  Act  include, among  others,  licensing, distribution and imposing stock limits. The governments also have the power to fix price limits, and selling the particular commodities above the limit will attract penalties. Black marketing of essential commodities was a major problem in the past and this has now been controlled to a large extent. The Drug Price Control Order (DPCO) and such other orders have been issued under the powers of the ECA.
o  Seven major commodities are covered under the Act. Some of them are:
o  Petroleum and its products, including petrol, diesel, kerosene, Naphtha, solvents etc
o  Food stuff, including edible oil and seeds, vanaspati, pulses, sugarcane and its products like, khandsari and sugar, rice paddy.
o  Jute and textiles
o  Drugs- prices of essential drugs are still controlled by the DPCO
o  Fertilisers- The Fertiliser Control Order prescribes restrictions on transfer and stock of fertilizers apart from prices
o  In the past, several products such as iron and steel came under the ambit of the Act, but were removed later. The Union Cabinet has already decided to add onions and potatoes under  the  ECA, but the notification is still awaited.

Q 9.D
o  Buffer stock is the stock of foodgrains namely wheat and rice procured by government through FCI. The farmers are paid minimum support price.

Q 10.C
o  It is called 'sweet gas' because of its lack of hydrogen sulfide.
o  Unlike much natural gas from conventional reservoirs, coalbed methane contains very little heavier hydrocarbons such as propane or butane

Q 11.D
o  The elasticity of energy use ( Kwh per rupee), defined as the amount of energy consumed for generating one unit of gross domestic production (GDP), has, however, been less than one.
o  The government has taken several initiatives for rationalizing the energy prices in different sectors. The
Integrated Energy Policy has outlined the broad contours of the pricing system for coal.


2                                      www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
o  The pricing of coal is done now on gross calorific value (GCV) basis with effect from 31 January 2012, replacing the earlier system of pricing on the basis of useful heat value (UHV) which takes into account the heat trapped in ash content also, besides the heat value of carbon content.
o  The revision in the GCV is likely to increase the prices of domestic coal to some extent, but this is a desirable adjustment because domestic thermal coal, adjusted for quality differences, continues to be underpriced. Pricing of gas is presently done under the New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP).
o  The government provides the operator freedom to sell the gas produced from the NELP blocks at a market-determined  price,  subject  to  the  approval  of  pricing formula.  The  government  is  reviewing pricing under the Price Sharing Contract (PSC) to clarify the extent to which producers will have the freedom to market the gas.

Q 12.D
o  Industrial  sector  consumes  the  highest  electricity  than  any  other  sector  in  India.  Consumption  of electricity in agriculture continues to be low due to dependence on manual labour and lack of mechanisation. Hence 1st statement is incorrect.
o  There is an under-utilisation of production capacity  in most of  the thermal power plants. Capacity utilisation  is  measured  by  Plant  Load  Factor  (PLF)  which  is  the  ratio  of  electricity  generated  to production capacity. It is around 75-77%. Hence 2nd statement is incorrect.
o  T&D losses are not negligible in India. It amounts to nearly 20% in most of the states. In some states it is upto 50%. Therefore 3rd statement is also incorrect.

Q 13.C
o  Use of HYV technology has reduced the  time lag between sowing and harvesting of crops. Use of chemical fertilizers eliminated the need for fallowing. This has resulted in double cropping and hence the increase in Gross area under cultivation.
o  The use of HYV technology has been restricted to mainly wheat and rice. Hence the production of these crops have increased compared and there is no similar rise in the production of other crops. So crop diversification is not achieved.
o  Use of HYV technology has given rise to increase in output, generating good marketable surplus in agriculture.
o  Use of costly HYV technology has been restricted to a small group of rich farmers. Large number of poor
farmers are not able to use the HYV technology. This has resulted in decrease in farm population over
the period of time.

Q 14.D
o  According to FDI policy of 2014, 100% FDI is allowed through automatic route in following agriculture and Animal Husbandry sectors :
(a) Floriculture, Horticulture, Apiculture and Cultivation of Vegetables & Mushrooms under controlled conditions;
(b) Development and Production of seeds and planting  material;
(c) Animal Husbandry (including  breeding of dogs), Pisciculture, Aquaculture, under controlled conditions; and
(d) Services related to agro and allied sectors.
o  And besides the above, FDI is not allowed in any other agricultural sector/activity.
o  In case of planatation crops, tea sector including tea plantations are allowed to have 100% FDI through government approval route. However, FDI is not allowed in any other plantation sector/activity. Hence,
option 4 is incorrect.
o  Contract farming is a core agricultural activity, therefore FDI is not allowed in this activity.

Q 15.B
o  The   term   "World   Bank"   refers   only    to   the    International    Bank    for    Reconstruction    and
Development (IBRD) and the International Development Association (IDA).
o  The term       "World       Bank       Group"       incorporates       five       closely       associated       entities that work collaboratively towards poverty reduction:

3                                      www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
o  the World Bank (IBRD and IDA), and
o  three other agencies,
o  the International Finance Corporation (IFC),
o  the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA), and
o  the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID).
o  So option 1 is correct.
o  IFC - The International Finance Corporation (IFC) lends money to private sector companies of its member nation. So option 2 is incorrect.
o  MIGA - encourages investment in developing countries by providing insurance to foreign private investors against loss caused by non-commercial (political war, civil disturbance, expropriation) risks. So option 3 is correct.

Q 16.B
o  P-Notes are issued by FII. PNs have decreased but not completely banned. (refer to the explanation of answer 20)

Q 17.D
o  Monopsony is a situation when there is one buyer of a product or a group of colluding buyers for a particular product or a service where the sellers of that product have virtually no other customers.Thus, the buyer has absolute control over the price of the product. The price is established by the buyer's bid. In case of a monopsonist, who is also a monopolist, both buying price and quantity bought are lower than they would be in a competitive situation. So Indian Railways can be considered as an example of monopsony situation as it is the only buyer for Railway products like railway coaches, wagons, etc. Hence, 1st Statement is correct.
o  In economics, a Cartel is an agreement between competing firms to control prices or exclude entry of a new competitor in a market. Thus, cartel is a collection of businesses or countries that act together as a single producer and agree to influence prices for certain goods and services by controlling production and marketing.Therefore, sometimes cartels are considered as illegal. Hence, 2nd Statement is correct.
o  Autarky is the quality of being self-sufficient. Usually the term is applied to political states or
their economic systems. Autarky exists whenever an entity can survive or continue its activities without external assistance or international trade. If a self-sufficient economy also refuses all trade with the outside world then it is called a closed economy. Hence, 3rd Statement is correct.

Q 18.D
o  NABARD conducts the following functions:
o  Credit functions, Developmental & Promotional functions, Supervisory functions, Capacity building &
Training functions.

Q 19.A

The main reasons were-
o  Absence of capital goods industry which is needed to promote further industrialization in India.
o  Limited area of operation of public sector, which was limited to few sector, like railways, power generation etc.
o  Further, there was lack of capital (or savings) for setting up industries.
o  There was not lack of demand. In fact the demand increased which was met by goods supplied by British industrialists.

Q 20.C
o  A Participatory Note (PN or P-Note) in the Indian context, in essence, is a derivative instrument issued in foreign jurisdictions, by SEBI and a registered Foreign Institutional Investor (FII) or its sub-accounts or one of its associates, against underlying Indian securities. PNs are also known as Overseas Derivative Instruments, Equity Linked Notes, Capped Return Notes, and Participating Return Notes etc. Hence 1st Statement is correct and 2nd Statement is incorrect.


4                                      www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
o  The underlying Indian security instrument may be equity, debt, derivatives or may even be an index.
Further, a basket of securities from different jurisdictions can also be constructed in which a portion of
the underlying securities is Indian securities or indices.
o  In 2014, SEBI issued the new Regulations for Foreign Portfolio Investments, P- Notes got formally defined under the tag "Offshore Derivative Instrument" (ODIs) in Section 2(1)(j) of the said regulation. As per this definition, participatory notes or ODIs are issued by selected foreign portfolio investors which is a broad category also including FIIs. Hence, Regulation excludes certain category of Foreign Portfolio Investors, like individuals, from issuing the PN against securities held by it that are listed or proposed
to be listed on any recognized stock exchange in India.
o  The investor in PN does not own the underlying Indian security, which is held by the FII who issues the PN. The PN holder also does not enjoy any voting rights in relation to security/shares referenced by the PN. Hence, 3rd Statement is correct.

Q 21.A
o  A compulsory licence is granted overriding patent to make a drug affordable and accessible. In India a CL is granted subject to three conditions; one of them is about price. The reasonable requirement of the public with regard to the invention should be satisfied. The price at which it is made available should be reasonably affordable.
o  WTO allows this exception to TRIPS agreement. Its dispute resolution mechanism even upheld the
India's decision to grant a compulsory license in Nexavar case.
o  Compensation is also paid to patent holder.

Q 22.B
o  IIP is a composite indicator that measures the short-term changes in the volume of production of a basket of industrial products during a given period with respect to that in a chosen base period. IIP is free of influences of price changes. Hence, statement 1 is correct
o  It is compiled and published monthly by the Central Statistics Office (CSO) with the time lag of six weeks from the reference month. Hence, statement 2 is correct
o  Sector wise number of items and item groups with weights :
Sector              No. of Items       No. of Item groups       Weight
Mining                            61                                1                        141.57
Manufacturing             620                            397                      755.27
Electricity                        1                                 1                        103.16
Total                              682                            399                       1000
o  Current base year for IIP is 2004-05 in which Manufacturing has assigned highest weight followed by
Electricity and Mining. So statement 3 is incorrect.

Q 23.A
o  Section 3 of CCI Act deals with anti-competitive agreements. Since healthy competition keeps prices under check, therefore, anti-competition agreements may result in artificial increase in prices. Hence,
1st is correct.
o  Section 4 of the same Act deals with abuse of dominant position only, which invariably means that the
Act doesn't prevent companies from acquiring dominant position. Hence, 2nd is incorrect.

Q 24.D
o  The capital account is that part of balance of payments which
is composed of movements of capital and international loans and grants.
o  The capital account of Balance of Payments includes External Commercial Borrowings, Non-Resident Indian Deposits, Short term debt of the government as well as Foreign Direct Investment and Foreign Portfolio Investment.
o  Hence, Option d  is the correct answer.

Q 25.D

5                                      www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 26.D
o  All are Non-Pesticidal Management (NPM) techniques in agricultural pest control.

Q 27.A
o  For achieving the objectives the government undertook three major steps, one of which was reorganization of agriculture.  Reorganization of agriculture constituted many parts, one of which was cooperative farming. Hence, 1st statement is correct.
o  However, the whole process of land reforms had negligible socio-economic positive impact, because it could not be implemented properly. Hence, 2nd statement is incorrect.

Q 28.A
o  USOF is a statutory fund under Indian Telegraph Act, 2003. The objective is to extend basic telecom
services to the rural areas. For this purpose National Optical Fiber Network (NOFN) is being funded by
USOF. Hence, 1st and 2nd statements are correct.
o  USOF is maintained outside the Consolidated Fund, and is maintained by the Department of
Telecommunication, Ministry of Communication. Hence, 3rd statement is incorrect.
o  Apart from the Levy the resources are provided by the Central Government in the form of grants and loans. Hence, 4th statement is incorrect.

Q 29.C
o  Captive generating plant means a power plant set up by any person to generate electricity primarily for his own use and includes a power plant set up by any co-operative society or association of persons
for generating electricity primarily for use of members of such cooperative society or association. Hence only 1st statement is incorrect and rest all are correct.

Q 30.C
o  Headline growth rate will now be measured by GDP at constant market prices, which will henceforth be referred to as 'GDP', as is the practice internationally. Earlier, growth was measured in terms of growth rate in GDP at factor cost at constant prices. Hence 1st statement is incorrect.
o  It would lead to comprehensive coverage of the financial sector by inclusion of information from the accounts of stock brokers, stock exchanges, asset management companies, mutual funds and pension funds, and the regulatory bodies including the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI), Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority (PFRDA) and Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA). Hence 2nd statement is correct.
o  Due to shift from GDP at factor cost to GDP at market prices the value addition is captured. Hence 3rd statement is correct.

Q 31.D
o  The mutation is done in such a way that HYV seeds do not need sunlight for targeted yields. Hence 1st statement is correct.
o  HYV crops are also prone to attack by pests; this is the very reason for increased use of chemical pesticides and fertilisers. Hence 2nd statement is incorrect.
o  HYV plants are dwarf because more nutrients are supplied for grains. Hence 3rd statement is correct.

Q 32.B
o  A Renewable Energy Certificate (REC) is a market based instrument which provides evidence that a generator has produced a certain amount of electricity from a RE resource.
o  Being a mandate from State Commission, Obligated Entities would be required to either purchase electricity generated from Renewable energy sources or purchase REC in lieu of the same.

Q 33.A
o  Community Development Programme, was launched in 1952. Its main thrust was on securing socio- economic transformation of village life through people's own democratic and cooperative organisations with the government providing technical services, supply and credit.

6                                      www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
o  In 1953, the National Extension Service was introduced which was an amplified version of the Community Development Programme and aimed at transferring scientific and technical knowledge to agricultural, animal husbandry and rural craft sectors.
o  Second Five Year Plan recommended that the Village Panchayats should be organically linked with popular organisations at higher levels.
Q 34.D Q 35.B
o  Aajeevika  -  National  Rural  Livelihoods  Mission  (NRLM)  was  launched  by  the  Ministry  of  Rural Development (MoRD), Government of India in June 2011. Aided in part through investment support by the World Bank, the Mission aims at creating efficient and effective institutional platforms of the rural poor enabling them to increase household income through sustainable livelihood enhancements and improved access to financial services.
o  The salient features of the NRLM are :
o  At least one member from each identified rural poor household, preferably a woman, to be brought under the SHG network in a time-bound manner, the ultimate target being 100 per cent coverage of BPL
families.
o  Work towards universal financial inclusion beyond basic banking services to all poor households, SHGs, and their federations on both the demand and supply sides of financial inclusion to look at stabilizing and enhancing existing livelihoods and subsequently diversifying them.

Q 36.B
o  National  Scheduled  Tribes  Finance  and  Development  Corporation  (NSTFDC)  is  a  Govt.  of  India undertaking under the Ministry of Tribal Affairs. Hence, 1st statement is incorrect.
o  The Tribal Cooperative Marketing Development Federation of India Limited (TRIFED) has been doing the retail marketing of tribal products through outlets under the brand name, TRIBES INDIA. Hence, 2nd statement is incorrect.

Q 37.C
o  India provides world class medical facilities with hospitals and specialized multi specialty health centers
providing their expertise.
o  The government does not provide any such subsidy to private hospitals for attracting medical tourists. At present most of the investment in health infrastructure is made by the private sector. It is hoped that
the government would invest in creating quality health infrastructure for sustaining the growth momentum of this sector.
o  Indian traditional treatments like Ayurvedic Therapies and much more, practically covering every aspect of medicine combining modern treatments with traditional experience. Indian traditional medicine system is increasingly popular among the foreigners, which is another factor for growth of this sector.

Q 38.C
o  Acturial premium- Acturial premium is calculated after estimating expected value of future loss which is based on historical losses. It helps to protect insurance company against the risk of severe under writing losses that could lead to insolvency.
o  Keeping in view the various risks involved in agriculture production, the Ministry of Agriculture has been implementing the National Agricultural Insurance Scheme (NAIS) as a Central Sector Scheme since Rabi season 1999-2000 to insure the farming community against these risks. It was reviewed based on the experience gained from its implementation, in which many deficiencies in the scheme were identified.
o  The approved scheme has the following features: (i) Actuarial premiums will be paid for insuring the crops, hence the claims liability would be on the insurer; (ii) The unit area of insurance for major crops is village panchayat; (iii) Indemnity amount shall be payable for prevented sowing/planting risk and for post harvest losses due to cyclone; (iv) On account payment up to 25% of likely claims would be released as advance for providing immediate relief to farmers; (v) Uniform seasonality discipline for loanee and non-loanee  farmers;  (vi)  More  proficient  basis  for  calculation  of  threshold  yield  and  minimum

7                                      www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
indemnity  level  of  70%  instead  of  60%;  (vii) Modified NAIS with improved features will have two components i.e. compulsory and voluntary. Loanee farmers will be insured under ‘compulsory category’while  non-loanee  farmers  will  be  insured  under  ‘voluntary  category’;  (viii)  Private  sector insurers with adequate infrastructure and experience would also be allowed in the implementation of MNAIS.

Q 39.D

Q 40.B
o  Regressive nature of a subsidy means that the benefits are taken up largely by the population on higher income side which is a result of inefficient targeting of subsidies. In other words, the rich households benefits more from the subsidy than a poor household.
o  Given that 67.2% of households in India are electrified (Census 2011), the top quintile i.e. the rich households consume more electricity per month (121 kWh) and thus, majority of power subsidy (37%) is taken up by them. Whereas, the bottom quintile of households i.e. the poor households consume only
10% of the subsidy amount on the basis of the electricity consumed by them per month( 45kWh). Hence,
1st Statement is correct.
o  The subsidised/controlled rail prices( 31.5 paise per passenger-km 2013-14 data) benefits the wealthy households than poor households, since the bottom 80% of households constitute only 28.1% of total originating passsengers on non-suburban rail routes. Thus, majority of railway subsidy goes to the rich. Hence 2nd Statement is correct.
o  Statement  3 is incorrect as it is a result of populist measures which is an issue for farmers belonging to all income groups.
o  Statement 4 is incorrect with respect to regressive nature of subsidies as kerosene is an inferior good and its consumption tends to decline as income rises i.e. richer households consume less kerosene because they substitute it with cleaner and higher quality fuels like LPG.

Q 41.B

Q 42.C
o  Exchange Traded Funds are essentially Index Funds that are listed and traded on exchanges like stocks.
An ETF is a basket of stocks that reflects the composition of an Index, like S&P CNX Nifty or BSE Sensex.
o  The ETFs trading value is based on the net asset value of the underlying stocks that it represents. .
Hence, both 1st and 2nd Statements are correct.

Q 43.B
o  Price Stabilisation Fund (PSF)  as a Central Sector Scheme, with a corpus of Rs.500 crores, to support market interventions for price control of perishable agri-horticultural commodities.
o  PSF will be used to advance interest free loan to State Governments and Central agencies to support their working capital and other expenses on procurement and distribution interventions for such commodities.  For this purpose, the States will set up a revolving fund to which Centre and State will contribute equally (50:50). Hence, 1st Statement is incorrect.
o  Horticultural commodities are not covered under the Minimum Support Price (MSP) mechanism and therefore, the farmers, at times, do not even recover their cost of cultivation, being fully dependent upon the market for disposal of their produce. As a result, farmers suffer the most on account of steep fall in prices. Hence, 2nd Statement is correct.
o  Initially the fund is proposed to be used for onion and potato only. Hence, 3rd Statement is incorrect.
o  Procurement   of   these   commodities   will   be   undertaken   directly   from   farmers   or   farmers’s
organizations at farm gate/mandi and made available at a more reasonable price to the consumers.
o  Losses incurred, if any, in the operations will be shared between the Centre and the States.
o  The Fund shall be managed by a Price Stabilization Fund Management Committee (PSFMC) under the
Chairmanship of Secretary (DAC).



8                                      www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 44.B
o  A bizarre object in the centre of the Milky Way which has puzzled astronomers for years is most likely a pair of binary stars that merged together, a new study has found.
o  The object, known as G2, in the centre of Milky Way was believed to be a hydrogen gas cloud headed towards our galaxy's enormous black hole.
o  Astronomers had figured that if G2 had been a hydrogen cloud, it could have been torn apart by the black hole, and that the resulting celestial fireworks would have dramatically changed the state of the black hole.
o  G2 was basically unaffected by the black hole. There were no fireworks.

Q 45.D
o  Its an economic concept where increased public sector spending replaces, or drives down, private sector
spending. "Crowding out" thus, refers to when government must finance its spending with taxes and/or
with deficit spending, leaving businesses/ private sector with less money and effectively "crowding them out."
o  One explanation of why crowding out occurs is government financing of projects with deficit spending through the use of borrowed money. When the government has to borrow, it needs to borrow from the private sector. This could be private individuals, pension funds or investment trusts. Thus, it  is argued that if the private sector buy government securities this will crowd out private sector investment.
o  Also "crowding out" implies how government borrowing can cause higher interest rates because, if government needs to sell more securities, it may have to increase interest rates on its bonds to attract private sector to buy government securities. Thus, higher interest rates discourage private sector from borrowing money, which reduces their spending and investment activities.

Q 46.D

Q 47.A
o  The Mission of NULM is to reduce poverty and vulnerability of the urban poor households by enabling them to access gainful self-employment and skilled wage employment opportunities, resulting in an appreciable improvement in their livelihoods on a sustainable basis, through building strong grassroots level institutions of the poor.
o  The mission would also aim at providing shelter equipped with essential services to the urban homeless in a phased manner.
o  In addition, the Mission would also address livelihood concerns of the urban street vendors  by facilitating access to suitable spaces, institutional credit, social security and skills to the urban street vendors for accessing emerging market opportunities.
o  The coverage may be broadened to include families of disadvantaged groups like SCs, STs , women, minorities , disabled etc subject to a maximum of 25% of the above urban poor population

Q 48.B
o  MSP also covers cotton, jute, sugarcane.
Purpose of MSP
o  The government purchases the crops from the farmers at a minimum price. Hence, even if the prices of crops fall or if the supply is inadequate, the farmers are assured of earning a minimum price on their crops.
Deciding MSP
o  The government decides the MSP for various agricultural commodities by considering:
o  Recommendations of the Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices
o  Views of the State Governments
o  Views of the Ministries

Q 49.D
o  Delicencing and de-reservation of industries for public sector are different concepts. The requirement of licencing is for the private players who start up industries in particular areas. The requirement of

9                                      www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
licencing was abolished in most of the industries except for liquor, cigarette, defence equipment, industrial explosives and dangerous chemicals. Atomic energy and railways are reserved for public sector industries. There is no private participation in these two industries. So there is no point of licencing in these two industries. Hence statement 1 is incorrect.
o  Earlier many production areas were reserved for small-scale industries and these are now allowed for large scale industries. Hence statement 2 is incorrect.
o  Earlier production capacities were also linked to licencing. With the removal of restrictions on licencing, the freedom to increase the production capacities was also granted. Hence statement 3 is correct.

Q 50.D
o  The primary healthcare system is both preventive and curative.
o  It encompasses a wide range of services for ensuring a healthy and dignified life. Therefore, it includes all
the components mentioned in the question.



Q 51.A
o  NABARD has set up Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF) under which loans are granted to states for speedy completion of minor irrigation project.
o  Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme, is one under which the centre provide additional central assistance by way of loans to the states for early completion of selected large and medium irrigation and multipurpose projects.

Q 52.D

Presently, markets in agricultural products are regulated under the Agricultural Produce Market
Committee (APMC) Act enacted by State Governments.
o  The APMC Act controls only the first sale of the agricultural produce. The Essential Commodities Act on the other hand, empowers the central and state governments concurrently to control production, supply and distribution of certain commodities, including pricing, stock-holding and the period for which the stocks can be kept and to impose duties.
o  The revenue earned by the APMCs does not go to the State exchequer and hence does not require the approval of State legislature to utilize the funds so collected. Thus APMC operations are hidden from scrutiny.
o  There are provisions/entries in List III of the Seventh Schedule (Concurrent List) in the Constitution which can be used by the Union to enact legislation for setting up a national common market for specified agricultural commodities, viz., Entry 33 which covers trade and commerce and production, supply and distribution of foodstuffs, including edible oil seeds and oils raw cotton, raw jute etc. Entry 42 in the Union List, viz., "Interstate Trade and Commerce" also allows a role for the union. Once a law is passed by the Parliament to regulate trading in the specified agricultural commodities, it will override the state APMC laws, paving the way for creating a national common market. But this approach could be seen as heavy handed on the part of the center and contrary to the new spirit of cooperative federalism.

Q 53.C
o  Services export means an activity which earns foreign exchange for the home country, and which is included within the services sector. In this case, the first option is included within the services sector but it would result in outflow of foreign exchange.
o  In  rest of  the  three  cases  the  activities  are included in services  sector  and are  earners  of  foreign exchange for India.

Q 54.A
o  Most-favoured-nation (MFN) : treating other people equally ; Under the WTO agreements, countries cannot normally discriminate between their trading partners. Grant some country a special favour (such as a lower customs duty rate for one of their products) and that country have to do the same for all other WTO members.


10                                   www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
o  Some exceptions are allowed under this. For example, countries can set up a free trade agreement that applies only to goods traded within the group discriminating against goods from outside.
o  Or they can give developing countries special access to their markets.
o  Or a country can raise barriers against products that are considered to be traded unfairly from specific countries. And in services, countries are allowed, in limited circumstances, to discriminate.
o  But the agreements only permit these exceptions under strict conditions.
o  In general, MFN means that every time a country lowers a trade barrier or opens up a market, it has to do so for the same goods or services from all its trading partners’ whether rich or poor, weak or strong.
(Reference www.wto.org)

Q 55.D

The accentuation of structural constraints has been one of the factors contributing to sub optimal growth without a commensurate large decline in investment rate in India.
These structural factors are the following:
o  Difficulties in taking quick decisions on project proposals have affected the ease of doing business. This has resulted in considerable project delays and insufficient complementary investments.
o  Ill-targeted subsidies cramp the fiscal space for public investment and distort allocation of resources.
o  Low  manufacturing  base,  especially  of  capital  goods,  and  low  value  addition  in  manufacturing.
Manufacturing growth and exports could be facilitated with simplified procedures, easy credit, and reduced transaction cost.
o  Presence of a large informal sector and inadequate labour absorption in the formal sector. Absence of required skill is considered an important reason.
o Sustaining high economic growth is difficult without robust agricultural growth. Low agricultural productivity is hampering this.
o  Structural  factors  engendering  continued  high  food  inflation  need to be  tackled.  Issues  related  to significant presence of intermediaries in the different tiers of marketing, shortage of storage and processing infrastructure, inter-state movement of agricultural produce, etc. need to be addressed.
o  So all the given options are correct.

Q 56.D
o  Priority sector refers to those sectors of the economy, which may not get timely and adequate credit in
the absence of this special dispensation. Typically, these are small value loans to farmers for agriculture
and allied activities,micro and small enterprises, poor people for housing, students for education and other low income groups and weaker sections.
o  Priority Sector includes the following categories:
1.   Agriculture
2.   Micro and Small Enterprises
3.   Education
4.   Housing
5.   Export Credit
6.   Others
o  Banks which fail to attain PSL target are mandated to invest in NABARD or Rural Infrastructure
Development Fund (RIDF) bonds for the shortfall.

Categories                                        Domestic commercial banks / Foreign banks with 20 and above branches (As percent of ANBC or Credit Equivalent of Off-Balance Sheet Exposure, whichever is higher)
Foreign banks with less than 20 branches (As percent of ANBC or Credit Equivalent of Off-Balance Sheet Exposure, whichever is higher)
Total Priority Sector                                                        40                                                                 32
Total agriculture                                                               18                                                   No specific target.
Advances to Weaker Sections                                       10                                                   No specific target.



11                                   www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 57.B
     Statements 1 and 3 are correct.
     Statement 2 is wrong because Rice is a Kharif crop.

Q 58.D
    Though, India has the third largest coal reserve in the world, but the production of CBM is sub-optimal due to various reasons, like :
     There is lack of CBM related technology and services.
     There is lack of basic infrastructure like pipelines for transportation of gas etc.
     Domestic gas prices are low in India due to which the private players do not have adequate incentives to invest in the exploration and production of CBM.
     Last but not the least many of CBM reserves are located in tribal areas, which are difficult to acquire.

Q 59.C
     SAPTA was envisaged primarily as the first step towards the transition to a South Asian Free Trade Area
(SAFTA) leading subsequently towards a Customs Union, Common Market and Economic Union.
     They shall eliminate all quantitative restrictions, except otherwise permitted under GATT 1994.
     The number of products in the Sensitive Lists shall be subject to maximum ceiling to be mutually agreed among the Contracting States with flexibility to Least Developed Contracting States.

Q 60.C
     Under the Electricity Act, 2003 the distribution licensee both distributes and supplies electricity to the consumers. The Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2014seeks to segregate the distribution network from the electricity supply business. Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2014creates a supply licensee who would be authorised to supply electricity to consumers.  The distribution licensee will distribute electricity and enable the supply of electricity.
     Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2014 enables consumers to choose to buy electricity from several supply licensees. Consumers can also switch suppliers by giving a notice.
     The  present  Act  does  not  define  renewable  sources  of  energy.  Electricity  (Amendment)  Bill,
2014defines renewable energy sources to include hydro, wind, solar, bio -mass, co-generation from these sources, geothermal and other sources as notified by the central government. Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2014 also provides for an additional National Renewable Energy policy.

Q 61.B
     The primary aim of the project is to reduce the unit transportation cost and speed up the freight trains resulting in higher productivity.
     The Eastern DFC extends from Dankuni near Kolkata to Ludhiana in Punjab, while the Western DFC
extends from the Jawahar Lal Nehru Port (JNPT) in Mumbai to Dadri near Delhi.
     The Western DFC is being funded by the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) up to 77 per cent of the total cost.
     The Ludhiana to Mughalsarai section (1183 km) of the Eastern DFC is being funded by the World Bank up to 66 per cent of the project cost.
     The trains will run completely on electrcity and thus reduces the green house gas emissions. Once implemented DFC will make Indian freight transport cheapest in the world as they run on a Broad- gauage with double-stack using electric locomotives, which no other country has achieved.

Q 62.A
     IDFs are investment vehicles, which can be sponsored by commercial banks and NBFCs in India in which domestic/offshore institutional investors, specially insurance and pension funds can invest through units and bonds issued by the IDFs.
     Infrastructure Debt Funds (IDFs)can be set up either as a Trust or as a Company. A trust based IDF would
normally be a Mutual Fund (MF), regulated by SEBI, while a company based IDF would normally be a
NBFC regulated by the Reserve Bank.
     So option A is correct.

12                                   www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 63.C


Under UIP, following vaccines are provided :
1. BCG (Bacillus Calmette Guerin)
2. DPT (Diphtheria, Pertussis and Tetanus Toxoid)
3. OPV (Oral Polio Vaccine)
4. Measles
5. Hepatitis B
6. TT (Tetanus Toxoid)
7. JE vaccination (in selected high disease burden districts)
8. Hib containing Pentavalent vaccine (DPT+HepB+Hib) (In selected States)
o  Recently four new vaccines as part of India's Universal Immunization Programme (UIP) which includes vaccines against rotavirus, rubella, polio (injectable) and an adult vaccine against Japanese Encephalitis (JE) are included.
Diseases Protected by Vaccination under UIP
1. Diphtheria
2. Pertussis.
3. Tetanus
4. Polio
5. Tuberculosis
6. Measles
7. Hepatitis B
8. Japanese Encephalitis (commonly known as brain fever)
9. Meningitis and Pneumonia caused by Haemophilus Influenzae type b
o  Vaccines against rotavirus (which causes Diarrhea), rubella (which causes severe congenital defects in newborns, like blindness, deafness and heart defects), polio (injectable) an adult vaccine against Japanese Encephalitis (JE) are newly introduced under UIP.

Q 64.D
o  Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF) was instituted in NABARD with an announcement in the Union Budget 1995-96 with the sole objective of giving low cost fund support to State Govts and State Owned Corporations for quick completion of ongoing projects relating to medium and minor irrigation, soil conservation, watershed management and other forms of rural infrastructure.
o  Shortfall of PSL norms of Foreign Banks goes to Small Enterprises Development Fund (SEDF) of SIDBI.

Q 65.C
o  Diesel and petrol are priced differently because of their level of distillation.

Q 66.C
o  The Uruguay round ended with the Marrakkesh Agreement signed by 117 countries including India and lead to formation of WTO.

Q 67.D
o  The decline in consumption expenditure on food items has mainly due to low cost of cereals; in addition there has been a decline in cereal consumption especially among the middle and high-income group.

Q 68.A
o  Services supplied from one country to another (e.g. international telephone calls), officially known as
‘cross-border supply’ (in WTO jargon, ‘mode 1’)
o  Consumers or firms making use of a service in another country (e.g. tourism), officially ‘consumption abroad’ or ‘mode 2’
o  A foreign company setting up subsidiaries or branches to provide services in another country (e.g.
foreign banks setting up operations in a country), officially ‘commercial presence’or ‘mode 3’.
o  Individuals travelling from their own  country  to supply services in another (e.g. fashion models or consultants), officially ‘presence of natural persons’ or ‘mode 4’

13                                   www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 69.B
Rainbow revolution as the name suggests covers different areas of agricultural economy -
o  Grey Revolution - Fertilizer
o  Pink Revolution - Onion production/Pharmaceutical (India)/Prawn production
o  Red Revolution - Meat & Tomato Production
o  Round Revolution - Potato
o  Silver Fiber Revolution - Cotton
o  Silver Revolution - Egg/Poultry Production
o  White Revolution (In India: Operation Flood) - Milk/Dairy production
o  Yellow Revolution - Oil Seeds production
o  Evergreen Revolution - Overall development of Agriculture

Q 70.B
o Edible Oil Economy
India is one of the largest producers of oilseeds in the world. However, 50 per cent of its domestic
requirements are met through imports, out of which crude palm oil and RBD palmolein constitute about
77 per cent and soyabean oil constitutes about 12 per cent. Import dependence was about 3 per cent during 1992-3. The production of oilseeds, though it has increased in recent years (from 184.40 lakh tons in 2000-1 to 297.99 lakh tons in 2011-12), has not kept pace with the demand for edible oils in India. Imports have helped to raise the per capita availability of edible oils, which has increased from 5.8 kg in 1992-93 to 14.5 kg in 2010-11.
o  One instrument for promoting future domestic production is calibration of the import duty structure.
Large imports of edible oils are primarily due to competitive prices of edible oils in the international
market and the import duty structure which has been sharply reduced to near zero levels over time to protect consumers. India has a market share that allows it to set some independent tariff policy that can meet both goals better. Considering the situation, it is time to frame a price band for edible oils in a manner that harmonizes the interests of domestic farmers, processors, and consumers through imposition of import duty at an appropriate rate. The import duty would also generate revenue, which could also be utilized for an oilseeds development programme.
o  India is also fortunate in having a wide range of oilseed crops grown in its different agro-climatic zones, including high- value premium crops.

Q 71.D
o  The three watershed programmes of the Department of Land Resources namely DPAP, DDP and IWDP have been consolidated into a single programme namely 'Integrated Watershed Management Programme (IWMP).
o  The Salient features of IWMP includes differential cost norm. The projects under the IWDP are generally sanctioned in areas that are not covered under DDP or DPAP.

Q 72.B
o  Organic farming is a whole system of farming that restores, maintains and enhances the ecological balance.
o  It is based on natural inputs such that the output of one process serves as input for the other.
o  Since it is completely based on bio-diversity as far as pesticides and fertilizers are concerned therefore it is labor intensive. Further, it doesn't use chemical inputs so the food produced is more nutritious.

Q 73.C
o  In terms of amount, commercial banks have highest share (70% plus) in credit disbursement to agricultural sector.
o  Uttar Pradesh is the largest producer of wheat.
o  Punjab has high share in procurement.





14                                   www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 74.B
o  Even though the policy of import substitution aimed to save foreign exchange reserve, it failed to promote exports.
o  Also the policy of import substitution aims at promoting domestic production and self-sufficiency in many sectors. Import Substitution thus gives boost to domestic manufacturing sector, which creates more employment opportunities and considerably lowers the demand for foreign exchange.Hence the foreign exchange dwindled reaching lowest levels in 1990. Hence, 1st Statement is correct
o  Protection of  public sector from  competition of  private players resulted in inefficient public sector monopolies, which gradually turned into dead social weight.Hence, 2nd Statement is correct.
o  Most of  the  domestic sectors  were  protected  from  foreign competition and many industries  were restricted to public sector. This resulted in lack of  competition in domestic industries and failed to achieve international standards.Hence, 3rd Statement is incorrect.
o  The licence-permit raj policy particularly helped in diversification of industrial sector by encouraging setting up of industries of all the types, both large scale and small scale, in all the regions. Hence, 4th Statement is correct.

Q 75.B
o  Weak environment laws may help in business environment in short run but for long run and stable economic growth require effective environmental legislation.

Q 76.A
o  The high level committee head by Shanta Kumar was appointed to suggest measures for restructuring of food policy.
o  The high-level committee has suggested that TPDS beneficiaries be reduced to 40 per centfrom the current 67 per cent.So statement 1 is correct.
o  It suggested that the rationed grains be priced at 50 per cent of the minimum support price paid to farmers. Sostatement 2 is incorrect.
o  Each beneficiary should be given 7 kg of grain instead of 5 kg under the Act, So statement 3 is also incorrect.
o  It is estimated that these provisions will reduce the food grain requirement under TPDS from 61.4 million tonnes to about 40 million tonnes.

Q 77.C
o  To make its financial support more flexible and tailored to the diversity of low-income countries, the IMF has established a Poverty Reduction and Growth Trust, which has three lending windows, all under highly concessional terms. These windows, which became effective in January 2010 and were further refined in April 2013 to improve the tailoring and flexibility of Fund support, are the following:
The Extended Credit Facility (ECF):
o  Provides  sustained  engagement  over  the  medium  to  long  term,  in  case  of  protracted  balance  of payments problems;
o  Offers more flexibility than before on program extensions, the timing of structural reforms, and formal poverty reduction strategy document requirements.
The Standby Credit Facility (SCF):
o  Provides  flexible  support to low-income  countries  with short-term  financing  and adjustment needs caused by domestic or external shocks, or policy slippages;
o  Targets countries that do not face protracted balance of payments problems but may need help from time to time;
o  Can also be used on a precautionary basis to provide insurance.
The Rapid Credit Facility (RCF):
o  Provides rapid financial support in a single, up-front payout for low-income countries facing urgent financing needs, and offers successive drawings for countries in post-conflict or other fragile situations;
o  Provides flexible assistance without program-based conditionality when use of the other two facilities is either not necessary (because of the limited nature of needs) or not possible (because of institutional or capacity constraints faced by a borrower).

15                                   www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 78.D
o  Currency swap is different from a central bank liquidity swap.
o  Currency swap example: suppose a U.S.-based company needs to acquire Swiss francs and a Swiss-based company needs to acquire U.S. dollars. These two companies could arrange to swap currencies by
establishing an interest rate, an agreed upon amount and a common maturity date for the exchange. Currency swap maturities are negotiable for at least 10 years, making them a very flexible method of foreign exchange.
o  Currency swaps were originally done to get around exchange controls.
o  The  Reserve  Bank  of  India  (RBI)  and Bank  of  Japan (BoJ)  have  signed  a  three  year  Bilateral  Swap
Arrangement (BSA) on December 4, 2012, wherein both countries can swap their local currencies against
the US dollar to address short-term liquidity problems.
o  A currency swap should be distinguished from interest rate swap, for in currency swap, both principal
and interest of loan is exchanged from one party to another party for mutual benefits.

Q 79.A
o  Surcharge reduces inequality, as it increases with tax.
o  Cess is a levy thus an indirect tax.

Q 80.A
o  It envisages connecting all habitations with a population of 500 persons and above in the plain areas and 250 persons and above in hill States, the tribal and the desert areas. (before 2003 it was 1000 and
500)
o  It is being implemented by Ministry of Rural Development.
o  National Rural Roads Development Agency (NRRDA) extends technical support to PMGSY.
o  The  Union  Cabinet  of  India  on  6  February  2013  gave  its  nod  to  the  proposal  of  decreasing  the headcounts to 100 in habitations under the government's flagship programme, Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana, PMGSY.
o  Under this program (PMGSY) habitation with population of 100 tribals and more in eighty-two naxal-hit would be connected via all weather roads. Earlier, under the PMGSY program the tribal areas with a population graph of more than 250 people in the naxal-affected reasons were covered.

Q 81.A
o  A major focus of the Programme is on citizen services, such as providing computerized copies of the records of rights (RoRs) with maps.
o  Abolition of stamp papers is being promoted under this programme.

Q 82.C
o  New Exploration Licensing Policy (NELP) was conceptualised by the Government of India, during 1997-
98 to provide an equal platform to both Public and Private sector companies in exploration and
production of hydrocarbons with Directorate General of Hydrocarbons (DGH) as a nodal agency for its implementation. It was introduced to boost the production of oil and natural gas and providing level playing field for both public and private players.
o  100% FDI is allowed under NELP.
o  Contracts under the New Exploration and Licensing Policy (NELP) for oil and gas are based on production sharing contract (PSC).

Q 83.D
o  An excise or excise tax (sometimes called a duty of excise special tax) is an inland tax on the sale, or production for sale, of specific goods or a tax on a good produced for sale, or sold, within a country or licenses for specific activities. Excises are distinguished from customs duties, which are taxes on importation. Excises are inland taxes, whereas customs duties are border taxes.
o  An excise is considered an indirect tax, meaning that the producer or seller who pays the tax to the government is expected to try to recover or shift the tax by raising the price paid by the buyer.


16                                   www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 84.A


Recommendations of High Level Committee on restructuring of FCI under the Chairmanship of Shanta
Kumar are :
o  It recommended that that FCI hand over all procurement operations of wheat, paddy and rice to states that have gained sufficient experience in this regard and have created reasonable infrastructure for procurement. These states are Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha and Punjab.  FCI should move on to help those states where farmers suffer from distress sales at prices much below MSP, and which are dominated by small holdings, like Eastern Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal, Assam etc. Hence, first statement is incorrect.
o  Negotiable warehouse receipt system (NWRs) - farmers can deposit their produce to the registered warehouses and take certain amount as advance from banks against their produce valued at MSP. They can sell later when they feel prices are good for them. This will bring back the private sector, reduce massively  the   costs  of  storage  to  the  government,  and  be  more  compatible  with  a  market economy. Hence, second statement is correct
o  HLC recommended gradual introduction (not substitution because it implies that fair price shops will be dismantled and target groups will buy the grains from open market with the help of cash transferred) of cash transfers in PDS, starting with large cities with more than 1 million population; extending it to grain surplus states, and then giving option to deficit states to opt for cash or physical grain distribution. This will be much more cost effective way to help the poor, without much distortion in the production basket, and in line with best international practices. Hence, third statement is incorrect.
o  Reduce the coverage of food security act (FSA) from 67 per cent to 40 per cent of the population.

Q 85.A
o  Typically in the literature, current account deficit (CAD) is viewed as foreign savings that promote growth through higher investment given the level of domestic savings in EMDEs; but in the context of India's large oil import dependence and the sharp rise in global crude oil prices, the widening of the CAD in
2011-12 and 2012-13 may be an atypical outcome. (Economic Survey 2014-15)
o  ECB is a part of Capital Account and not Current Account.
o  The current account can also be expressed as the difference between national (both public and private) savings and investment. A current account deficit may therefore reflect a low level of national savings relative to investment or a high rate of investment or both.
o  For capital-poor developing countries, which have more investment opportunities than they can afford to undertake because of low levels of domestic savings, a current account deficit may be natural.

Q 86.C
o  All the statements are correct.
o  As in the Fed Tapering the U.S. central bank (the Federal Reserve) is climbing down its bond buying programme, the circulation of U.S. dollar is to get affected and also the interest rate is also getting hiked on bond, which in turn is making investment in U.S. bonds attractive for U.S. investors which may affect fund flow towards emerging economies.

Q 87.C
o  Blue Box Subsidies are Amber Box types of support, but with constraints on production or other conditions designed to reduce the distortion. Currently they are not limited.Hence, 1st Statement is incorrect.
o  Amber Box Subsidies are all domestic support measures considered to distort production and trade.
o  Amber Box Subsidies subject to “De Minimis” rules under which minimal supports are allowed (5% of agricultural production for developed countries, 10% for developing countries). Hence, 2nd Statement is incorrect.
o  Green Box Subsidies are domestic support for agriculture that is allowed without limits because it does not distort trade, or at most causes minimal distortion. Hence, 3rd Statement is correct.

Q 88.B


17                                   www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 89.B
o  Revenue expenditure does not cause either increase or decrease the assets of Government because such expenditures are of 'consumptive' nature and do not involve creation of productive assets i.e. they are either used in running of a productive process. Whereas, Capital expenditure are asset creating in nature, like on construction of infrastructure adds to the capital stock. Hence, 1st statement is incorrect.
o  In case of receipts, revenue receipts do not impact assets or liabilities whereas capital receipts are for investment purposes and are supposed to be spent on plan-development by a government. Thus add to the liabilities of the government. Hence, 2nd statement is correct.

Q 90.C
Following are the provisions for MMDR Bill, 2015:
o  Existing captive mines will be auctioned after 2030, while existing non-captive mines will be auctioned in
2020. All new mines will be auctioned only.
o  The Bill provides for freedom to trade rights/permits and non-exclusive reconnaissance permits
o  For the four notified surficial minerals namely iron ore, bauxite, limestone and manganese, the auction will be for grant of mining (production) leases since the reserves in their case are known and nearly
accurately estimated; as for deep-seated minerals including copper, nickel and zinc, given the lack of information database, prospecting-cum-mining  leases  will  be  issued to the  winners  emerging  from competitive bidding.

Q 91.A


The salient features of the Policy are:
o  Citizens have every right to own part of the shares of Public Sector Undertakings. Public Sector Undertakings are the wealth of the Nation and this wealth should rest in the hands of the people. This has been a major goal of disinvestment policy in India. Hence, statement 1 is correct.
o  While pursuing disinvestment, Government has to retain majority shareholding, i.e. at least 51% and management control of the Public Sector Undertakings. Hence, statement 2 is incorrect.

Q 92.D
o  Industrial Sector has become the largest consumer of commercial energy displacing transport sector.
o  Sector wise share in descending order: Industry > Transport > Residential and Commercial > Other energy uses > Non energy uses > Agriculture. (Source: Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas; Ministry of
Commerce)

Q 93.C
o  SEZ, or Special Economic Zone, is essentially an industrial cluster meant largely for exports. An SEZ is governed by a special set of rules aimed at attracting direct investment for export-oriented production. SEZs, earlier known as Export Processing Zones or Free Trade Zones, are duty free enclaves which are treated as foreign territory only for trade operations, duties, tariffs and typically marked by the best infrastructure and least red tape. Other salient features of SEZs are:
o  Manufacturing or service activities are allowed;
o  Full freedom for sub-contracting;
o  No routine examination by customs authorities of export/import cargo;
o  Units in SEZs have to become net foreign exchange earners within three years; and
o  Domestic sales from them are subject to full customs duty and the import policy in force.
Q 94.B
o  Fiscal deficit = Total expenditure – Total receipts + borrowings
o  Hence, option 1 is incorrect.
o  Grants given by centre to states come under revenue deficit but grant used for creation of capital assets excluded from effective revenue deficit. Hence, option 2 is correct.
o  To calculate primary deficit only interest payments is subtracted from fiscal deficit not the loan payments. Hence, option 3 is incorrect.
Q 95.B
     The scheme was launched for tea, coffee, rubber, and tobacco growers in 2003 against the backdrop of decline in unit value realization of these commodities.

18                                   www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 96.B
     The mission does not aim to import cows. The mission aims to conserve and develop  “indigenous breeds” of cows in a focused and scientific manner. The mission will undertake breed improvement programme  for  indigenous  cattle  breeds  to  improve  the  genetic  make-up  and  increase  the  stock; enhance milk production and productivity; upgrade nondescript cattle using elite indigenous breeds like Gir, Sahiwal, Rathi, Deoni, Tharparkar and Red Sindhi. So option 1 is incorrect.
     It is not a sub-mission under the National mission for livestock. The mission is a focussed project under
National Programme for Bovine Breeding and Dairy Development. So option 2 is also incorrect.
     A number of Integrated Indigenous Cattle Centres (Gokul Grams) will be set up under the mission that will work for improving milk productivity. So option 3 is correct.
     Rashtriya Gokul Mission will be implemented through the State Implementing Agency (SIA viz Livestock Development Boards). State Gauseva Ayogs will be given the mandate to sponsor proposals to the SIA's (LDB's) and monitor implementation of the sponsored proposal. All Agencies having a role in indigenous cattle development will be the “Participating Agencies” like CFSPTI, CCBFs, ICAR, Universities, Colleges, NGO's and Gaushalas with best germplasm.

Q 97.A
     The Government of India constituted the National Investment Fund (NIF) on 3rd November, 2005, into which the proceeds from disinvestment of Central Public Sector Enterprises were to be channelized. Hence, statement1 is correct.
     The corpus of the fund was to be of permanent nature and the same was to be professionally managed
in order to provide sustainable returns to the Government, without depleting the corpus. NIF was to be maintained outside the Consolidated Fund of India. Hence, statement 2 is incorrect
     The Government on 17th January, 2013 has approved restructuring of the National Investment Fund (NIF) and decided that the disinvestment proceeds with effect from the fiscal year 2013-14 will be used only for approved purposes, like investment in shares of PSEs, recapitalization etc. Hence, statement 3 is also incorrect.

Q 98.D

Q 99.D
The economic cost of foodgrains consists of three components:
1.   The MSP including central bonus, if applicable, as the price paid to farmers - MSP is the minimum support price announced by the govt. at the beginning of the sowing season.
2.   Procurement incidentals - these are the extra cost incurred during the process of procurement
3.   The cost of distribution - this include the charges incurred during transport, handling, storage etc.
o  Hence all the given options are included while calculating economic cost of foodgrains.
o  The economic cost of both wheat and rice witnessed significant increase during the last few years due to
increase in MSPs and proportionate increase in incidentals as well as other costs, which necessitated for  a detailed review of the open-ended procurement policy, especially in states that offer high bonus on top of MSP and those that impose high taxes and statutory levies, as well as stocking and distribution policies.
o  In  this  regard,  the  government  set  up  a  High   Level Committee  (HLC)  in  August  2014  under the chairmanship of Shri Shanta Kumar to suggest inter-alia restructuring or unbundling of the FCI with a view to improving its operational efficiency and financial management.

Q 100.A
o  Majority of Cotton Cultivation areas are rainfed.
o  Gossypium arboretum and Gossypium herbaceum are varieties of cotton.



Copyright © by Vision IAS
All  rights  are  reserved.  No  part  of  this  document  may  be  reproduced,  stored  in  a  retrieval  system  or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise,
without prior permission of Vision IAS

19                                   www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
