VISIONIAS z™
www.visionias.in www.visionias.wordpress.com

ANSWERS & EXPLANATION GENERAL STUIDES (P) 2015 – Test 7 (1556)




Q 1.B
     Scythians invaded North-west India in around 1st century BC & it became one of causes of the decline of
Mauyan Empire. Hence, statement 1 is incorrect.
     Statement 2 is correct

Q 2.B
     The Rajputs were staunch followers of Hinduism. They also patronized Buddhism and Jainism. It was during their period that the Bhakti Cult started.

Q 3.D
     All are correct. Q 4.C
Q 5.C
     Virshaiva Movement (12th Century) was founded by Basava, who was initially a Jaina and a minister in the court of a Chalukya king. His followers were known as Virashaivas (heroes of Shiva) or Lingayats (wearers of the linga).They worship Shiva in his manifestation as a linga.
     Lingayats believe that on death the devotee will be united with Shiva and will not return to this world.
Therefore they do not practise funerary rites such as cremation, prescribed in the Dharmashastras. Instead, they ceremonially bury their dead

Q 6.A
     He appointed the Afghan soldiers in higher posts.
     He introduced the Dagh" system (or) "branding the horses" to avoid false musters. He also maintained a descriptive roll for the soldiers.
     Sher shah revived the Dak-chauki, the espionage system.

Q 7.D
     Akbar undertook social and educational reforms.
     He tried to reform marriage, sati, restriction on sale of wine etc.
     Akbar also revised the educational syllabus, laying more emphasis on moral education, and secular subjects such as mathematics, agriculture, geometry, astronomy.
Hence, all the statements are correct.

Q 8.C
     It was Greeks, who introduced standard coinage in India, with rulers name on coins.
     Pure gold coins of Kushana implies increase in economic activities whereas impure gold coins in Gupta period hints at decline in economic activities.

Q 9.A
1. Activated charcoal is carbon that has been treated with oxygen.
2. Activated charcoal is used in water filter.
3. Charcoal is activated by heating it in steam.

1                                                                www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
     Common charcoal is made from peat, coal, wood, coconut shell, or petroleum. “Activated charcoal” is similar to common charcoal, but is made especially for use as a medicine. To make activated charcoal, manufacturers heat common charcoal in the presence of a gas that causes the charcoal to develop lots of internal spaces or “pores.” These pores help activated charcoal “trap” chemicals.
     Activated charcoal is used to treat poisonings, reduce intestinal gas (flatulence), lower cholesterol levels, prevent hangover, and treat bile flow problems (cholestasis) during pregnancy.

Q 10.C
     The Emperor Akbar in his profound sagacity classified the lands and fixed a different revenue to be paid by each.
     Polaj is land which is annually cultivated for each crop in succession and is never allowed to lie fallow.
     Parauti is land left out of cultivation for a time that it may recover its strength.
     Chachar is land that has lain fallow for three or four years.
     Banjar is land uncultivated for five years and more. Of the first two kinds of land, there are three classes,
good, middling, and bad. They add together the produce of each sort, and the third of this represents the medium produce, one-third part of which is exacted as the Royal dues.
     In his list of duties of the amil-guzar or revenue collector, Akbar decreed that while he should strive to make cultivators pay in cash, the option of payment in kind was also to be kept open.
Q 11.B Q 12.D
     The village council and the nadu had several administrative functions including dispensing justice and
collecting taxes.
     Rich peasants of the Vellala caste exercised considerable control over the affairs of the nadu(group of villages) under the supervision of the central Chola government.
     Associations of traders known as nagarams performed administrative functions in towns.

Q 13.D
     During the Vedic period, king did not maintain a standing army. During wars tribal units were mustered.
     The system of civil service took birth during this period as the concept of territory began to be followed.
Here, officials were assigned specific duties.

Q 14.B
     Numerous foreign travelers wrote about India’s wealth and love of Indians for gold and silver in their writings.
     India was known for self sufficiency for most the product at the time except Gold and other precious material. Indian exported agricultural products, spices and clothes and other things at a very favorable terms and imported Gold and silver from these countries.

Q 15.C
     Both laid emphasis on oneness of God & denounced idol-worship, pilgrimages and other formal observances of the various faiths. However, both Nanak and Kabir had no intention of founding a new religion & it is their followers who got inspired by their ideas gave birth to a new creed , 'Sikhism' & sect of 'Kabir Panthis' respectively.
Q 16.D Q 17.A
     The Brahmans were excluded from any kind of administrative post in these Republics.
     Even in the pre-mauryan times, monarchies were more strong and common.




2                                                                www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 18.B
     Khusrau, who was given the title of nayak or master of both the theory and practice of music. He introduced many Perso-Arabic airs (ragas), such as aiman, gora, sanam, etc. The qawwali is supposed to originate with him. He is credited with having invented the sitar and tabla.
     Khusrau wrote a large number of poetical works, including historical romances. He experimented with all the poetical forms, and created a new style of Persian which came to be called the sabaq-i-hindi or the style of India. Khusrau has praised the Indian languages, including Hindi (which he calls Hindavi).

Q 19.C
     After Guru Gobind Singh's death in 1708, the Khalsa rose in revolt against the Mughal authority under Banda Bahadur’s leadership, declared their sovereign rule by striking coins in the name of Guru Nanak and Guru Gobind Singh.
     Guru Gobind Singh had inspired the Khalsawith the belief that their destiny was to rule (raj karega khalsa).
     The Khalsa declared their sovereign rule by striking their own coin again in 1765. Q 20.B
Q 21.B
     Shankaracharya propounded the Philosophy of the 'advaita' or non-dualism
     He propounded that God, soul & the created world are both one. At the practical level, there may appear to be differences but at the 'parmarthik' level there are no real differences
     It is based on the interpretation of the upanishads which comprise of dialogue between teacher and student & belived in the knowledge or Gyan marg for salvation. Bhakti marg is accepted by Ramanuja.

Q 22.D
     Many artisan tasks were dependent on women. The more commercialised the product, the more was women's involvement.
     Peasant and artisinal women worked not only in fields but also in houses of employers and in markets.
     Marriages in rural communities required payment of bride price rather than dowry because of the useful resource that women proved to be

Q 23.A
     Mahmud of Ghazni was a turk by descent who led 17 expedition into India which led to the establishment of the Turkish Foot Hold in Punjab.

Q 24.B
     The Mughals did not believe in the rule of primogeniture, where the eldest son inherited his father’s estate. Instead they followed the Mughal and Timurid custom of coparcenary inheritance, or a division of the inheritance amongst all the sons.
     Peasant revolts challenged the stability of the Mughal Empire from the end of the seventeenth century.

Q 25.C
     Babur received invitations from Alam Khan, the uncle of Ibrahim Lodi and Daulat Khan Lodi, the
Governor of Punjab, to invade India.
     Sher Shah Suri introduced the Ryotwari System.
     The victory at Panipat did not make Babur the ruler of India. He had to deal with a formidable foe, Rana Sanga of Mewar. Rana Sanga was defeated in the battle of Kanwah in A.D 1527. Medini Rai of Malwa was defeated in the battle of Chanderi in A.D 1528.

Q 26.A
     The script has not been deciphered yet. Rests of the statements are correct.



3                                                                www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 27.C
     Jahangiri palace was built by Akbar for his rajput wives.

Q 28.C
     Tantric practices were open to women and practitioners ignored caste, class differences within ritual context.

Q 29.A
     Ibn batuta wrote Rihala in Arabic about the socio cultural life in the subcontinent in the reign of
Muhammad bin Tughlaq. Hence, 1st statement is correct.
     Alberuni translated Patanjali’s Yoga-Sutra into Arabic (called Kitab Patanjal). He also wrote a monograph on Indic culture, Kitab al-Hind which did not achieve the prominence of other works of comparative religion written around the same time. Romila Thapar adds that Alberuni was the finest intellect of central Asia. In the ten years he spent in India, he made observations on Indian conditions, systems of knowledge, social norms and religion.
     Duarte Barbosa was the Portuguese traveler who gave a detailed account of trade and society in South
India. Hence, 3rd statement is incorrect.

Q 30.C
     Virupaksha Temple - Vijayanagar. Rest are correctly matched

Q 31.B
     The paintings belong to chalcolithic & Mesolithic phase in the Vindhyas. Paintings were done on both the wall & ceilings but not on floor. Color was prepared by grinding of rocks & minerals. They have remained intact to a great extent because of chemical reaction of these minerals with rock surfaces.

Q 32.A
     There are enough evidence throughout the ancient Indian history, of prevalence of slavery. They were used for many works including agricultural activities.
     Megasthenese denies the existence of slavery in India as in India the slaves were treated much better than in Greece. So he could not comprehend them as slaves.

Q 33.D
     Chinese porclein was found in the urban core suggesting this area would have been occupied by rich traders.
     Muslim residential quarter has also been located.

Q 34.A
     Ibn Battuta’s book of travels, called Rihla, written in Arabic, provides extremely rich and interesting details about the social and cultural life in the subcontinent in the fourteenth century. This Moroccan traveller was born in Tangier into one of the most respectable and educated families known for their expertise in Islamic religious law or shari‘a.
     True to the tradition of his family, Ibn Battuta received literary and scholastic education when he was
quite young.
     Muhammad-Bin-Tughlaq was impressed by his scholarship, and appointed him the qazi or judge of Delhi. Q 35.C
Q 36.C

Q 37.A
     Although a military state, Athashastra mentions many practices followed by a welfare state - incorporated by Mauryan state.
     It also maintained a navy.
     Also it was a highly centralized administration with all the powers concentrated in king.

4                                                                www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 38.A

Q 39.A
     It was the biggest merchant guild of southern india and strengthed under Chola kings. Most of the existing indigenous and local trade guilds became associated with it. The Manigramam and nanadesi guilds joined the Ayyavole-500. The Ayyavole guild also emerged as a maritime power. These traders were one of the conduits for transporting Indian culture to Southeast Asia.

Q 40.A
     He collected four important taxes such as Kharaj-1/10 of the produce of the land, Khams-1/5 of the warbooty, Jizya-Poll Tax and Zakat-Tax on muslims for specific religious purposes.
Q 41.C Q 42.D
     According to texts a married woman may not be ordained a nun without the consent of her husband and
his guild; hence guild has power over social life also.
     Besides economic activities, guilds also made large religious donations and built many religious architectures like Stupas and Viharas.



Q 43.C












































5                                                                www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS





















































Q 44.D

Q 45.D
     The system of taxation did not exist at the time & no officials existed for the collection of taxes. People made contribution to king voluntarily. The medium of exchange was gold & cows.
Q 46.A Q 47.C





6                                                                www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 48.C
     One of the most important chronicles was the Ain-i Akbari (in short the Ain) authored by Akbar’s court historian Abu’l Fazl. This text meticulously recorded the arrangements made by the state to ensure cultivation, to enable the collection of revenue by the agencies of the state and to regulate the relationship between the state and rural magnates, the zamindars.
     We are told in the Ain that the Mughal provinces of Agra produced 39 varieties of crops and Delhi produced 43 over the two seasons. Bengal produced 50 varieties of rice alone.
     However, the focus on the cultivation of basic staples did not mean that agriculture in medieval India was only for subsistence. We often come across the term jins-i kamil (literally, perfect crops) in our sources. The Mughal state also encouraged peasants to cultivate such crops as they brought in more revenue. Crops such as cotton and sugarcane were jins-i kamil par excellence. Cotton was grown over a great swathe of territory spread over central India and the Deccan plateau, whereas Bengal was famous for its sugar.
     Cultivation was based on the principle of individual ownership. Peasant lands were bought and sold in the same way as the lands of other property owners.

Q 49.A
     All are correct.
     Iltutmish undertook an expedition against Bamiyan. He nominated his daughter Raziah as his successor before his death.

Q 50.A
     Owing to crown ownership of land, according to Bernier, the landholders could not pass on their land to their children. Hence, Statement 2 is incorrect.
     According to Bernier, many kinds of towns existed during the Mughals like trading towns, port towns, pilgrimage towns, etc. Their existence is an indicator of the prosperity of the merchant & professional classes.
     However, since the profits were appropriated by the State , the artisans had no motivation to improve the quality of their manufactures . Thus manufacturing declined & the artisans became very poor. Hence, Statement 3 is incorrect.

Q 51.D
     The Sangam texts are different from the Vedic texts, particularly the Rig Vedic texts, they do not constitute religious literature.

Q 52.B
    Pottery first appeared in Neolithic phase.

Q 53.C
     In general, the Upnishads proclaim salvation by knowledge or realization. Unlike Vedas, they talk
about Moksha instead of heaven.
     With the advent of Upnishads, the importance of sacrificial rites declined; but unlike Jainism and
Buddhism, Upnishads do not completely discard the need of sacrificial rites or supremacy of Vedas.
     Aranyakas literally mean Forest Books, which are a later vedic development. Q 54.B
Q 55.A
     Indus Valley Civilization had Pashupathi Mahadeva and female figures for worship which are linked with todays Shiva and Shakti worship.
     They also worshiped natural figures and there is evidence in the form of terrecotta figures. Tantric
traditions evovled later during Buddhist and Brahmanic traditions.



7                                                                www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 56.D
     Marriageable age in Rig Veda seems to be 16 or 17. Women‘s status was not bad. They attended political
assemblies & offered sacrifices. Rig Veda mentions about widow re-marriage.

Q 57.D
     All the statements are correct regarding Indus civilization. Mohenjodaro literally means place of dead and the both sites are located on the rivers given in statement respectively.

Q 58.C
     Avesta is an Iranian text.
     Rig Vedic Aryans did not know the use of iron. It appeared in later Vedic period. Varna system was practiced but it was not hereditary which it became in later Vedic period.
     Statement c is correct.

Q 59.A
     Statement 1 is correct. The reason for spread was the patronage recieved by Jainism in these areas, though it was not quite of the level as received by Buddhism. But Jainism was able to maintain its inflluence in these areas whereas Buddhism vanished from the Indian sub-continent.
     However, statement 2 is incorrect. Infact, Jainism did not become popular with masses because it did not clearly mark itself from the Brahmanical religion.

Q 60.B
     The monuments of Ashoka's time, especially the bell-shaped capitals were influenced by Iranian models.
Iranian influence can even be traced in the preamble of Ashoka's edicts as well as certain words contained in them.
     Iranian coins found in the north-western region points to trade with Iran. But it would be wrong to think
that punch-marked coins constinued in India as a result of contact with Iran. Hence, statement 2 is incorrect as it cannot be conclusively ascertained.

Q 61.B
    All of them were determined by Aryabhatta. Q 62.C
     It is the unorthodox character of Magadhan society and the happy racial admixture which helped them in defeating the other kingdoms and found in the first empire in India.

Q 63.C
     To keep the bottle completely immersed, the upward force on the bottle due to water must be
balanced. This can be achieved by an externally applied force acting downwards. This force must at least
be equal to the difference between the upward force and the weight of the bottle.

Q 64.A
     A major feature of the Chishti tradition was austerity, including maintaining a distance from worldly power. However, this was by no means a situation of absolute isolation from political power as the sufis accepted unsolicited grants and donations from the political elites. Hence, 2nd Statement is incorrect.
      When the Turks set up the Delhi Sultanate, they resisted the insistence of the ulama on imposing sharia as state law because they anticipated opposition from their subjects, the majority of whom were non- Muslims. The Sultans then sought out the sufis – who derived their authority directly from God – and did not depend on jurists to interpret the sharia.

Q 65.B
     Samhitas are the collection of Vedic hymns.


8                                                                www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 66.A
     Sangam Literature is best source to know about the social and cultural set up of Dravidian societies of past. Weaver comminity enjoyed special status and streets were named after them in their recognition. these term are streets named after them. So option A is correct.
Q 67.D Q 68.A
     Early Aryans were not united against local tribes & did not possess iron weapons. They succeeded because they rode chariots driven by horses. They possibly also had better bronze tools with them & wore armour.

Q 69.D
     In the administration of Shivaji, 'Ashtapradhan' was the term used for 8 ministers who were directly responsible to the Ruler. It included Peshwas, Senapati, Nyayadhish, etc.

Q 70.C
     The first metal to be used was Copper.

Q 71.C
     Prajapati or creator was the most important god of later Vedic period & replaced Agni & Indra.
     Rig Vedic people did not sought spiritual enlightenment but only material benefits from their prayers

Q 72.C
     Muhammad Tughlaq’s rationale for shifting the capital was that Deccan was a new conquered territory and Muslims were in small number. the empire of the sultan had become extended and Daulatabad was in the centre, and strategically important compared to Delhi and Tughlaq believed that this new capital would be kept safe from Mongol invasions

Q 73.A Q 74.C
Q 75.C
     In Indus valley Civilization, Shamans are men and women who claim magical and healing powers, as well as an ability to communicate with the other world. So option C is correct.

Q 76.D
     The whole nobility, the bureaucracy as well as the military hierarchy, held mansabs. They could be transferred from the civil side to the military department and vice versa. Hence, Statement 1 is incorrect.
     During the Mughal Period, Tajwiz System' was devised wherein a petition was by a nobleman to the
Emperor to recommend an applicant to be recruited as a  'mansabdar'. Hence, Statement 2 is correct.
     The mansabdars of the Mughal empire received their pay either in cash (naqd) or in the form of assignments of areas of land (jagir) from which they were entitled to collect the land revenue and all other taxes sanctioned by the emperor. Hence, statement 3 is correct.

Q 77.B
     Both Kailasanatha Temple at Kanchipuram & Brihadiswara Temple - Dravida Style.
     Hoysaleswara Temple- Chalukyan Style

Q 78.C
     It reacts with acidic components in batters, releasing carbon dioxide, which causes expansion of the batter and forms the characteristic texture and grain in pancakes, cakes, quick breads, soda bread, and

9                                                                www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
other baked and fried foods. Acidic compounds that induce this reaction include phosphates, cream of tartar, lemon juice, yogurt, buttermilk, cocoa, vinegar, etc.

Q 79.A
     With the Market Control measures , the Rulers of that time could hope to enjoy support of citizens as well as the Army.
     Also, Allaudin Khalji initiated them to raise a large army to keep a check on the Mongol invasions & for
this the Army was kept happy by paying them in cash.
     Infact, he was the first Sultan in the Delhi Sultanat to do so. Hence, Statement 3 is incorrect

Q 80.B
     Artisan population was substantial reaching even upto 25% of the village households. there was also fluidity in professions as cultivators in off-season performed a variety of roles of artisans like dyeing, textile printing, etc.

Q 81.D
     They did get occasional support from the kings. Their hymns are full of opposition to buddhism and jainism. It was inferred that this is because of competition for royal patronage. They were revered by peasants due to which kings supported them and built temples.

Q 82.B
     Shulva-sutras, i.e. rules of the cord, which treat of the measurement by means of cords, and the construction, of different kinds of altars required for sacrifices.

Q 83.B
     Domestication of animals began in around Mesolithic period. Hence, 1st statement is incorrect.
     2nd one is correct.

Q 84.B
     Sutta Pitaka deals with teachings of Budhha.
     Abhidhamma Pitaka deals with philosophical matters.
     The earlier Buddhist text were written in Pali but new text/chronicles were written in Sanskrit.

Q 85.A
     Bhakti movement started from South India and was led by series of popular saints Alvars (Vishnu) and
Nayanars (Shiva).
     They rejected caste inequality and vedic rituals. The spoke in local language and went from place to place to spread the message of love and devotion to God.

Q 86.B
     Vikramaditadevacharita is about the Chalukan King of Kalyan, Vikramaditya VI.

Q 87.C
     This discovery was a path-breaking discovery for Historian as it gave clear picture about the political developments of ancient period. Both statements are correct. John Princep was an East India company officer who 1st discoverd this fact.

Q 88.D
     Sikhism had its origin in the teachings of Nanak & started the institution of Guruship.
     5th Guru Arjun Dev started living a life of aristocrat unlike his predecessors & he compiled Sikh scriptures
Granth Sahib or Adi Granth.
     Guru Gobind Singh was the last Sikh Guru & he abolished the institution of Guruship & declared Granth
Sahib as the true source of any guidance for the Sikhs.

10                                                              www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
Q 89.A


Ashokan Inscription may be divided into -
1. Major Rock Edicts – Mansehra, Shahbazgarhi, Qandahar, Girnar, Sopara, Sannati, Jaugada, Shishupalgarh, Kalsi.
2. Minor Rock Edicts- Bahapur, Bairat, Bhabru, Maski. (Mainly in Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh)
3. Pillar Inscription: Topra, Meerut, Sarnath, Kaushambi
(Many in Bihar, Bengal)

Q 90.B
     Mouds is common term used in Archaeologocal references. Otion 'c'  provides correct definition of the
term. Other options define defferent terms. Q 91.D
Q 92.C
     It did not have rich deposits of gold & hence statement 1 is not the correct reason. In fact, it had rich resources of iron which helped its rise.
     It had deposits of iron which helped it to make iron weapons on an extensive scale.
     Although the Indian states were well acquainted with te use of horse and chariots, Magadha was the first state to use elephants on a large scale.
     Since, it was Vedicised late it showed greater enthusiasm for expansion than the kingdoms which had been Vedicised earlier.

Q 93.D
     The craft of the Thatheras of Jandiala Guru constitutes the traditional technique of manufacturing brass and copper utensils in Punjab. The metals used – copper, brass and certain alloys – are believed to be beneficial for health.
     The Lists of Intangible Cultural Heritage are established by UNESCO aiming to ensure the better protection of important intangible cultural heritages worldwide and the awareness of their significance

Q 94.A
     All the statements except statement 3 are correct.
     Few rulers like Huna king Mihirkul is said to have killed many Buddhists.
     Other reasons include internal degenration of Buddhism as new tantric cult like Vajrayana came to the fore and it was tried to be absorbed into Hinduism by making Buddha incarnation of Vishnu.

Q 95.A
     His land revenue system resembled the system followed by Raja Todar Mai under Akbar. The state also collected custom duties and professional taxes. The two other important taxes collected during his time were Chauth and Sardeshmuki.
     Women were not allowed in military camps.

Q 96.D
     Aryabhatta considered zero not only as a numeral but also as a concept and a symbol.

Q 97.A
     The 'amara-nayakas' were the military commanders who were given the territories to govern by the King ; they sent tributes to the king annually and appeared in the royal court personally with gifts to express their loyalty.
     They were allowed to retain a part of revenue collected by them for personal use apart for maintaining a stipulated contingent of horses and elephants.


11                                                              www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
     It can be compared with the 'iqta system' of the Delhi Sultanate as both were the systems of giving land revenue grants . However , whereas the 'Iqta system' was not hereditary , on the other hand
'nayakaship' was in the initial stages personal, it became hereditary in the course of time. Hence, Statement 3 is incorrect.
Q 98.D Q 99.A
     Rig Veda shows some consciousness of physical appearance of people. Varna was the term used for color. Thus, color had been a factor in determination of social order.
     The locals who were won over by the Aryans wee treated as slaves. This was the most important factor contributing to the growth of Varna System.
     Social inequalities resulted in different trade practices. Hence, it was the result & not a reason. Though it further led to its strengthening of Varna System. Thus, statement 3 is incorrect.

Q 100.D
     Buddha propounded four noble truths. Fourth of them is  Eight-fold path (Ashtangika marga).
     Buddha denounce excesses of all kind, hence his teaching include Middle Path.
     As Buddhism doen't believe in existence of soul, therefore Prtityasmutpada is the concept used to explain the process of rebirth.






































Copyright © by Vision IAS
All  rights  are  reserved.  No  part  of  this  document  may  be  reproduced,  stored  in  a  retrieval  system  or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without prior permission of Vision IAS


12                                                              www.visionias.in                                                         ©Vision IAS
