

1 Which of the following in the constitution has/have a bearing on the welfare of the old and/or disabled?
1.  Directive Principles of State Policy (DPSP)
2.  Fourth Schedule
3.  Seventh Schedule
4.  Eleventh Schedule
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 3 only
b)  2 and 4 only
c)  1, 3 and 4 only
d)  1, 2, 3 and 4
Answer: C
Statement 1: Article 41: The State shall, within the limits of its economic capacity and development, make effective provision for securing the right to work, to education and to public assistance in cases of unemployment, old age, sickness and disablement, and in other cases of undeserved want.
Statement 2: It deals with allocation of seats in Rajya Sabha. Statement 3: Relief of the disabled and unemployable - State List http://socialjustice.nic.in/writereaddata/UploadFile/Seventh%20Schedule.pdf
Statement 4: Eleventh Schedule contains the following items:
Health and sanitation, including hospitals, primary health centers and dispensaries.
Family welfare.
Women and child development.
Social welfare, including welfare of the handicapped and mentally retarded. Welfare of the weaker sections, and in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
df

2 What was/were the reasons behind Muhammad Bin Tughlaq's transfer of capital from
Delhi to Daulatabad?
1.  He wanted to keep Daulatabad safe from Greek invasions.
2.  Delhi held a referendum which resulted in the transfer of capital to Daulatabad.
3.  Daulatabad was situated very close to the northern frontiers of his empire which allowed better control.
Select the correct answer using the code given below:
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  None of the above
Answer: D
Statement 1: It was the earlier capital Delhi was prone to Mongol (not Greek) invasions, not Daultabad, which was actually more secure and centrally located.
Statement 2: No such referendum was held. It was a monarchy.
Statement 3: Daulatabad was situated at a long distance from the northern frontiers of the empire and those required to be constantly watched.
Barani points out that Dualatabad had a central situation and were nearly equidistant (700 miles) from Delhi. Gujarat, Lakhnauti, Telingana and other important places.
The new capital had its strategic value. It was safe from Mongolian invasions which constantly threatened Delhi. The Sultan also did his best to make Daulatabad a suitable place for his officers and the people.

3 In a multi-cultural democracy which of the following are generally in strain?
a)  National rights versus minority rights
b)  Socio-economic rights versus Constitutional rights
c)  Political rights versus sovereignty
d)  Populism versus political rights
Answer: A
 Option (b) can't be the answer because many constitutions provide for and aim at socio-economic justice.
Option (c) can't be the answer because it is sovereignty of the nation that forms the basis for getting political rights, if any. If a nation is not free, there is no question of a political right.
Option (d) is not appropriate because populism is generally against long-term development objectives.
National rights versus minority rights have been a major issue in democracies. For e.g. in cases of development displacement, the question is whose rights should be preferred, the right of the nation to develop as a whole or that of minorities to decide their own future?
In a religious setting, should a religious practice be banned because it is against national morality, or should the minority religious practices be respected because they have a right to preserve their practices.
Such conflicts are common in democracies and every democracy strikes a balance between them by providing some space to minorities in decision making.

4 As per a study, India has emerged as the world's second largest mobile market and also the fifth largest producer of e-waste. A mobile phone device Lithium-Ion battery generally contains which of these harmful products?
1.  Lead
2.  Cadmium
3.  Arsenic
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  1 only
c)  2 and 3 only
d)  None of the above
Answer: D
 While other types of batteries include toxic metals such as cadmium, the metals in lithium ion batteries - cobalt, copper, nickel and iron - are considered
safe for landfills or incinerators.
Each battery contains 10 to 13% cobalt by weight.
According to the U.S. government, lithium ion batteries aren't an environmental hazard, and instead their recycling can generate enough metal to be reused in the semiconductor industry applications.
Source: http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/energy-and-environment/india-fifth-large st-producer-of-ewaste-study/article8646446.ece

5 Consider the following about money laundering in India.
1.  Unwillingness to pay taxes or evading taxes is called money laundering.
2.  All investment received from tax-havens in India is laundered money.
3.  The Enforcement Directorate (ED) is empowered to investigate such cases under the
Prevention of Money Laundering (PMLa) Act.
4.  If money laundering is suspected the concerned financial institution must inform the
Financial Intelligence Unit-India (FIU-IND). Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  3 and 4 only
c)  1, 3 and 4 only
d)  1, 2, 3 and 4
Answer: B
Statement 1: If the launderer simply conceals income and violates I-T Act, he will not necessarily be booked for money laundering. Generation of black money and money laundering are two different issues, however closely related.
Statement 2: No, investments received from tax havens can be genuine investments too. But, generally it is seen that the round-tripped money (from home to host tax- haven to back home) is laundered money.
Statement 3: The Enforcement Directorate carries out investigations. The ED is also empowered to attach property of entities involved in money laundering. T
Statement 4: Banks, financial institutions and intermediaries are obligated, by law, to keep an eye on such transactions. In India, for example, if a suspected case of
money laundering is spotted, the financial institution needs to inform the Financial
Intelligence Unit-India (FIU-IND), an enforcement agency.
According to Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLa), the director of FIU- IND can impose fines on banks and other financial institutions if they fail to detect or conceal wrongdoings.

6 Ocean health Index (OHI) prepared by Conservation International shows which of the following results?
1.  Western Indian Ocean performs the worst in the world in matters in conservation of fisheries, iconic species and biodiversity.
2.  Antarctica's biodiversity richness and conservation status is one of the best in the world.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: B
As per the OHI 2014, the overall health score of the Oceans of the world stands at 67 out of 100. It covers all oceans of the world.
For the assessment of the Ocean Health of the High Seas, three goals and sub- goals were assessed. There are: Fisheries, Iconic Species, and Biodiversity (measured as the threat of extinction to all assessed Species).
The Western Indian Ocean and Eastern Central Atlantic Ocean scored the highest overall score of 79 and the North-western Pacific Ocean scored the lowest score of 53. So, 1 is incorrect.
The OHI score of eight goals assessed for Antarctica are: Food Production (55), Natural Products (29), Economies and Livelihoods (83), Tourism and Recreation (55), Sense of Place (46), Coastal Protection (99), Clean Water (100) and Biodiversity (94). So, clearly 2 is correct.
http://zeenews.india.com/news/sci-tech/worlds-first-ocean-health-index-finds-earths
-oceans-only-67-healthy_1478550.html

7 In past few years, referendums on various national issues have been conducted in few countries. Which of these is/are such countries?
1.  Egypt
2.  Greece
3.  Britain
4.  Scotland
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  2 and 3 only
b)  1, 2 and 3 only
c)  1 and 4 only
d)  1, 2, 3 and 4
Answer: D
A referendum (in some countries synonymous with a plebiscite - or a vote on a ballot question) is a direct vote in which an entire electorate is asked to vote on a particular proposal. This may result in the adoption of a new law, leaving or joining a territory, adopting constitution or such other significant questions.
Statement 1: A constitutional referendum was held in Egypt in January 2014.The new constitution was approved by nearly 98% of voters (turnout was low though at around 38%).
Statement 2: A referendum to decide whether Greece was to accept the bailout conditions in the country's government-debt crisis proposed jointly by the European institutions.
Statement 3: We know about the Brexit that happened in the month of July 2016 which was based on a referendum about staying or leaving the EU.
Statement 4: A referendum on Scottish independence took place in September 2014. The independence referendum question, which voters answered with "Yes" or "No", was "Should Scotland be an independent country? The "No" side won and Scotland remains in the UK.

8 Countries with which of the following will attract the most Foreign Direct Investment
(FDI) from across the globe?
a)  Very small population
b)  Highly skilled and cheap labour
c)  Consistently high inflation and large fiscal deficit
d)  Economy is closed.
Answer: B
 A small population is likely to constitute a small market and thus not attractive for foreign investors who are looking for a long-term association with the economy. So, (a) is wrong.
Consistently high inflation and large fiscal deficit actually discourages investors because returns on investment become uncertain. If inflation is very high returns on investment will be eroded significantly. High fiscal deficit usually leads to macroeconomic imbalances. So, (c) is also wrong.
A closed economy does not have any external transactions. So, (d) is definitely wrong.
Highly skilled and cheap labour attracts FDI because the investor can run her business at a lower cost in the host country rather than home country, since labour costs form a major chunk of production cost. This has attracted many BPOs, KPOs in India. So, (b) is a correct option.

9 Why the recent general elections (2014) in Bangladesh were boycotted by the main opposition parties?
a)  Many opposition party candidates were debarred by the Election Commission on the directions of the incumbent government.
b)  1971 war crimes convicts were not persecuted by the government
c)  Their demand for holding elections under a neutral care-taker government was not accepted.
d)  International organizations were interfering in the national elections.
Answer: C
 Throughout most of 2013, Bangladesh Nationalist Party and its alliance
led by Opposition Leader Khaleda Zia called more than 85 days of nationwide general strikes and blockades.
The opposition demanded that the ruling Awami League party led by the current Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina amends the constitution, dissolves parliament after their full five-year term ends in January 2014 and then hand over power to a non- partisan interim government or a caretaker government that will be run by technocrats for 90 days.
The job of a Caretaker Government of Bangladesh will then be to work in tandem with the Bangladesh Election Commission by helping them to organise, arrange, oversee the general election held on 5 January and transfer power to a newly elected government.
As most of the demands were not met within the stipulated time frame all opposition parties boycotted the polls
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/05/world/asia/bangladesh-election.html?_r=0

10 "Landlessness" has been a key issue in India amidst growing population size, fast-paced economic activity and shrinking effective per capita land holdings. However, some time back India's first zero-landless district was declared from the State of
a)  Gujarat
b)  Assam
c)  TamilNadu
d)  Kerala
Answer: D
 Under the Zero Landless (Citizens) Kerala Project, Kannur (Kerala) has been declared as the the first zero-landless district in India.
Zero Landless (Citizens) Kerala Project sought to provide 3 cents of land each to
2.44 lakh landless in the State of Kerala by 2015.
However, the land has not been divided most desirably, as many citizens have received infertile lands or lands far away from their residence.
http://www.ndtv.com/south/kannur-in-kerala-declared-indias-first-zero-landless-citi zens-district-539699

11 Which of the following possibly explains the reasons for the existence of Thar Desert in
Western India?
a)  Alluvial plaints exist to the east of Thar.
b)  It is located near Tropic of Cancer which receives the grea
c)  It lies in the rain shadow area of the Bay of Bengal arm of the southwest monsoon.
d)  There are no groundwater resources in the region.
Answer: C
 The Thar Desert extends between the Aravalli Hills in the north-east, the Great Rann of Kutch along the coast and the alluvial plains of the Indus River in the west and north-west.
The desert lies in the rain shadow area of the Bay of Bengal arm of the southwest monsoon. The parallel nature of the range to the Arabian Sea arm also means that the desert does not receive much rainfall.

12 The Poligar revolt of early 19th Century was rooted in
a)  General discontentment with foreign rule
b)  Oppressive land revenue system
c)  Control of tribal forests and river streams by British government
d)  Enmity of tribals with non-tribals
Answer: B
The Polygar Wars or Palaiyakkarar Wars were fought between the Polygars of the former Tirunelveli Kingdom in Tamil Nadu and the British East India Company forces between 1799 to 1805 over pending taxes, oppressive land revenue system etc.
The British finally won after carrying out gruelling protracted jungle campaigns against the Polygar armies and finally defeated them.
The British victory over the Polygars brought large parts of the territories of Tamil
Nadu under British control, enabling them to get a strong hold in Southern India.

13 Consider the following statements with reference to the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.
1.  The Annual Budget shall be presented to the House on such day as the Presiding
Officer of the house may direct.
2.  The Budget shall be presented to the House in such form as the Estimates
Committee decides.
3.  There shall be no discussion of the Budget on the day on which it is presented to the
House.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  3 only
c)  2 and 3 only
d)  2 and 3 only
Answer: B
Statement 1: The Annual Financial Statement of the Government of India in respect of each financial year ('the Budget') shall be presented to the House on such day as the President may direct.
Statement 2: The Budget shall be presented to the House in such form as the Finance Minister may, after considering the suggestions, if any, of the Estimates Committee, settle.
Statement 3: On a day to be appointed by the Speaker subsequent to the day on which the Budget is presented and for such time as the Speaker may allot for this purpose, the House shall be at liberty to discuss the Budget as a whole or any question of principle involved therein, but no motion shall be moved nor shall the Budget be submitted to the vote of the House.
The Finance Minister shall have a general right of reply at the end of the discussion.
http://parliamentofindia.nic.in/ls/rules/rulep19.html

14 Consider the following about the oxygen cycle on earth.
1.  More oxygen is freely available in the atmosphere than stored in earth.
2.  The grea
3.  Anthropogenic combustion of fossil fuel causes the biggest loss or decay of oxygen in the atmosphere.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  2 only
d)  1 and 3 only
Answer: C
Statement 1 and 2: The largest reservoir of Earth's oxygen is within
the silicate and oxide minerals of the crust and mantle (99.5%). Only a small portion has been released as free oxygen to the biosphere (0.01%) and atmosphere (0.36%). The main source of atmospheric free oxygen is photosynthesis.
Statement 3: The processes that lead to loss of oxygen are: Aerobic respiration (largest - more than 75%)
Microbial oxidation
Combustion of fossil fuel (anthropogenic - around 6-7% loss only) Photochemical oxidation
Fixation of N2 by lightning
Fixation of N2 by industry (anthropogenic) Oxidation of volcanic gases
Chemical weathering
Surface reaction of O3

15 Consider the following statements.
1.  The United Nations General Assembly had declared 1992 as the International Year of Biodiversity.
2.  The United Nations General Assembly declared 2011-20 the United Nations Decade on Biodiversity.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: B
Statement 1: The year is 2010. The point to note is that biodiversity did not gain as much traction in 1992 as it has gained in the past few years. Then, in
1992, the focus was more on conservation of natural resources towards sustainable development.
Statement 2: The UN Decade on Biodiversity serves to support and promote implementation of the objectives of the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity and the Aichi Biodiversity Targets, with the goal of significantly reducing biodiversity loss.
We will be framing a lot of questions from this link in Q Source, so please go through all sections, sub-sections and links given in it broadly. UPSC too lifts a lot of questions directly from Wikipedia.

16 Recent developments are pointing to a new-generation data transfer technology Li-Fi. Consider the following about it.
1.  It uses LED light to transmit data.
2.  It is slower but more secure than conventional data transfer mechanisms.
3.  It can replace telecom towers to supply internet connectivity to large metropolitan areas.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1 only
d)  1 and 3 only
Answer: C
Statement 1: Li-fi is loosely expanded to Light-Fidelity. Using precisely controlled light modulation, data can be transmitted using regular, visible
light.
Statement 2: It will be 10-100 times faster than current-generation WiFi, but very secure.
Statement 3: Transmission range of this technology is limited compared to a radio frequency based technologies likeWi-Fi. Its because range is inversely proportional to frequency.
http://www.techworld.com/big-data/what-is-li-fi-everything-you-need-know-363276
4/

17 Consider the following statements.Assertion (a): The term "Inclusive growth" was used as a theme for the first time in 11th Five year Plan document.Reason (R): No development programme launched before the 11th Five Year Plan focussed on poverty alleviation per se.In the context of the above, which of these is correct?
a)  A is correct, and R is an appropriate explanation of A.
b)  A is correct, but R is not an appropriate explanation of A.
c)  A is correct, but R is incorrect.
d)  A is incorrect, but R is correct.
Answer: C
11th FYP emphasises on the idea of "Rapid and inclusive growth" dealt in its Volume I.
12th FYP emphasises on the theme "faster, sustainable and more inclusive growth". The plans before never focussed on inclusive growth as a theme, even though we
were running several programmes that were targeted at poverty reduction (e.g. food
for works) and inclusive growth.

18 The objective of Mahatma Gandhi Pravasi Suraksha Yojana (MGPSY) is to encourage and enable the overseas Indian workers by giving government contribution to
a)  Save for their return, resettlement and old age
b)  Acquire permanent property in the nation of their residence
c)  Prevent their employer from forcing them to stay in the nation of their residence
d)  Provide employment security in nation of their residence
Answer: A
It is a Pension and Life Insurance fund scheme.
The objective of MGPSY is to encourage and enable the overseas Indian workers by giving government contribution to:
Save for their Return and Resettlement (R&R) Save for their old age,
Obtain a Life Insurance cover against natural death during the period of coverage.
The government contribution available under the MGPSY is for a period of five years or till the return of subscribed worker back to India, whichever is earlier.

19 Some Bills require the prior permission/consent/recommendation of the President to be introduced. However, such recommendations are not is required in which of the following legislative cases?
a)  For changing the official language of the Parliament
b)  For alteration of areas of the existing States
c)  Making provision for the reduction or abolition of any tax
d)  All the above cases require prior Presidential assent.
Answer: A
 Admission or establishment of new States, formation of new States, and alteration of areas, boundaries or names of existing States. Bills relating to such matters require the recommendation of the President for introduction.
Constitutional amendment bills require prior Presidential assent. Other bills are:
Money Bill (as per Article 110) & Finance Bill
Any bill which affects the taxation in which the states are interested (Article

274)
State Bills which impose restriction upon freedom of trade (Article 304).

20 If high pressure develops over North-western India, it may lead to
a)  Dry winds blowing from the North-west regions towards Northern plains
b)  Temperature in the region would suddenly spike up.
c)  There would be torrential rains brought by thunderstorms.
d)  Attraction of South-west Monsoon currents
Answer: A
 Due to a low temperature in the winter season, a high pressure develops over north-western India.
In contrast to it, low pressure is found over south India, Arabian Sea and Bay of Bengal.
Therefore, winds blow from north-west to south-east. The direction of the winds in the Ganga valley is westerly or north-westerly and it becomes northerly in Brahmaputra valley.
Direction of winds over the Bay of Bengal and south-eastern coastal regions is north-easterly.
The pressure and wind conditions in north India are modified by the inflow of the westerly disturbances. These disturbances are westerly depressions originating over Central Asia and the Mediterranean Sea, and they reach
India travelling across Iran and Pakistan.

21 Nash equilibrium is related to
a)  Transition state of nuclear fuel in between plasma and solids
b)  Psychology of virtual simulations of reality
c)  Market equilibrium between forces of supply and demand
d)  Rational decision-making in a competitive scenario
Answer: D
 Renowned mathematician and Nobel laureate John Nash recently passed away, who was renowned for works in game theory (where we reach Nash equilibrium).
Game theory is the study of strategic decision making. Specifically, it is "the study of mathematical models of conflict and cooperation between intelligent rational decision-makers."
Game theory is mainly used in economics, political science, and psychology, as well as logic, computer science, and biology.
Prisoner's dilemma is a classical case of game theory.
Source: https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/may/24/john-nash-mathematici an-beautiful-mind-dies-taxi-crash

22 You are the District Collector (DC) of a hilly region in the state of Uttarakhand where top soil loss and soil degradation are major issues affecting farm fertility. Which of the following methods you would recommend for soil conservation in such a hilly region?
1.  Checking overgrazing
2.  Contour ploughing and terracing of hilly farm lands
3.  Constructing check dams at appropriate locations
4.  Strip cropping
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1, 2 and 3 only
b)  3 and 4 only
c)  1, 2 and 4 only
d)  1, 2, 3 and 4
Answer: D
 Statement 1: Animals freely move about in the fields for grazing and spoil the soil by their hoofs which lead to soil erosion. This should be avoided. Separate feeding grounds should be arranged by growing fodder crop in large quantities.
Statement 2: Contour ploughing: If ploughing in done at right angles to the hfll slope, following the natural contours of the hill, the ridges and furrows break the
flow of water down the hill This prevents excessive soil loss as gullies are less likely
to develop and also reduce run-off so that plants receive more water. Thus by growing crops in contour pattern, plants can absorb much of the rain water and erosion is minimised.
Terracing: Contour ploughing follows the "natural shape" of the slope without altering it. Terrace farming alters the shape of the slope to produce flat areas that provide a catchment for water.
Statement 3: Much of the soil erosion by river floods can be avoided by constructing dams across the rivers. This checks the speed of water and saves soil from erosion.
Statement 4: Crops may be cultivated in alternate strips, parallel to one another. Some strips may be allowed to lie fallow while in others different crops may be sown e.g., grains, legumes, small tree crops, grass etc.
Various crops ripen at different times of the year and are harvested at intervals. This ensures that at no time of the year the entire area is left bare or exposed.
The tall growing crops act as wind breaks and the strips which are often parallel to the contours help in increasing water absorption by the soil by slowing down run off.

23 The terms "Event Horizon" and "Singularity" often discussed in scientific communities are associated with
a)  Black Hole
b)  Higgs Boson
c)  Neutrinos
d)  Fast-rotating massive galaxies
Answer: A
In general relativity, an event horizon is a boundary in space-time beyond which events cannot affect an outside observer. It is also defined as "the point of no return", i.e., the point at which the gravitational pull becomes so great as to make escape impossible, even for light.
An event horizon is most commonly associated with black holes.
In the centre of a black hole is a gravitational singularity, a one-dimensional point which contains a huge mass in an infinitely small space, where density and gravity become infinite and space-time curves infinitely, and where the laws of physics as we know them cease to operate.
Source: http://www.newindianexpress.com/editorials/LIGO-Discovery-Opens-Up- World-of-Possibility/2016/02/13/article3273917.ece

24 Which of the following Ancient Indian texts contain references to hydrological concepts and principles?
1.  Vedas
2.  Puranas
3.  Meghmala
4.  Nirmala Sanhita
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1, 2 and 3 only
b)  3 and 4 only
c)  2 and 4 only
d)  1, 2, 3 and 4 only
Answer: A
 A reading of ancient Indian literature suggests that those people knew the basic concepts of hydrological processes and measurements.
Important concepts of modern hydrology are scattered in various verses of Vedas, Puranas, Meghmala, Mahabharat, Mayurchitraka, Vrhat Sanhita and other ancient Indian works.
For e.g. the most important concepts, on which the modern science of hydrology is founded, are scattered in Vedas in various verses which are in the form of hymns and prayers addressed to various deities.
Verse I, 32, 10 says that the water is never stationary, but it continuously gets evaporated and due to smallness of particles we cannot see the upgoing water particles.
In the Varahamihira's Vraht Sanhita (550 A.D.), three Chapters are devoted to hydrometeorology comprising Pregnancy of clouds (Chapter 21), Pregnancy
of air (Chapter 22) and quantity of rainfall (Chapter 23).
Slokas 1 and 2 of Dakargelam (Chapter 54 of Vraht Samhita) state the importance of science of ground water exploration which helps man to ascertain the existence of water.

25 Which of the following Central Asian countries is land-locked or do not have any coasts?
a)  Kazakhstan
b)  Kyrgyzstan
c)  Turkmenistan
d)  Uzbekistan
Answer: B
Here is a map of the Central Asian region. Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan touch Caspian Sea. Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan touch the Aral sea. Afghanistan is
another bordering nation to Central Asian republics that is landlocked.

26 Consider the following statements.
1.  Manipur and Tripura were Union Territories (UTs) that later gained statehood.
2.  Meghalaya was initially declared as an 'autonomous state' by a constitutional amendment, which later gained full statehood.
3.  Sikkim gained Indian statehood before Nagaland and Arunachal Pradesh gained
statehood.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  3 only
d)  1, 2 and 3
Answer: A
Statement 1: In 1963, the State of Nagaland was formed10 by taking the Naga Hills and Tuensang area out of the state of Assam. This was done to satisfy the movement of the hostile Nagas.
In 1972, the political map of Northeast India underwent a major change. Thus, the two Union Territories of Manipur and Tripura and the Sub-State of Meghalaya got statehood and the two union territories of Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh (originally known as North-East Frontier Agency—NEFa) came into being.
Statement 2: Initially, the 22nd Constitutional Amendment Act (1969) created Meghalaya as an 'autonomous state' or 'sub-state' within the state of Assam with its own legislature and council of ministers.
Statement 3: In 1974, Sikkim expressed its desire for greater association with India. Accordingly, the 35 th Constitutional Amendment Act (1974) was enacted by the parliament. So, it gained statehood after Nagaland and Arunachal Pradesh, statement
3 is wrong.

27 Which of the following can form the basis of trade between two countries located geographically close to each other?
1.  Absolute cost difference of production of the same commodity
2.  Opportunity of specialization in a particular commodity due to comparative advantages of producing that commodity
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: C
Statement 1: If Nepal produces shoes at a cost of Rs. 100/piece, and India does the same at Rs. 50/piece, then its advantageous for Nepal to import it from India rather than producing all the wheat by itself. However, due to strategic reasons, no nation will ever shut down a domestic industry completely.
Statement 2: If raw material for making shoes is available easily in India, whereas that for making socks is available in Nepal more easily, India would tend to specialize in producing Shoes and Nepal in socks. This is because it is advantageous for both nations to extract and process the raw material locally than to import it.

28 Consider the following statements about education of women in the colonial era.
1.  The Christian missionaries were the first to set up the Calcutta Female Juvenile
Society in India in colonial period.
2.  The Bethunc School laid stress on women's education.
3.  Pandit Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar is considered one of the pioneers of women's education.
4.  Charles Wood's Despatch on Education (1854) laid great stress on the need for female education.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 4 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  2, 3 and 4 only
d)  1, 2, 3 and 4
Answer: D
 The Bethunc School. founded by J.E.D. Bethune, president of the council of Education in Calcutta in 1849 was the first fruit of the powerful movement for women's education that arose in the 1840s and 1850s.
In 1914, the Women's Medical Service did a lot of work in training nurses and mid- wives. The Indian Women's University started by Professor Karve in 1916 was one of the outstanding institutions imparting education to wonien.
In the same year Lady Hardinge Medical College was opened in Delhi.

29 Dandi march is NOT associated with which of the following?
a)  British salt law
b)  Civil Disobedience
c)  Separate electorates for minorities
d)  Non-violence
Answer: C
 Dandi march was started to break the salt law by non-violent methods following the strategy of civil disobedience to ultimately unite all the communities
in India, as a common cause was taken up in the form of a mass movement.
Separate electorates for minorities issue was taken up later when the round table conference finished and the communal award was announced by Ramsay Mcdonald.

30 Which of the following is NOT a part of the "Model Code of Conduct for the Guidance of Political Parties and Candidates", formulated by the Election Commission of India?
a)  No political party can criticise the other political party or its candidates after the notification of the election schedule.
b)  There shall be no appeal to caste or communal feelings for securing votes.
c)  The Ministers shall not use government resources for furthering the interest
of their political parties solely.
d)  Issue of advertisement at the cost of public exchequer in media to further the interest of a particular political party should be avoided during elections.
Answer: A
 It provides for the following salient points:
No party or candidate shall indulge in any activity which may aggravate existing differences or create mutual hatred or cause tension between different castes and communities, religious or linguistic. So, (b) is correct. Criticism of other political parties, when made, shall be confined to their policies and programmes, past record and work. Parties and candidates shall
refrain from criticism of all aspects of private life, not connected with the public activities of the leaders or workers of other parties. Criticism of other parties or their workers based on unverified allegations or distortions shall be avoided. So, (a) is incorrect.
The Ministers shall not combine their official visit with electioneering work and shall not also make use of official machinery or personnel during the electioneering work
Government transport including official air-crafts, vehicles, machinery and personnel shall not be used for furtherance of the interest of the party in power. So, (c) is also correct.
Issue of advertisement at the cost of public exchequer in the newspapers and other media and the misuse of official mass media during the election period for partisan coverage of political news and publicity regarding achievements with a view to furthering the prospects of the party in power shall be scrupulously avoided. So, (d) is also correct.

31 Consider the following statements.
1.  India's largest trade partner is Saudi Arabia.
2.  India exports the most (in value) to United States of America.
3.  India imports the most (in value) from China.
4.  India is the largest exporter to Bhutan.
5.  Petroleum products form the largest chunk of India's exports.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  3 and 4 only
b)  1, 2 and 5 only
c)  2, 3, 4 and 5 only
d)  1, 2, 3, 4 and 5
Answer: C
 Statement 1: Largest trading partner is China.
Statement 2: Exports to USA are around $42 billion, whereas second largest exports to UAE are around $33 billion.
Statement 3: Three largest import partners are China, Saudi and UAE in descending order of value of imports to India.
Statement 4:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_the_largest_trading_partners_of_India
Statement 5: Highest is petroleum products amounting to around $60 billion, then precious stones around $40 billion and then automobiles around $15 billion.
You can also go through the following references:
http://indiatoday.intoday.in/education/story/export-products/1/480878.html
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_the_largest_trading_partners_of_India#Countr ies_of_which_India_is_the_largest_trading_partner

32 The total market value of all final goods and services produced by the citizens of a country and their property, whether operating within the domestic territory of the country or outside in a year is termed as
a)  Gross National Income
b)  Gross Disposable Income at factor cost
c)  Gross Domestic Product
d)  Net Domestic Product
Answer: A
 The gross national income (GNI) is the total domestic and foreign output claimed by residents of a country, consisting of gross domestic product (GDP) plus factor incomes earned by foreign residents, minus income earned in the domestic economy by non-resident.
GNI measures income received by a country both domestically and from overseas. In this respect, GNI is quite similar to Gross National Product (GNP), which measures output from the citizens and companies of a particular nation, regardless of whether they are located within its boundaries or overseas.
The Gross national income has gradually replaced the Gross national product (GNP)
in international statistics. While being conceptually identical, it is calculated
differently.

33 Which of the following act as carbon sinks on earth?
a)  Oceans
b)  Rainforests
c)  Soil
d)  All of the above
Answer: D
 Carbon sinks are natural systems that suck up and store carbon dioxide from the atmosphere.
The main natural carbon sinks are plants, the ocean and soil. Plants grab carbon dioxide from the atmosphere to use in photosynthesis; some of this carbon is transferred to soil as plants die and decompose.
The oceans are a major carbon storage system for carbon dioxide. Marine animals also take up the gas for photosynthesis, while some carbon dioxide simply dissolves in the seawater.
The soil also uptakes carbon dioxide and stores it.

34 Consider the following statements about groundwater in India.
1.  Green revolution increased the demand of groundwater in India.
2.  The total replenishable ground water reserves is highest in the hilly acts of Sikkim, Nagaland and Meghalaya.
3.  Coastal regions are usually rich in groundwater owing to the largely alluvial terrain.
4.  Andhra Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Maharastra have the lowest replenishable ground water reserves.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1, 3 and 4 only
b)  2 and 4 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  1, 2 and 3 only
Answer: C
 Statement 1: Irrigation by surface water and borewells increased after green revolution as the new GM crops required more water.
Statement 2: The presence and availability of groundwater varies greatly with changes in topography, subsurface geology and the prevailing climate in the region. In some areas, groundwater exists in deep aquifers while in others the water is stored near the surface.
In general, the mountainous and hilly regions in the north and west do not allow adequate infiltration and as a consequence, groundwater is mostly limited to valleys and other lower lying areas.
Statement 3: Coastal regions are usually rich in groundwater owing to the largely alluvial terrain, but the aquifers risk being easily contaminated by saltwater ingress due to overpumping.
Statement 4: The alluvial tract of the Gangetic plain, which extends over 2000 km across central and northern India has the best potential for groundwater extraction in the country. This large area possesses many favourable characteristics for groundwater storage and recharge, and the yield over most of the region has been estimated at moderate to high.
AP, MP, Marashtra and UP have some the largest groundwater reserves. So, 4 is wrong.

35 Consider the following about Marrakesh VIP Treaty.
1.  It facilitates access to published works for easy accessibility by the disabled
2.  India was the first country to ratify the treaty.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: C
 India was the first country to ratify the Marrakesh Treaty to facilitate access to published works for persons who are blind, visually impaired, or otherwise print disabled on 30th June, 2014.
Before India ratified the treaty, 79 WIPO (World Intellectual Property Organisation)
member states had only "signed" this Treaty.
The Marrakesh treaty comes into force once twenty countries ratify this treaty. More than 50 countries have ratified it and thus it has come into force.
The treaty requires signatories to adopt national law provisions that facilitate the availability of published works in formats like Braille that are accessible
to the blind and allow their exchange across borders by organisations working for the visually impaired.
The treaty will facilitate import of accessible format copies from the member states by the Indian authorised entities such as educational institutions, libraries and other institutions working for the benefit of the visually impaired.
This will also facilitate translation of imported accessible format copies and export of accessible format copies in Indian languages.

36 Consider the following about foreign investment norms in India.
1.  The same investor cannot invest as FDI in a company if he has earlier invested as
FII in the same company
2.  NRI investment cannot be treated as FDI since it is invested by citizens of the country within the country.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: D
 The Union Government in March 2013 constituted a committee to clearly define the Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) and Foreign Institutional
Investment (FII).
At present, if an investor has a stake of 10 per cent or less in a company, the investment is treated as foreign institutional investment
If an investor has a stake of more than 10 per cent, it is treated as foreign direct investment. But, the same investor can invest as FDI or FII depending on his shareholding in the company. So, statement 1 is incorrect.
Statement 2: The mayaram committee has treated non-repatriable (that which is not taken abroad) NRI investment as FDI.
http://www.thehindu.com/business/Economy/centre-accepts-mayaram-panel-report- on-fdi/article6136928.ece

37 Ahadis during the Mughal period were
a)  Tax collectors from small settlements at the fringe of the empire
b)  Judges delivering criminal justice
c)  Employed by the kingdom for warfare or fighting
d)  Foreign spies deployed in enemy kingdoms
Answer: C
 "Ahadi" literally means "royal messenger".
Ahadis were those cavalry men who offered their services solely not attaching them to any headman. The emperor was their absolute colonel.
They were the personal contingents of the emperor and had a separate commandant of their own
It is pointed out, that the Ahadis numbered 7,000 to 8,000.

38 A pressure group does NOT perform which of the following activities?
a)  Con
b)  Influencing public opinion by use of media, propaganda and publishing
c)  Acting as an intermediary between the Government and the public at large
d)  Lobbying, pro
Answer: A
 A pressure group can be described as an organised group that does not put up candidates for election, but seeks to influence government policy or legislation. They can also be described as 'interest groups', 'lobby groups' or 'pro
Pressure groups provide a means of popular participation in national politics between elections. They are sometimes able to gather sufficient support to force government to amend or even scrap legislation
For e.g. pressure groups like ABVP frequently organize pro

39 Planning in post-independent India had been a major instrument for attaining socio- economic welfare, allocate resources and generate economic growth. In this context, Government's top priority in the first Five Year Plan of India was
a)  Heavy Industries b)  Primary Sector
c)  Technological d)  Higher Education
Answer: B
 The First Five-year Plan was launched in 1951 which mainly focused in development of the primary sector.
Irrigation and energy (27.2%), agriculture and community development (17.4%), transport and communications (24%) and social services received major allocations.
The Second Plan was particularly notable in the development of the public sector and followed the Mahalanobis model which laid stress on the development of heavy industries.

40 Consider the following about the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI).
1.  It is a statutory body setup by an Act of Parliament
2.  It was setup to regulate telecom services including fixation or revision of tariffs for telecom services which were earlier vested in the Central Government
3.  It is authorized to adjudicate a dispute between a service provider and a group of consumers.
Select the correct answer using the codes below
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  1, 2 and 3
Answer: A
 The entry of private service providers brought with it the inevitable need for independent regulation. The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) was, thus, established in 1997 by an Act of Parliament to regulate telecom services, including fixation/revision of tariffs for telecom services which were earlier vested in the Central Government.
TRAI's mission is to create and nurture conditions for growth of
telecommunications in the country in a manner and at a pace which will enable India to play a leading role in emerging global information society.
One of the main objectives of TRAI is to provide a fair and transparent policy environment which promotes a level playing field and facilitates fair competition
Statement 3: The TRAI Act was amended by an ordinance (effective 2000), establishing a Telecommunications Dispute Settlement and Appellate Tribunal (TDSAT) to take over the adjudicatory and disputes functions from TRAI. TDSAT was set up to adjudicate any dispute between a licensor and a licensee, between two or more service providers, between a service provider and a group of consumers, and to hear and dispose of appeals against any direction, decision or order of TRAI.

41 If both the surfaces of the leaves of a plant are completely covered and packed with a jelly like substance, it would affect which of the following processes?
1.  Respiration of plants
2.  Photosynthesis

3.  Transpiration
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  3 only
d)  1, 2 and 3
Answer: D
 Statement 1 and 2: Photosynthesis is the process of capturing light energy and converting it to sugar energy, in the presence of chlorophyll using carbon dioxide (CO2) and water (H2O). If leaves are covered, photosynthesis can hardly occur.
Statement 2: Respiration occurs in all living cells, including leaves and roots. Since respiration does not require light energy, it can be conducted at night or during the day. However, respiration does require oxygen which is taken from leaves and roots.
Statement 3: Transpiration is loss of water from leaves by evaporation. Water cannot evaporate from leaves if they are completely packed

42 Consider the following matches of materials with places of industrial production.
1.  Chikkan embroidery: Moradabad
2.  Brassware: Jalandhar
3.  Firozabad: Glass Bangles
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 only
c)  3 only
d)  1, 2 and 3
Answer: C
 Statement 1: It is a traditional embroidery style from Lucknow believed to have been introduced by Nur Jehan, the wife of Mughal emperor
Jahangir
Statement 2: Moradabad is famous for both bangles and brasswares.
Statement 3: Moradabad in Uttar Pradesh is said to be the world's largest producer of bangles. Firozabad is the largest producer of glass bangles in the world. The Lad Bazar in Hyderabad is one of the most famous and largest markets of bangles.

43 Despite such a large geographical spread, why the Himalayan region seems poor in mineral resources?
a)  The terrain is undulating
b)  The rock structure is complex
c)  The climatic conditions are adverse
d)  It is made up of crystalline rocks which do not hold mineral resources anywhere in India
Answer: B
 The rugged terrain and adverse climatic conditions make exploration of minerals difficult and costly, but it can't be a reason for lack of mineral resources. So, (a) and (b) are wrong
Our rich mineralized zone is largely confined to the old, crystalline rock structures of plateaus and low hills of peninsular India. So, option (d) is clearly wrong
In Himalayas, geological processes have led to major displacement of rock strata. This has disturbed the arrangement of rocks and made it complex, making Himalayas poor in mineral resources.

44 Which of the following committees act as Parliament's 'Watch Dogs' over the executive?
a)  Committee on Public assurances
b)  Committee on Estimates
c)  Committees on Subordinate Legislation
d)  All of the above
Answer: D
 The work done by the Parliament in modern times is not only varied in nature, but considerable in volume.
The time at its disposal is limited. It cannot, therefore, give close consideration to all the legislative and other matters that come up before it. A good deal of its business is, therefore, transacted by what are called the Parliamentary Committees.
The committees that act as watchdogs are the Committees on Subordinate Legislation (checks rules/regulation made under laws), the Committee on Government Assurances, the Committee on Estimates, the Committee on Public Accounts and the Committee on Public Undertakings and Departmentally Related Standing Committees (DRSCs).
The Committee on Estimates, the Committee on Public Accounts, the Committee on Public Undertakings and DRSCs play an important role in exercising a check over governmental expenditure and Policy formulation.
Committee on Government Assurances (Lok Sabha)
This Committee consists of 15 members nominated by the Speaker. A Minister is not nominated to this Committee.
While replying to questions in the House or during discussions on Bills, Resolutions, Motions etc., Ministers at times give assurances or undertakings either to consider a matter or to take action or to furnish the House further information later.
The functions of this Committee are to scrutinize the assurances, promises, undertakings etc. given by Ministers from time to time and to report to Lok Sabha on the extent to which such assurances etc. have been implemented and to see whether such implementation has taken place within the minimum time necessary for the purpose.

45 Consider the following statements.
1.  At a given apparent position of Sun in the sky, all places on the same longitude receive the same amount of solar insolation.
2.  Sun is overhead at the same time for all locations with the same latitude.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: D
 Solar insolation depends on both latitude and longitude.
For e.g. even if a North-eastern state and Western state are at the same latitude, they would not see the Sun overhead at the same time. There will be a time lag
Similarly, if a Northern State and Southern state are at the same longitude, they do not receive the same amount of solar insolation. Depending on the apparent position of Sun in the sky, place close to ITCZ would receive greater insolation

46 Consider the following statements.
1.  Assertion (a): Oil and gas deposits cannot be found in sandstones and coarse- grained limestones
2.  Reason (R): Structural traps cannot be formed in sandstones and limestones.
In the context of the above, which of these is correct?
a)  A is correct, and R is an appropriate explanation of A
b)  A is correct, but R is not an appropriate explanation of A.
c)  A is correct, but R is incorrect
d)  Both A and R are incorrect
Answer: D
 All oil and gas deposits are found in structural or stratigraphic traps.
Most oil and gas deposits are found in sandstones and coarse-grained limestones. A
piece of sandstone or limestone is very much like a hard sponge, full of holes, but
not compressible. These holes, or pores, can contain water or oil or gas, and the rock will be saturated with one of the three.
The oil and gas become trapped in these holes, stays there, for millions of years

47 Which of the following is NOT one of the objectives of the Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat
Sashaktikaran Abhiyan (RGPSa)?
a)  Enable democratic decision-making and accountability in Panchayats and promote people's participation
b)  Promote devolution of powers and responsibilities to Panchayats according to the spirit of the Constitution and PESA Act
c)  Create and strengthen democratic local self-government in areas where
Panchayats do not exist
d)  Strengthen District Autonomous Councils in Sixth Schedule areas to function as effective democratic forums
Answer: D
 RGPSA doesn't intervene in the District autonomous councils as they are not within the PRI system.
The Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan will strengthen the Panchayati
Raj system across the country and address critical gaps that constrain its sucess
RGPSA seeks to (apart from what is mentioned in the question):
Enhance capacities and effectiveness of Panchayats and the Gram Sabhas Strengthen the institutional structure for knowledge creation and capacity building of Panchayats
Strengthen Gram Sabhas to function effectively as the basic forum of people's participation, transparency and accountability within the Panchayat system; Strengthen the constitutionally mandated framework on which Panchayats are founded.
http://www.panchayat.gov.in/documents/401/80005/GUIDLINES_RGPSA.pdf

48 The Government of India has decided to introduce plastic notes on a trial basis to increase the lifetime of notes. Apart from this, it will also help in
1.  Controlling counterfeiting of notes
2.  Reducing the cost of printing currency notes
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: A
 Statement 1: The Reserve Bank Of India (RBI) is likely to begin an experiment in select few cities in India to 
The security features on these notes will be easy to verify as well as quite difficult to counterfeit
Statement 2: Printing plastic notes has a higher cost. But, it is assumed that its benefits like longer life, reduced counterfeiting etc will ultimately lead to long term benefits offsetting the initial cost
http://www.thehindu.com/business/markets/plastic-notes-to-be-launched-next-year/a rticle6013003.ece
http://www.crazyengineers.com/threads/plastic-currency-notes-in-india-advantages-
disadvantages.76353/

49 Consider the following statements about the Bhakti tradition in South India.
1.  Nalayira Divyaprabandham, which was frequently described as the Tamil Veda, is related to the Bhakti tradition.
2.  Alvars supported patriarchy and did not allow women saints to join the group or compose hymns
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: A
 : Earliest Bhakti movements in India were led by Alvar and Nayanar saints.
Statement 1: The importance of the traditions of the Alvars and Nayanars was sometimes indicated by the claim that their compositions were as important as the
Vedas.
For instance, one of the major anthologies of compositions by the Alvars, the Nalayira Divyaprabandham, was frequently described as the Tamil Veda, thus claiming that the text was as significant as the four Vedas in Sanskrit that were cherished by the Brahmanas
Statement 2: Perhaps one of the most striking features of these traditions was the presence of women. For instance, the compositions of Andal, a woman Alvar, were widely sung. These women challenged patriarchal norms.

50 West Bank and Gaza Strip often in news are related to
a)  Central Asian transport corridor
b)  Israeli-Palestinian conflict
c)  Iran-Iraq wars
d)  Disputed British territories in the South Pacific Ocean
Answer: B
 Despite a long-term peace process and the general reconciliation of Israel with Egypt and Jordan, Israelis and Palestinians have failed to reach a final peace agreement.
The remaining key issues are: mutual recognition, borders, security, water rights, control of Jerusalem, Israeli settlements, Palestinian freedom of movement, and Palestinian right of return
Many Palestinians and Israelis in the West Bank and Gaza Strip have expressed a preference for a two-state solution

51 A global satellite named UN Kalam Global Sat was envisaged in 2015 in Sendai, Japan. The GlobalSat was proposed in response to the need for a/an
a)  Globally interconnected disaster and environmental management system
b)  International Space probe to look for earth like planets
c)  Universally encrypted satellite communication for correspondence between
member nations of the UN
d)  Global open source Geographical Information System (GIS)
Answer: A
 It was launched on third UN World Conference on Disaster Risk
Reduction held at Sendai in Japan in March 2015
The GlobalSat was proposed in response to the need for a globally interconnected disaster and environmental management system since no single country can afford to develop a complete set of sensors and satellite systems needed for forecasting, monitoring and mitigating disasters like floods, drought, typhoons, earthquakes, wild fires, windstorms, or tidal events.
It will provide a common platform that will allow sharing of space and data segments, with an ability to serve individual nation's disaster management and development needs.
http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/science/global-satellite-to-be-named-after-abdul- kalam/article7512030.ece

52 Which of the following was/were some of the official outcomes of the recent 2016 visit of the Indian Prime Minister to the USA?
1.  USA declared India a "Strategic defence partner".
2.  USA will support India in consolidating military bases in South China Sea.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: D
 Statement 1: The US senate refused to recognize India as a strategic partner, and thus the US instead recognized India only as a major defence partner (with lesser access to modern technologies than in case it was declared a strategic
partner).
http://thebricspost.com/us-senate-refuses-to-grant-india-strategic-defence-partner-sta tus/#.V3E-IFR97IV
Now, we would be treated at a level similar to the closest allies and partners of the U.S. and that it sort of allows for better, higher quality, faster technology access on the defence side and also more liberal access to the dual technology side.
Statement 2: There was no mention of South China sea in the document
http://www.thehindu.com/news/international/us-names-india-major-defence-partner/
article8704634.ece

53 Which of the following schemes specifically targets the welfare of Scheduled Castes
(SCs) population?
1.  Sabla Scheme
2.  Pradhan Mantri Adarsh Gram Yojana (PMAGY)
3.  Members of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme (MPLADS) Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 only
b)  1 and 3 only
c)  2 only
d)  1, 2 and 3
Answer: C
 Statement 1: It targets adolescent girl population
Statement 2: The Centrally Sponsored Pilot Scheme 'Pradhan Mantri Adarsh Gram Yojana' (PMAGY) is being implemented for integrated development of Scheduled Castes (SC) majority villages having SC Population concentration > 50%.
Statement 3: It provides that each member of parliament of India has the choice to suggest to the Head of the District works to the tune of 5 crore per year, to be taken up in his/her constituency. It does not target SC population directly.

54 If you travel across the Western coast, upper Assam regions, lower slopes of Eastern
Himalayas, Orissa coast and its neighbouring hills, you are most likely to come across which kind of forests?
a)  Dry tropical forests
b)  Dry Shrubs and grasslands
c)  Moist tropical forests
d)  Conifer sub-tropical forest
Answer: C
 Moist tropical forest is a broad category that includes tropical evergreen forests, semi-evergreen forests, littoral and swamp forests and moist deciduous forests.
Bordering the areas of tropical wet evergreen forests, are comparatively drier areas of the tropical semi-evergreen forests - Here the armual rainfall is 200-250 cm, the mean annual temperature varies from 24°C to 27°C and the relative humidity is about 75 per cent.
These forests are found on the Western coast, Assarr, lower slopes of the
Eastern Himalayas, Orissa and Andamans
The semi-evergreen forests are less dense but more gregarious (especially in
Assam) than the wet evergreen forests.
At places, these forests represent a transition from wet evergreen to deciduous forests. Further, these forests are characterised by many species, frequently buttressed tnmks, rougher and thicker bark, heavy climbers, less bamboos and abundant epiphytes
Source: 11th NCERT Geography: India Physical Environment

55 Consider the following matches of rivers with their origin source.
1.  Narmada: Maikal Hills
2.  Chambal: Singar Chouri peak
3.  Tapi : Satpura range
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  1, 2 and 3
Answer: D
 Statement 1: Amarkantak (MP) is the place from where the Narmada River originates. It rises from the Maikal ranges at the height of 1057 m above MSL. It mainly flows in the central India
Statement 2: Chambal River originates from the Singar Chouri peak on the northern slopes of the Vindhyan escarpment.
Statement 3: The river rises in the eastern Satpura Range of southern Madhya Pradesh state, and flows westward, draining Madhya Pradesh's Nimar region, Maharashtra's Kandesh and east Vidarbha regions in the northwest corner of the Deccan Plateau and south Gujarat, before emptying into the Gulf of Cambay of the Arabian Sea.

56 Which of the following ministries/departments come under the Ministry of Rural
Development (MoRD)?
1.  Ministry of Panchayati Raj
2.  . Department of Drinking Water Supply
3.  Department of Tribal Welfare
4.  Department of Land Reclamation
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  4 only
c)  2, 3 and 4 only
d)  None of the above
Answer: A
 As per the recent reshuffling, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj and Drinking Water and Sanitation (which were separate ministries earlier) are now under the MoRD
Ministry of Tribal Welfare is a separate ministry. So, 3 is wrong.
There is no department of land reclamation in the Government of India, rather there is a department of land resources in the MoRD.

57 Which of the following factors affect the generation and flow of Equatorial Westerlies?
1.  Movement of Inter-tropical convergence zone
2.  Coriolis force caused due to rotation of earth
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: C
 The westerly winds develop within the equatorial trough when the
Intertropical Convergence Zone is well north or south of the Equator.
The north-easterly or south-easterly trade winds cross the Equator and, because of the reversal of the Coriolis effect, acquire a westerly component
The term is also applied to the westerlies that are present throughout most of the year in the eastern Indian Ocean.

58 A Green building is a structure which
a)  Runs only on in-house generated energy
b)  Is located amidst forests
c)  Helps conserve natural resources
d)  All of the above
Answer: C
 A green building can function using an optimum amount of energy, consume less water, conserve natural resources, generate less waste and create spaces for healthy and comfortable living, as compared to conventional buildings, is a green building.
Conventional methods of building use tremendous quantities of material, many of
them non-renewable and toxic, and pay little attention to the impact the building has on the environment
Green buildings not only reduce these impacts but are also healthier and consume less energy saving money in the long run

59 Energy can be generated in oceans by the harnessing the power of
1.  Currents
2.  Waves
3.  Tides
4.  Ocean thermal energy
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2, 3 and 4 only
c)  3 and 4 only
d)  1, 2, 3 and 4
Answer: D
 Statement 1: Marine current is ocean water moving in one direction. Tides also create currents that flow in two directions. Kinetic energy can be captured from the marine current and other tidal currents with submerged turbines that are very similar in appearance to miniature wind turbines
As with wind turbines, the constant movement of the marine current moves the rotor blades to generate electric power
Statement 2: Wave energy is generated by the movement of a device either floating on the surface of the ocean or moored to the ocean floor. This is harnessed to generate electricity
Statement 3: The difference in water height from low tide and high tide is potential energy. Similar to traditional hydropower generated from dams, tidal water can be captured in a barrage across an estuary during high tide and forced through a hydro- turbine during low tide
Statement 4: Ocean thermal energy conversion, or OTEC, uses ocean temperature differences from the surface to depths lower than 1,000 meters, to extract energy. A
temperature difference of only 20°C can yield usable energy.
In the closed cycle method, a working fluid, such as ammonia, is pumped through a heat exchanger and vaporized. This vaporized steam runs a turbine The cold water found at the depths of the ocean condenses the vapor back to a fluid where it returns to the heat exchanger

60 The colonial government appointed the Deccan Riots Commission to
a)  Act as a court for disposing of cases filed by the British citizens affected in the 1857 mutiny
b)  Recommend on increasing government spending on law and order to contain large spurts of violence in Deccan region
c)  Consider the possibility of removing land encroachment by municipalities
d)  None of the above
Answer: D
  The Deccan peasants uprising 1875 was directed mainly against the excesses of the Marwari and Gujarati money lenders.
Social boycott of moneylenders by the peasants was later transformed into armed peasant revolt in the Poona and Alimadnagar districts of Maharashtra
By June 1875 nearly a thousand peasants were arrested and the uprising completely suppressed
The Government appointed the Deccan Riots Commission to investigate into the causes of the uprising
The ameliorative measure passed was the Agriculturists Relief Act of 1879 which put restrictions on the operations of the peasants land and prohibited imprisonment of the peasants of the Deccan for failure to repay debts to the moneylenders.

61 Consider the following about ancient Nalanda University (427-1197) and Takshashila
University (6th Century BC).
1.  Nalanda University trained students in not only fine arts but also politics and art of war
2.  Nalanda University had very few students who all were generally housed in the teacher's home itself.
3.  Takshashila University is associated with Charaka and Chanakya.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  1, 2 and 3
Answer: C
 Statement 1: Astronomy, Buddhism, medicine, mathematics etc were also taught there
Statement 2: Use smart elimination in such questions. It is common knowledge that there were a lot of students studying at Nalanda. If 2 is eliminated, the only answer possible is (c).
There were more than 10,000 students who were housed in dormitories then, which was perhaps unique to an educational institution then. It attracted international students also (e.g. Huen Tsang).
Statement 3: It is said that Chanakya, Charaka and Chardagupta Maurya studied here. Arthashashtra is said to have composed in Takshashila itself.

62 The Nayak Committee setup by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) dealt with
a)  Financial Inclusion
b)  Autonomy of RBI from government
c)  Public Sector Bank (PSB) reforms
d)  Capital account convertibility
Answer: C
 The RBI set up the PJ Nayak Committee to look into three issues related with Public Sector banks (PSBs) - regulatory compliance; governance (board) of
PSBs; and compensation of the board of directors. Its major recommendations were:
Removal of Banking Nationalization Acts of 1970 and l980, SBI Act etc. Incorporation of all banks under Companies Act and constituting a Bank Investment company for the government to transfer its holdings in banks. Appointment of a whole time director in three phases with the help of Bank Boards Bureau (BBB)
Reduction of government stake to less than 50 per cent. Recommendation on HR policy that could bring younger people into top management.

63 In the Union Budget 2016-17, a corpus of Rs. 900 crores has been provided to the Price
Stabilization Fund (PSF) to support market interventions for stabilizing
a)  Stock prices
b)  Rupee movements in Forex
c)  Perishable Agri-horticultural commodities prices
d)  Crude Oil and natural gas prices
Answer: C
 It is to support market interventions for price control of perishable agri- horticultural commodities during 2014-15 to 2016-17. Initially the fund is proposed to be used for market interventions for onion and potato only
PSF Scheme provides for advancing interest free loan to State Governments/Union Territories (UTs) and Central agencies to support their working capital and other expenses on procurement and distribution interventions for such commodities

64 Consider the following about World Wildlife Federation (WWF).
1.  It has an office located in every continent
2.  WWF-India was set up as a Charitable Public Trust after the Rio Earth Summit.
3.  WWF-India has been declared as the nodal agency for the environmental
conservation goal under the SDGs
Select the correct answer using the codes below
a)  1 only
b)  1 and 2 only
c)  2 and 3 only
d)  None of the above
Answer: D
 Statement 1: It does not have any office in Antarctica, so it is based in only 6 continents. This question statement is a modified version of a statement appearing directly on the homepage of WWF. Please be prepared to face such options, tick carefully.
Statement 2: It was set up as a Charitable Public Trust in 1969 (Rio Summit in
1992). It was then known as the World Wildlife Fund-India, much before the terms
'wildlife' and 'environment' had caught the attention of the government or the public.
Statement 3: NITI Aayog is the nodal agency for SDGs, no separate nodal agencies have been assigned for this particular goal

65 What do you understand by "Liberalisation" in the context of Indian economy?
a)  Nationalization of public financial institutions
b)  A citizen-centric economic structure that maximizes welfare
c)  Relaxing unnecessary government control from the market and economic institutions
d)  Increasing the money supply in the economy
Answer: C
 Economic liberalization is the lessening of government regulations and restrictions in an economy in exchange for greater participation by private entities promoting economic As a general rule, to what degree a country is liberalized economically can be found out by how easy it is to invest and do business in the country.
The primary goals of economic liberalization are the free flow of capital
between nations and the efficient allocation of resources and competitive advantages. This is usually done by reducing protectionist policies such as tariffs, trade laws and other trade barriers.
India started liberalizing significantly since 1991 reforms, for e.g. easing FDI caps, promoting ease of doing business, reducing bureaucracy where its not needed etc

66 Oxfam is an international confederation of 18 organizations working in more than 90 countries towards the goal of
a)  Containing Human Rights Violations
b)  Fighting poverty
c)  Ecological conservation
d)  Promoting liberalization and globalization
Answer: B
Around the globe, Oxfam works to find practical, innovative ways for people to lift themselves out of poverty and thrive.
Oxfam works directly with communities and seeks to influence the powerful, to ensure that poor people can improve their lives and livelihoods and have a say in decisions that affect them.
Oxfam's involvement in India began when money was granted in 1951 to fight famine in Bihar. Bihar at the time was one of the poorest and most populated states in India.
Oxfam India was established in 2008 under the Companies Act, 2005 as a non profitable organization with its head office in Delhi and is now a member of Oxfam International Confederation.

67 Which one of the following matches is INCORRECT?
a)  Gobi desert : Mongolia
b)  Bering Strait : International Date Line
c)  Mt. Kilimanjaro : Africa
d)  Andes Mountain: South Africa
Answer: D
Please refer to the map here and check options (a), (b) and (c).
http://www.worldmapsonline.com/images/murals/miller_world_physical_wall_mura l_lg.jpg
Mt. Kilimanjaro is a dormant volcano in Tanzania and the highest mountain in
Africa.
The Gobi Desert is a vast, arid region in northern China and southern Mongolia. It's known for its dunes, mountains and rare animals like snow leopards and Bactrian camels.
The Bering Strait is a strait connecting the Pacific and Arctic oceans between Russia and the United States. The International Date Line runs equidistant between the Strait's Diomede Islands at a distance of 1.5 km.

68 Consider the following statements.
1.  National mammal of India is Nilgiri Bull.
2.  National heritage animal of India is Elephant.
3.  National Protected Area is Bhitarkanika Reserve.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 only
c)  2 and 3 only
d)  3 only
Answer: B
Here are the national symbols:
National animal: Royal Bengal tiger
National heritage animal of India: Elephant
National mammal of India: Hanuman Langur National aquatic animal: Ganges river dolphin National bird: Peacock
Lotus is the National Flower of India. It is a sacred flower and occupies a unique position in the art and mythology of ancient India and has been an auspicious symbol of Indian culture since time immemorial.
https://india.gov.in/india-glance/national-symbols

69 Which of the following mammal species is NOT endangered or critically endangered?
a)  Sangai
b)  Namdapha flying squirrel
c)  Blue whale
d)  Indian rhinoceros
Answer: D
 Indian rhinoceros is vulnerable as per IUCN classification.
Namdapha flying squirrel: It is known from a single specimen collected in 1981
from the Namdapha National Park, though there were informal sightings in 2002. Its range may be restricted to a single valley and it is threatened by poaching of animals for food from within the park, and possibly by habitat destruction
Sangai: Its habitat is located in the southern parts of the Loktak Lake, which is the largest freshwater lake in eastern India. It is also one of the seven Ramsar sites of international importance. The habitat of the sangai is now protected as the Keibul Lamjao National Park. The sangai is also the state animal of Manipur

70 The purpose of the inclusion of Directive Principles of State Policy in the Indian
Constitution is to establish
a)  A market economy
b)  A stable Federation of States and the Union
c)  Strong Bureaucracy
d)  Social and Economic Democracy
Answer: D
 The principles laid down therein are considered fundamental in the governance of the country, making it the duty of the State to apply these principles in making laws to establish a just society in the country.
They were made non-justifiable keeping in view that the state may not have resources to implement them.
DPSPs are not enforceable in a court of law.

71 Consider the following statements.
1.  Such soils are more common in piedmont plains such as Duars, Chos and Terai.
2.  According to their age they can be classified as Bangar and Khadar.
3.  These soils extend in Rajasthan and Gujarat through a narrow corridor.
4.  It can be found in the eastern coastal plains particularly in the deltas of the
Mahanadi and Godavari. The above refers to?
a)  Red and Yellow Soil
b)  Alluvial Soil
c)  Black Soil
d)  Laterite Soil
Answer: B
This is the most widely spread and important soil. In fact, the entire northern plains are made of alluvial soil. These have been deposited by three important Himalayan river systems' the Indus, the Ganga and the Brahmaputra.
The alluvial soil consists of various proportions of sand, silt and clay.
As we move inlands towards the river valleys, soil particles appear bigger in size. In the upper reaches of the river valley i.e. near the place of the break of slope, the soils are coarse.

72 Consider the following about the Bodo Kachari Tribes.
1.  They are found mainly in Assam.
2.  Usually, the Bodo family structure is matriarchal.
3.  They are recognized by the Sixth Schedule of the Indian Constitution.
4.  Decision of the village council, a community institution of bodos, commands authority in all matters among Bodo people.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 3 only
b)  1, 3 and 4 only
c)  2 and 4 only
d)  1, 2, 3 and 4
Answer: B
Statement 1: They are an ethnic and linguistic aboriginal group of the
Brahmaputra valley in the northeast part of India.
Statement 2: The Bodo family structure is patriarchal, with the father as the head of the family. The family property usually passes to the male members of the family.
Statement 4: The village priest looks after the proceedings of the several rituals that mark their social and religious calendars. The priest, the douri (assistant of priest), and the heads of the families are the revered persons of the family, and are the decision-makers. The most important community institution of Bodos is the village. The village council's decision in all matters is accepted by the people.

73 Aggregate demand is an important economic indicator. It can be increased by
1.  More investments
2.  Increasing bank rate by RBI
3.  Lower taxation
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  1, 2 and 3
Answer: C
Aggregate demand is the total demand for final goods and services in an economy at a given time.
Statement 1: Investment creates infrastructure, generates demand for raw material, labour, provides employment and adds to the productive capacity of the economy. It is one of the most potent factors in increasing Aggregate demand (AD).
Statement 2 and 3: The government has some ability to impact AD. It can give fiscal stimulus or increase taxes in order to influence how consumers spend or save. An expansionary fiscal policy (higher spending, lower taxes) causes AD to increase, while a contractionary monetary policy (e.g. high bank rates) causes AD to decrease.

74 Sankhya philosophy holds that
1.  It is the self-knowledge that leads to liberation and not any exterior influence or agent.
2.  The Universe is a material creation and will cease to exist once the cycle is completed.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: A
Sankhya is the oldest philosphy. It was put forward by Kapila. Sankhya philosophy provided the materialistic ontology for Nyaya and Vaisheshik
Statement 1: Samkhya emphasizes the attainment of knowledge of self by means of concentration and meditation. Sankhya holds that it is the self-knowledge that leads to liberation and not any exterior influence or agent. Samkhya thus forms the philosophical basis for Yoga.
Statement 2: It is generally believed that Sankhya Philosophy is dualistic and not
monistic because it has two entities, purush (spirit which is immaterial, ever- existing) and prakriti (nature which is material consisting of three gunas ' Satva, Rajas, tamas) in it.

75 Consider the following about National Bank for Agriculture and Rural (NABARD).
1.  It was setup by an act of Parliament.
2.  It took over the agricultural credit functions of RBI.
3.  It provides refinance to lending institutions in rural areas.
4.  It acts as a regulator for cooperative banks and Regional Rural Banks (RRBs).
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 4 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  3 only
d)  1, 2, 3 and 4
Answer: D
The Parliament, through an Act in 1981, approved the setting up of NABARD. The bank came into existence in 1982 by transferring the agricultural credit functions of RBI and refinance functions of the then Agricultural Refinance and Development Corporation (ARDC).
In discharging its role as a facilitator for rural prosperity, NABARD is entrusted with
Providing refinance to lending institutions in rural areas Bringing about or promoting institutional development and Evaluating, monitoring and inspecting the client banks
Besides this pivotal role, NABARD also:
Acts as a coordinator in the operations of rural credit institutions
Extends assistance to the government, the Reserve Bank of India and other organizations in matters relating to rural Offers training and research facilities for banks, cooperatives and
organizations working in the field of rural Helps the state governments in reaching their targets of providing assistance to eligible institutions in agriculture and rural Acts as regulator for cooperative banks and RRBs

76 The "whitefly problem" recently reported in Northern India is related to
a)  Crop damage
b)  Spread of communicable diseases
c)  Loss of forest biodiversity
d)  Pollution
Answer: A
Whitefly is a small (1-2 mm) white coloured insect affecting cotton, and also occurring on vegetables and other crops in tropical and sub-tropical regions.
There is large-scale crop damage from whitefly infestation this year, especially in northern India.
Reasons and spread in India:
Rains were scarce and intermittent, which led to farmers resorted to excessive irrigation and urea application that promoted fresh vegetative growth and allowed whiteflies to proliferate.
The problem was worsened by over-spraying of pesticides.
Other reasons are delayed sowing, persistent drought coupled with hot and cloudy conditions.
The early-sown crop is less susceptible, as the mature leaves are not preferred by whiteflies.
The whitefly menace was not witnessed in Maharashtra. Although Telangana did report some incidence, it was much less severe than Punjab.
http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/other-states/500-scouts-to-tackle-whitefly-i n-cotton-fields-of-punjab/article8719520.ece

77 The Rajataringini by Kalhan is a
a)  Sanskrit account of the various monarchies of Kashmir
b)  Genealogy of major kingdoms in Southern India
c)  Accounts of Deccan wars and invasions by foreigners
d)  Spiritual guide to the kingdoms of medieval India
Answer: A
It is a metrical historical chronicle of north-western Indian subcontinent, particularly the kings of Kashmir, written in Sanskrit by Kashmiri Brahman Kalhaa in 12th century CE.
The work generally records the heritage of Kashmir, but 120 verses of Rjatarangi describe the misrule prevailing in Kashmir during the reign of King Kalash, son of King Ananta Deva of Kashmir.
Although the earlier books are inaccurate in their chronology, they still provide an invaluable source of information about early Kashmir and its neighbors in the north western parts of the Indian subcontinent, and are widely referenced by later historians and ethnographers.

78 Consider the following about the Linguistic Survey of India (LSI).
1.  First LSI was conducted by the Government after publication of Sachar Committee
Report (2005).
2.  Presently it is conducted decennially alongwith Census by the Registrar General & Census Commissioner of India.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: D
Statement 1: It was a project the Government of India conducted between 1894 and 1928, under the direction of George A. Grierson, a member of the
Indian Civil Service. It is a useful source for understanding the linguistic diversity of
India.
Statement 2: A new Linguistic Survey of India project was initiated by the Language
Division of Office of the Registrar General & Census Commissioner of India in
1984. This project is still going on and at the end of year 2010 approximately 40% of the survey has been completed. However, some sources point that the project has been abandoned.

79 Angus Deaton was awarded the Nobel Prize 2015 in Economic Sciences for his analysis of
a)  Market power and regulation
b)  Economics governance of global commons
c)  Conflict and cooperation through equilibrium analysis
d)  Consumption, poverty, and welfare
Answer: D
 By emphasizing the links between individual consumption decisions and outcomes for the whole economy, his work has helped transform modern microeconomics, macroeconomics and development economics. In his work, he has tried to answer three questions:
How do consumers distribute their spending among different goods? How much of society's income is spent and how much is saved?
How do we best measure and analyze welfare and poverty?
India has been one of Deaton's laboratories. His work has greatly influenced how
India maps its disadvantaged population.
For instance, he pointed out how in the 55th Round of the NSS (1999-2000) there were measurement flaws.
The central message emanating from Deaton's work is that inequalities are often a consequence of economic growth.

80 Consider the following characterization of a vegetation type.
1.  It has a large expanse of grassland with scattered trees and shrubs.
2.  It lies between tropical rain forest and tropical steppes.
3.  It has flat-topped trees.
The above refers to?
a)  Mid-Latitude flat-topped mixed forests
b)  Temperate conifers
c)  Tropical savannah
d)  Sub-tropical Sudan vegetation
Answer: C
 The tropical savanna is a biome characterized by tall grasses and occasional trees. Large regions of tropical savanna extend through the nations of Botswana, Namibia, and Kenya in Africa, southern Brazil, India, and Australia.
Savannas exist in areas where there is a 6 to 8 month wet summer season and a dry winter season. Annual rainfall in savannas varies depending on the geographic location.
There are also distinct wet and dry seasons.

81 A Land Development Bank is a special kind of bank in India to promote development of land, agriculture and increase the agricultural production. It does NOT
a)  Accept deposits
b)  Make business loans
c)  Offer any investment products
d)  Regulate micro-finance institutions in rural areas
Answer: D
 NABARD is the regulator of MFIs, cooperative banks and other
RRBs.
Land development bank provides long-term funds for various agriculture related projects besides development of land and business.
It is of quasi-commercial type and provides services such as accepting deposits, making business loans, and offering basic investment products. So, all options other than (d) will not be the correct answer.

82 The Government has recently decided to establish the National Tribal Advisory Council
(NTAC). Consider the following about it.
1.  It will be a constitutional body setup under the compulsory provisions of the Fifth
Schedule of the Constitution.
2.  It will be chaired by the Prime Minister.
3.  It will approve the release of tribal welfare funds to both Fifth and Sixth Schedule areas.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  None of the above
Answer: B
Government has recently (2015) decided to set up a National Tribal Advisory Council for effecting monitoring and implementation of various tribal welfare schemes.
Statement 1: The NTAC is different from a TAC that is setup under 5th schedule provisions.
As per Para 4(1) of the Fifth Schedule of the Constitution, there shall be TAC in each State having Scheduled Areas therein and , if the President should directs, also in any State having Scheduled Tribes but non-Scheduled Areas Therein
Statement 2: The council is chaired by the Prime Minister and will meet once or twice in a year.
Statement 3: It monitors and does not approve funds for tribal welfare.

83 Which of the following was/were NOT the observations/recommendations of the
Kasturirangan Panel Report (2013) submitted on Western Ghats?
a)  Declare entire hill range of Western Ghats (WG) as Ecologically Sensitive
Zone (ESZ)
b)  There should be a complete ban on mining, quarrying and sand mining in the
Ecologically Sensitive Areas (ESAs)
c)  Constitution of a statutory Western Ghats Ecology Authority (WGEa) under the then Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF)
d)  Both (a) and (c)
Answer: D
Gadgil Committee (not Kasturirangan) report specifies that the present system of governance of the environment should be changed. The commission recommended constitution of a Western Ghats Ecology Authority (WGEa). So, option (c) is incorrect.
The Western Ghats Ecology Expert Panel (WGEEP) (Gadgil committee) designated the entire hill range as an Ecologically Sensitive Area (ESa).
Instead of the total area of Western Ghats, only 37% (i.e. 60,000 sq. km.) of the total area be brought under ESA under Kasturirangan report. So, (a) is also incorrect.
http://www.rediff.com/news/interview/the-kasturirangan-report-is-a-disaster-for-the- western-ghats/20131230.htm

84 India currently meets about 80 per cent of its demand of bulk drugs or active pharmaceutical ingredients (API), which are used as raw materials by the pharmaceutical industry, from Chinese imports. What is the reason behind it?
a)  Only Public Sector Units (PSUs) can manufacture APIs in India, but many of them have become dysfunctional and non-profitable.
b)  Raw material for making APIs is not locally available in India.
c)  India does not have the technical expertise required to synthesize APIs domestically.
d)  The Chinese are able to supply the same API at a more attractive price than
produced in India.
Answer: D
 Indian drug makers depend on foreign imports for the APIs in many antibiotics, painkillers, synthetic penicillin etc.
There is a growing concern in India that the domestic pharma industry has developed an over dependence on China for the manufacture of active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs).
India is known for complex intermediates and APIs, while China always had an advantage when it comes to base chemicals and intermediates.
The concern now is that China has gone up the value chain and is becoming more competitive in APIs and complex intermediates as well.
Also, the USA is banning generic drugs that are not manufactured by using locally synthesized APIs.
Experts cite fragmentation within the industry, high costs of land, power and utilities, as well as a marked lack of incentive for research and development. The Chinese are simply able to offer the same ingredients at a more attractive price.
LiveMint reports that the Indian government intends to make locally manufactured APIs more attractive and available for Indian drug makers.
From the above, it is clear that none of the options except (d) is correct.
Source: http://www.business-standard.com/article/economy-policy/govt-to-create-se parate-ministry-for-pharma-in-one-year-ananth-kumar-115120901043_1.html

85 Recent studies have pointed out an increased warming over the Indian Ocean during the past half-a-century. Which of the following is/are its possible implications?
1.  Surplus rains over the ocean at the cost of the monsoon rains over land
2.  Decline in the marine phytoplankton in the Indian Ocean
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: C
Statement 1: Increased warming in the ocean enhances the large-scale upward motion of warm moist air over the ocean.
This upward motion over the ocean is compensated by subsidence of dry air over the subcontinent resulting in surplus rains over the ocean at the cost of the monsoon
rains over land, thereby drying the Indian subcontinent.
Statement 2: NASA-funded scientists announced that warming sea surface temperatures over the past decade have caused a global decline in phytoplankton productivity.
The most likely explanation is that the warmer the surface waters become, the less mixing there is between those waters and deeper, more nutrient-rich water. As nutrients become scarce at the surface, where phytoplanktons grow, productivity will decline.
Food Security issues will also arise as large scale distribution of fishes are associated with the phytoplankton's availability.
https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/may/18/indian-ocean-storing-up-he at-from-global-warming-says-study

86 The term of the Rajya Sabha
a)  Can be extended by an extraordinary Presidential order
b)  Can be extended by six months at a time by ordinary legislation
c)  Can be extended by one year at a time during the proclamation of emergency
d)  None of the above
Answer: D
 Rajya Sabha is a permanent continuing chamber and not subject to dissolution. Hence, there is no term of RS, it is the term of the MPs of the house. So, (d) can be the only answer.
Lok Sabha's term can be increased by six months at a time during the proclamation of emergency.
This is keeping in view the importance of a legislature overseeing the actions of the executive during emergency periods.

87 Which of the following terms has/have NOT been defined in the constitution?
a)  Union Territory
b)  Securities
c)  Agricultural Income
d)  Procedure Established by Law
Answer: D
Article 366 contains the definitions of various terms used in different provisions of the constitution. These are mentioned below:
Agricultural Income means agricultural income as defined for the purposes of the enactments relating to Indian income-tax.
Securities include stock.
Union Territory means any Union territory specified in the First Schedule and includes any other territory comprised within the territory of India but not specified in that Schedule.
Since the term "procedure established by law" is not defined, the courts have taken enough liberty to interpret it to mean "due process of law". So, (d) will be the correct answer.

88 First Amendment Act, 1951 to the Constitution of India
1.  Added more restrictions on Freedom of Speech and Expression in India
2.  Added Ninth Schedule to protect the land reform and other laws included in it from the judicial review
3.  Readjusted the scale of representation in the Lok Sabha
4.  Empowered the president to fix the time-limit for the state legislatures to express their views on the proposed Central legislation
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2, 3 and 4 only
c)  1 and 4 only
d)  1, 2, 3 and 4
Answer: A
 Statement 1 and 2: Important elements were:
Empowered the state to make special provisions for the advancement of socially and economically backward classes.
Provided for the saving of laws providing for acquisition of estates, etc.
Added Ninth Schedule to protect the land reform and other laws included in it from the judicial review
Added three more grounds of restrictions on freedom of speech and expression, viz., public order, friendly relations with foreign states and incitement to an offence. Also, made the restrictions "
89 Which of the following is NOT one of the guiding principles of Arya Samaj?
a)  God is the primary source of all true knowledge.
b)  Vedas are infallible and supersede rationality.
c)  One's own progress should depend on the upliftment of others.
d)  Dharma, the consideration of right or wrong, should be the principle of all actions.
Answer: B
 It said Vedas are books of true knowledge, but the Samaj always gave preference to rational thoughts and the spirit of inquiry, justice and humanity.
This is also shown by one of their principles - All persons should always be ready to accept the truth and renounce the untruth.
You can read their principles here http://www.vedicculturalcentre.com/10principles.htm

90 Which of the following is/are fundamental rights provided by the Constitution of
India?
1.  No person shall be deprived of his property save by the authority of law.
2.  All linguistic and religious minorities shall have the right to establish and
administer educational institutions of their choice. Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: B
Statement 1: It is a legal right only and was stripped of its status as a constitutional right long back.
Statement 2: These are minority rights under the broader framework of Articles 25-30 that protect religious rights, safeguards minorities, their culture and heritage.

91 The abundance and distribution of organisms and biodiversity in an environment is dependent upon
1.  Solar insolation received
2.  Nutrient flow and availability of water in the region
3.  Population size and species richness of the community
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  1, 2 and 3
Answer: D
 Statement 1: Responsible for photosynthesis and the overall basis for life
Statement 2: Nutrient availability decides the distribution and richness of community. For e.g. nutrient rich ocean waters are likely to have more phytoplankton.
Statement 3: Greater species richness and large-sized communities make a
biome more stable. Greater the diversity, more intricate and reliable would be the trophic level linkages.

92 Consider the following about South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
(SAARC).
1.  The SAARC Secretariat is based in India.
2.  The Secretariat is headed by the Secretary General, who is appointed by the
Council of Ministers from Member States.
3.  The Council of Ministers (CoM) of SAARC comprises of the Head of the
Government of the Member States.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  2 only
d)  1, 2 and 3
Answer: C
Statement 1: It is based in Kathmandu, Nepal.
Statement 2: The CoM of member states appoints the Sec Gen in alphabatical order for a three year term.
Statement 3: Council of Minsiters (CoM) comprises of the Ministers of
Foreign /External Affairs of the Member States.
As provided in Article V of the Charter, the Council undertakes: formulation of policies of the Association; review of progress of cooperation under SAARC; decision on new areas of cooepration; establishment of aditional mechanism under SAARC, as deemed necessary; and decision on other matters of general interest to SAARC.
The Council is mandated to meet twice a year as also to hold its extra- ordinary session (by agreement of among the Member States).

93 Law of variable proportions or diminishing marginal returns is related to
a)  Production in an industry in the short-run
b)  Calculation of total natural resources in an economy
c)  Poverty amidst cultural diversity
d)  Reducing psychological satisfaction with a gain in income
Answer: A
Option (d) is related to the Law of Diminishing marginal utility.
As per the Law of variable proportions "in a given state of technology, when the units of variable factor of production (L) are increased within the units of other fixed factors, the marginal productivity increases at increasing rate up to a point, after this point it will become less and less".

94 With reference to the Indian National Movement, what was the basic difference in the ideology of the moderates and extremists?
a)  Extremists relied on the use of brute force and annihilation of British Empire, whereas moderates wished to achieve the same through secret means.
b)  Moderates wanted British to rule longer in the country, extremists held an opposite view.
c)  Moderates believed in providential mission of the British and pushed for gradual constitutional or legal reforms, extremists relied on agitations and movements.
d)  Extremists did not want India to become a welfare state after gaining
independence, moderates wanted India to be a welfare state.
Answer: C
 Moderates believed in England's providential mission in India.
They also believed political connections with Britain to be in India's social, political and cultural interests and thus professed loyalty to the British Crown limiting their movements to middle class intelligentsia. They felt that masses are not yet ready for participation in political work.
So, they demanded only constitutional reforms and share for Indians in
services by the use of constitutional methods only.
Extremists demanded swaraj as the panacea for Indian ills and did not hesitate to use extra- constitutional methods like boycott and passive resistance to achieve their objectives.

95 Despite the clear environmental advantages of bio-fuels over conventional fuels, why have they not been adopted widely in India?
1.  There is no national policy on bio-fuels in place.
2.  No such plants that can yield bio-fuels can be grown in Indian climatic conditions.
3.  Bio-fuels cannot be used as vehicle fuel which leads to lesser focus in this direction.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1 only
d)  None of the above
Answer: D
Statement 1: Union Cabinet of India had approved the National
Policy on Bio-fuels & its implementation in 2009 itself.
Statement 2: Jatropha, Minnata etc grow well in Indian conditions. Statement 3: The National Policy on Bio-fuels envisages accelerated
development and promotion of the cultivation, production and use of Bio- fuels to increasingly substitute petrol and diesel for transport. So, 3 is clearly wrong.
The major goals of the policy are Development and utilization of indigenous non-food feed stocks raised on degraded or waste lands, thrust on research and development on cultivation, processing and production of biofuels and a blending mandate of 20% Ethanol and Bio-diesel by 2017.
Their non-adoption is due to several reasons such as political will, farmer's reluctance to grow bio-fuel crops, less established markets in India, lack of support from automobile makers, availability of land to grow bio-fuels etc.
You can read other reasons here http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/editorial/the-ethanol-imperative/article208
8170.ece
http://www.thehindu.com/business/Industry/flex-fuel-policy-of-government-t o-curb-pollution-worry-automakers/article8116881.ece

96 Which of the following is NOT a source of threat to biodiversity?
a)  Genetic pollution
b)  Habitat destruction
c)  Climate change
d)  Lack of human settlements in a region
Answer: D
From 1950 to 2011, world population increased from 2.5 billion to 7 billion and is forecast to reach a plateau of more than 9 billion during the 21st century.
The global human population already exceeds planet's biocapacity. So, increasing human population and its pressure is a major factor causing loss of biodiversity. Lack of human settlements would only allow the natural to evolve. So, (d) is the answer.
Option (a): Genetic erosion coupled with genetic pollution (for e.g. GM seeds used in green revolution) may be destroying unique genotypes, thereby creating a hidden crisis which could result in a severe threat to our food security.
Diverse genetic material could cease to exist which would impact our ability to further hybridize food crops and livestock against more resistant diseases and climatic changes.

97 Consider the following statements.
1.  The act allotted finances to promote education for the Indian masses.
2.  The act permitted Christian missionaries to propagate English and preach their religion.
The above refers to?
a)  Regulating Act of 1773
b)  Government of India Act 1935
c)  Charter Act of 1813
d)  Act of 1858
Answer: C
For the first 60 years of its dominion in India, the East India Company, a trading and profit making concern, took no interest in the promotion of education.
However, small beginning was made by the Charter Act of 1813.
The Act incorporated the principle of encouraging learned Indians and promoting knowledge of modern sciences in the country. The Act directed the Company to sanction certain sum annually for this purpose.
The Government also set up three Sanskrit colleges at Calcutta, Delhi and
Agra.

98 Why are floods so destructive in the Ganga-Brahmaputra valley?
1.  The valley is highly populated with a substantial population living in flood prone areas.
2.  There are no landslides or soil erosion in the region that increases the velocity of rainwater.
3.  Ganga and Brahmaputra carry large volumes of water and have large catchment areas.
4.  There is intense rainfall in the upper catchment areas of Ganga and in the
Indian course of Brahmaputra River during Monsoon. Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  2 and 3 only
b)  1, 3 and 4 only
c)  1 and 4 only
d)  1, 2 and 3 only
Answer: B
Statement 1: Both valleys are fertile and have a significant agricultural population or people living near river banks.
Statement 2: There are heavy landslides and soil erosion in these areas, so statement 2 is incorrect.
Statement 3: It is the large volume of water and size of catchment area (that receives rainfall from large parts) during Monsoon that culminating into floods due to heavy rains.
Statement 4: There is high intensity of rainfall in the Himalayan mountain range and also at the foot of the Himalayas which lies in the upper catchment of Ganga river. In the course of Brahmaputra there are heavy rainfalls in the North-eastern region of India.

99 India and Sri Lanka signed a nuclear energy deal in 2015. The deal does NOT
include which of the following issues?
a)  Capacity building and training of personnel in peaceful application of nuclear energy
b)  Cooperation in dealing with radioactive waste management and nuclear accidents
c)  Sri Lanka's support for India's membership of all export control regimes and UNSC
d)  It does not deal with any of the above.
Answer: C
In 2011, Sri Lanka announced that it would establish an Atomic Energy Regulatory Council to allow for the introduction of nuclear power generation technology in the country, and also to address concerns over the security of radioactive sources and to deal with radiation emergencies.
In this context, it signed an agreement with India in 2015. The agreement would facilitate cooperation in the transfer and exchange of knowledge and expertise, sharing of resources, capacity building and training of personnel in peaceful uses of nuclear energy, including use of radioisotopes, nuclear safety, radiation safety, nuclear security, radioactive waste management and nuclear and radiological disaster mitigation and environmental protection.
nuclear-pact-with-sri-lanka/article6902874.ece

100 The Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (Ma) report 2005 defines Ecosystem services as benefits people obtain from ecosystems and distinguishes four categories of ecosystem services: Supporting, Provisioning, Regulating, Cultural. Which of the following is/are Regulating services?
1.  Generation of genetic resources
2.  Waste decomposition and detoxification
3.  Pest and disease control
4.  Nutrient cycles and crop pollination
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 4 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  2, 3 and 4 only
Answer: B
 Supporting services: Ecosystem services "that are necessary for the production of all other ecosystem services". These include services such as nutrient recycling, primary production, soil formation, pollination etc. So, 4 can't be the answer.
These services make it possible for the ecosystems to provide services such as food supply, flood regulation and water purification.
Provisioning services: "Products obtained from ecosystems" such as food; raw materials; genetic resources (including crop improvement genes, and health care); water; minerals; medicinal resources; energy etc. So, 1 can't be the answer.
Regulating services: Benefits obtained from the regulation of ecosystem processes are:
carbon sequestration and climate regulation waste decomposition and detoxification purification of water and air
pest and disease control
es
