

1 The Sur Empire may be considered in many ways as a continuation and culmination of the Delhi Sultanate. Which of the following were some of the reforms introduced by Sher Shah?
1.  He repealed the land revenue system to promote a welfare state.
2.  He restored the old imperial Grand Trunk Road from the river Indus in the west to
Sonargaon in Bengal.
3.  Customs duties were abolished on goods to promote trade and commerce.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 only
c)  2 and 3 only
d)  1 and 3 only
Answer: B
Statement 1: He re-established law and order and dealt sternly with robbers and with zamindars who refused to pay land revenue or disobeyed the orders of the government. So, 1 is incorrect.
Statement 2: Sher Shah paid great attention to the fostering of trade and commerce and the improvement of communications in his kingdom. Sher Shah restored the old imperial road called the Grand Trunk Road, from the river Indus in the west to Sonargaon in Bengal.
Statement 3: Sher Shah also introduced other reforms to promote the growth of trade and commerce. He fixed standards for weights and measures, which helped trade
and commerce.
In his entire empire, goods paid customs duty only at two places: goods produced in Bengal or imported from outside paid customs duty at the border of Bengal and Bihar, and goods coming from West and Central Asia paid customs duty at the Indus.
No one was allowed to levy customs at roads, ferries or towns; anywhere else.
 Sher Shah did not make many changes in the administrative divisions prevailing since the Sultanat period. A number of villages comprised a pargana. The pargana was under the charge of the shiqdar, who looked after law and order and general administration, and the ,nunsif or amil who looked after the collection of
land revenue. Accounts were maintained both in the Persian and the local
languages(Hindavi).

2 Consider the following statements.
1.  The North-West Indian Region mineral belt is associated with Dharwar system of rocks.
2.  Manganese deposits cannot be found in Dharwar system of rocks.
3.  Uranium deposits occur in the Dharwar rocks.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  1, 2 and 3 only
Answer: C
Statement 1: This belt extends along Aravali in Rajasthan and part of Gujarat and minerals are associated with Dharwar system of rocks. Copper, zinc have been major minerals.
Statement 2: Manganese deposits are found in almost all geological formations, however, it is mainly associated with the Dharwar system.
Statement 3: Important minerals used for the generation of nuclear energy are uranium and thorium.
Uranium deposits occur in the Dharwar rocks. Geographically, uranium ores are known to occur in several locations along the Singbhum Copper belt.
It is also found in Udaipur, Alwar and Jhunjhunu districts of Rajasthan, Durg district of Chhattisgarh, Bhandara district of Maharashtra and Kullu district of Himachal Pradesh.
Thorium is mainly obtained from monazite and ilmenite in the beach sands along the coast of Kerala and Tamil Nadu.

3 Which of the following threatens the population of Sea turtles in India?
1.  Accidental capture in fishing gear
2.  Genetic engineering projects on sea turtles
3.  Poaching and trade of parts of sea turtle
4.  Loss of coral reefs and sea grass beds
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  3 and 4 only
b)  1, 2 and 3 only
c)  1, 3 and 4 only
d)  2 and 4 only
Answer: C
 Nearly all species of sea turtle are classified as Endangered. Slaughtered for their eggs, meat, skin and shells, sea turtles suffer from poaching and over- exploitation. Other major reasons are:
They face habitat destruction and accidental capture in fishing gear. Climate change has an impact on turtle nesting sites. It alters sand temperatures, which then affects the sex of hatchlings.
Some also kill turtles for medicine and religious ceremonies.
Sea turtles are dependent on beaches for nesting. Uncontrolled coastal development, vehicle traffic on beaches and other human activities have directly destroyed or disturbed sea turtle nesting beaches around the world. Turtle feeding grounds such as coral reefs and sea grass beds are damaged
and destroyed by activities onshore, including sedimentation from clearing of land and nutrient run-off from agriculture.
Warmer sea surface temperatures can also lead to the loss of important foraging grounds for sea turtles, while increasingly severe storms and sea level rise can destroy critical nesting beaches and damage nests.

4 Why ozone hole is predominant at Antarctic (South Pole) as compared to Arctic (North
Pole)?
a)  Southern polar region is colder and more isolated than the north.
b)  Stratospheric clouds are not formed over the Arctic region.
c)  Permafrost of Antarctic region has been leaching ozone-depleting substances slowly in the atmosphere for a long time.
d)  Presence of Boreal forests subdues ozone hole formation in Arctic, unlike
Antarctica which is largely barren.
Answer: A
About Colder temperatures: Air temperatures in both polar regions reach minimum values in the lower stratosphere in the winter season. Average daily minimum values over Antarctica are at least 10 degrees lower than the Arctic.
Lower temperatures favor the formation of polar stratospheric clouds (PSCs)
which serve as platforms for catalytic ozone breakdown.
Polar stratospheric clouds (PSCs) are formed in the polar ozone layer when winter minimum temperatures fall below the formation temperature of about
-78°C.
This occurs on average for 1 to 2 months over the Arctic and 5 to 6 months over Antarctica.
Therefore, since the Southern region is colder and colder for a longer time, it helps ozone depletion.
About isolation of Antarctica: Unlike the Arctic, the circulation over the Antarctic is more persistent and vortex-like as a consequence of having less land. Air inside the vortex is prevented from mixing with warmer, ozone-rich air from lower latitudes. This vortex is not a feature of the Arctic. The chemistry of ozone loss works in both poles, but their meteorological conditions are different, and more supportive in Antarctica.

5 Consider the following about developments in Ancient India.
1.  The earliest epigraphic evidence for the 'use of the decimal system is in the beginning of the fifth century AD.
2.  Zero was discovered by the Indians around the second century B.C.
3.  Aryabhatta formulated the rule for finding the area of a triangle.
4.  In the second century B.C. Apastamba produced a practical geometry for the construction of altars at which the kings could offer sacrifices.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 3 only
b)  2 and 4 only
c)  1 and 4 only
d)  1, 2, 3 and 4
Answer: D
All statements are correct. The information given below is important and you should be thoroughly acquainted with it, as ancient Indian discoveries has been quite often in news.
By the third century, mathematics, astronomy and medicine began to develop separately.
In the field of mathematics the ancient Indians made three distinct contributions the notation system, the decimal system and the use of zero. The earliest epigraphic evidence fot the 'use of the decimal system is in the beginning of the fifth century AD.
The Indian notational system was adopted by the Arabs who spread it In the
Western world.
The Indian numerals are called Arabic in English, but the Arabs themselves llcd their numerals hindsa.
Before these numerals appeared in the West they had been used in India for centuries. They are found in the inscriptions of Asoka, which were written in the third century B.C.
The Indians were the first to use the decimal system. The famous mathematician Aryabbata (AID. 476-500) was acquainted with it. The Chinese learnt this system from the Buddhist missionaries, and the Western world borrowed it from the Arabs when they came in contact with India. Zero was discovered by the Indians in about the second century B.C.
In the second century B.C. Apastamba produced a practical geometry for the construction of altars at which the kings could offer sacrifices. It describes acute angle, obtuse angle, right angle.
Aryabhata formulated the rule for finding the area of a triangle, which led to the origin of trigonometry. The most famous work of this time is the Suryasiddhanta, the like of which is not found in contemporary ancient East.

6 Which of the following places are linked with Gandhiji's life or his heritage?
1.  Sadaqat Ashram, Patna
2.  Manorville, Simla
3.  Kingsway Camp, Delhi
4.  Kanigata Cottage, Maharashtra
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 4 only
b)  1, 2 and 3 only
c)  2 and 4 only
d)  1, 2, 3 and 4
Answer: B
Statement 1: It was established by Mahatma Gandhi in 1921. During independence movement, Important meetings between eminent freedom fighters like Brajkishore Prasad, Maulana Mazharul Haque, Dr. Anugrah Narayan Sinha & Rajendra Prasad has taken place here. After Independence, Jayaprakash Narayan launched his historic movement during 70's from here only.
Statement 2: The mansion is Popular for having served as residence to Mahatma Gandhi, Jawahar Lal Nehru, Sardal Patel and Maulana Azad during a meeting with Lord Wavell regarding India's independence in the year 1945. It today serves as a guest house. The main attraction is the preserved room where Mahatma Gandhi stayed.
Statement 3: The Harijan Sevak Sangh for Dalits (untouchables) was established here, by Mahatma Gandhi in 1932. Later, it was Valmiki Bhawan within the campus, which functioned as Gandhi ji's one-room ashram.

7 Consider the following about Biochar.
1.  It has the potential to help mitigate climate change via carbon sequestration.
2.  Use of Biochar reduces the nutrient content in the soil and degrades its productive abilities as it can endure in soil for long.
3.  It can provide protection against some soil-borne diseases.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  1, 2 and 3
Answer: C
 Biochar is found in soils around the world as a result of vegetation fires and historic soil management practices. Intensive study of biochar-rich dark earths in the Amazon (terra preta), has led to a wider appreciation of biochar's unique properties as a soil enhancer.
Statement 1: Biochar is charcoal used as a soil amendment. Like most charcoal, biochar is made from biomass via pyrolysis. Biochar is under investigation as an approach to carbon sequestration to produce negative carbon dioxide emission.
Statement 2 and 3: Independently, biochar can increase soil fertility of acidic soils (low pH soils), increase agricultural productivity, and provide protection against some foliar and soil-borne diseases.
Biochar reduces pressure on forests. Biochar is a stable solid, rich in carbon, and can endure in soil for thousands of years

8 Consider the following statements.
1.  Before the adoption of the portfolio system in the Government of India, governmental business was disposed of by the Secretary of State from Britain.
2.  The Councils Act of 1861 led to the introduction of the portfolio system and the inception of the Executive Council of the Governor-General.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: B
 Statement 1: They were disposed by the Governor-General-in council.
The Council functioned as a joint consultative board. But, as the amount and complexity of business of the Government increased, the work of the various departments was distributed amongst the members of the Council only the more important cases being dealt with by the Governor-General or the Council collectively.
Statement 2: This procedure was legalised by the Councils Act of 1861 during the time of Lord Canning, leading to the introduction of the portfolio system and the inception of the Executive Council of the Governor-General.
The Secretariat of the Executive Council was headed by the Private Secretary to the Viceroy, but he did not attend the Council meetings.
Lord Willingdon first started the practice of having his Private Secretary by his side at these meetings. Later, this practice continued and in November,
1935, the Viceroy's Private Secretary was given the additional designation of
Secretary to the Executive Council.
The constitution of the Interim Government in September 1946 brought a change in the name, though little in functions, of this Office.
The Executive Council's Secretariat was then designated as Cabinet
Secretariat.

9 Consider the following about the Silk sector in India.
1.  Central Silk Board (CSB), which is a Statutory Body, promotes the development of
Silk Industry in India.
2.  India is both the largest producer and consumer of Silk in the World.
3.  Mulberry Silk is produced only in the Southern states, whereas non-Mulberry silk is produced only in Eastern India.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  3 only
d)  1 and 3 only
Answer: A
 Statement 1: It was established during 1948, by an Act of Parliament. It functions under the administrative control of the Ministry of Textiles, Government of India.
Statement 2: Geographically, Asia is the main producer of silk in the world and produces over 95 % of the total global output. Though there are over 40 countries on the world map of silk, bulk of it is produced in China and India, followed by Japan, Brazil and Korea. China is the leading supplier of silk to the world.
India is the second largest producer of silk and also the largest consumer of silk in the world. It has a strong tradition and culture bound domestic market of silk.
Statement 3: In India, mulberry silk is produced mainly in the states of Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Jammu & Kashmir and West Bengal, while the non- mulberry silks are produced in Jharkhand, Chattisgarh, Orissa and north-eastern states.

10 Which of the following Ministries/Departments was recently merged with the Ministry of External Affairs?
a)  Ministry of Planning
b)  Ministry of North-Eastern Region
c)  Department of Homeland Security
d)  Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs
Answer: D
The primary task of the MOIA was to connect the Indian Diaspora with its motherland.
In order to avoid duplication of work and to improve efficiency, the government recently merged the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs (MOIa) with the Ministry of External Affairs.
Others reasons, as cited by officials:
A substantial work of MOIA is done through MEA's missions abroad.
Senior diplomats wanted officials dealing with foreign workers-related issues and emergencies to have better diplomatic back-up and coordination.
MEA, which has been short of staff, wanted greater number of officials with diplomatic experience in key positions in MOIA to deal with emergencies involving Indians in various crisis-prone countries in West Asia. The merger is expected to increase efficiency in MEA's emergency work abroad.
Source: http://indianexpress.com/article/india/india-news-india/govt-decides-to-mer ge-overseas-indians-ministry-with-mea/

11 The S&P BSE-GREENEX Index is a veritable first step in creating a credible market based response mechanism in India, whereby both businesses and investors can rely upon purely quantitative and objective performance based signals, to assess "carbon performance". The Index includes
a)  Globally traded carbon bonds
b)  Selected top companies which are good in terms of Carbon Emissions and other financial criteria
c)  Weather based data that is continuously affected by climate change
d)  State of Indian forests including green tradable items
Answer: B
The S&P BSE-GREENEX Index includes the top 25 companies which are good in terms of Carbon Emissions, Free-Float Market Capitalization and Turnover.
BSE considers the company's initiative to offset the carbon emissions; the offset limit being set to 2/3rd of the company's total emissions.
The Index is a Cap Weighted Free-Float Market Capitalization weighted Index comprising from the list of BSE-100 Index.
It seeks to achieve its mission by developing and promoting a "green ethos" in high growth developing nations through market based push and pull factors by providing financial tools to investors - in the form of innovative products that are developed with keen insight and cutting edge technology, in order to create internal capacities and capabilities within the corporate sector to entrench sustainable practices.
Source: http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-business/bse-launches-greenex/ar ticle2921682.ece

12 Consider the following statements about India's external debt.
1.  India's external debt statistics are released by Department of Commerce.
2.  A rise in outstanding NRI deposits tends to increase India's external debt.
3.  Commercial borrowings do not form part of India's external debt.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  2 only
d)  None of the above
Answer: C
 Statement 1: As per the standard practice, India's external debt statistics for the quarters ending March and June are released by the Reserve Bank of India with a lag of one quarter and those for the quarters ending September and December by the Ministry of Finance, Government of India. So, 1 is wrong.
Statement 2: India's external debt at end-March 2016 witnessed an increase of 2.2 per cent over its level at end-March 2015, primarily on account of a rise in outstanding NRI deposits. So, clearly statement 2 is correct.
However, the increase in the magnitude of external debt was partly offset by valuation gain resulting from the appreciation of the US dollar vis-a-vis the Indian rupee and other major currencies.
The external debt to GDP ratio stood at 23.7 per cent at end-March 2016. Statement 3: Commercial borrowings continued to be the largest component of
external debt with a share of 37.3 per cent, followed by NRI deposits (26.1 per cent)
and short-term trade credit (16.5 per cent).

13 Which one of the following is NOT related to the formation or modification of the present atmosphere?
a)  Solar winds
b)  Degassing
c)  Differentiation
d)  Photosynthesis
Answer: C
Option (a): The early atmosphere, with hydrogen and helium, is supposed to have been stripped off as a result of the solar winds.
Option (b): The early atmosphere largely contained water vapour, nitrogen, carbon dioxide, methane, ammonia and very little of free oxygen. The process through
which the gases were outpoured from the interior is called degassing.
Option (d): Finally, the composition of the atmosphere was modified by the living world through the process of photosynthesis.
Option (c): It is through the process of differentiation that the earth forming material got separated into different layers. Starting from the surface to the central parts, we have layers like the crust, mantle, outer core and inner core.

14 "Lakshya" and "Nishant" developed by the DRDO are
a)  Ballistic missile systems
b)  Combat engineering equipments
c)  Naval systems
d)  Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs)
Answer: D
 Lakshya is a high speed target drone system developed by DRDO.
The drone remotely piloted by a ground control station provides realistic towed aerial sub-targets for live fire training.
The Nishant UAV is primarily tasked with intelligence gathering over enemy territory and also for reconnaissance, training, surveillance, target designation, artillery fire correction, damage assessment, ELINT and SIGINT.

15 Conservation of few identified endemic, endangered and sensitive species has been chosen under the National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG). Which of the following is/are NOT among those species?
a)  Indian Skimmer and Saras
b)  Gharial and Gangetic Turtle
c)  River Dolphins and Otters
d)  Sacred Grove Bushfrog
Answer: D
The ultimate goal of the Aquatic Biodiversity Conservation is to achieve the NMCG (National Mission for Clean Ganga) long term vision for Ganga River Conservation, in which viable populations of all endemic and endangered aquatic species occupy their full historical range and fulfill their role in maintaining the integrity of the Ganga River ecosystems.
The proximate goal is to ensure that by 2020, a significant reduction of threats to the biodiversity populations of River Ganga that are either currently endangered, or are likely to become endangered in the foreseeable future, is achieved.
Priority species identified for conservation are:
FISH: Snow trout (Schizothorax richardsonii), Golden Mahseer (Tor putitora), Indian Major Carps (IMC): Four species (Labeo rohita, L. calbasu, Catla catla, Cirrhinus mrigala).
REPTILES: Gharial and Gangetic Turtle sp: MAMMAL: River Dolphins and Otters
BIRDS: Indian Skimmer and Saras

16 Consider the following about Mishing tribes.
1.  They mainly live close to mountainous areas in Jammu & Kashmir (J&K).
2.  They are amongst those few tribal groups that have institutionalised the caste system.
3.  The Mishings have their own language, but no script of their own.
4.  The 'Amrok' is their harvest festival.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 only
c)  3 and 4 only
d)  1, 2, 3 and 4
Answer: C
 Statement 1: The Miris, also known as Mishings, are the second largest schedule tribe of Assam. Mostly they are based on riverine areas like
Lakhimpur, Dibrugarh, Sibsagar, Jorhat and Sonitpur.
Statement 2 and 3: Social structure: The Mishing family is generally a joint family. The eldest member of the family is highly respected.
Inheritance in the family is a patrilineal one, and the social structure - patriarchal.
Daughters have no right over the property. There is no caste system or ideas of slavery in the Mishing society.
The Mishings have their own language, but no script: hence they use the Assamese language when the written form is required.
Statement 4: 'Porag' is the social festival observed by the villagers after harvesting the 'Ahu' rice. Neighboring villagers are invited for celebrations that go on through the night, with a lot of singing and dancing. A great feast is arranged on the event. The 'Amrok' is the festival observed when food from the harvested crop is offered.

17 Sound Navigation and Ranging (SONAR) can be used for
a)  Underwater communications
b)  Determining the depth of water beneath ships and boats
c)  Finding aircraft location in the event of a crash in the sea
d)  All of the above
Answer: D
 It is a technique that uses sound propagation (usually underwater, as in submarine navigation) to navigate,
 It is a technique that uses sound propagation (usually underwater, as in submarine navigation) to navigate, communicate with or detect objects on or under the surface of the water, such as other vessels.
Dedicated sonars can be fitted to ships and submarines for underwater communication.
Sonars which act as beacons are fitted to aircraft to allow their location in the event of a crash in the sea.
Sound waves travel differently through fish than through water because a fish's air-
filled swim bladder has a different density than seawater.
This density difference allows the detection of schools of fish by using reflected sound. Acoustic technology is especially well suited for underwater applications since sound travels farther and faster underwater than in air.

18 Consider the following statements.
1.  Ecozones are characterized by the evolutionary history of the organisms they contain, and are different from biomes.
2.  Palearctic, Australasia, Oceania, Antarctic as categorized by the World Wildlife
Federation (WWF) as Ecozones. Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: C
Statement 1: An ecozone is the broadest biogeographic division of the
Earth's land surface, based on distributional patterns of terrestrial organisms.
Ecozones delineate large areas of the Earth's surface within which organisms have been evolving in relative isolation over long periods of time, separated from one another by geographic features, such as oceans, broad deserts, or high mountain ranges, that constitute barriers to migration.
They are distinct from biomes, also known as major habitat types, which are divisions of the Earth's surface based on life form, or the adaptation of animals, fungi, micro-organisms and plants to climatic, soil, and other conditions. Biomes are characterized by similar climax vegetation. Each ecozone may include a number of different biomes.
Statement 2: The patterns of distribution of living organisms in the world's ecozones were shaped by the process of plate tectonics, which has redistributed the world's land masses over geological history.
For e.g. the Australasia ecozone includes Australia, Tasmania, the islands of
Wallacea, New Guinea, the East Melanesian islands, New Caledonia, and New
Zealand.

19 Which of the following statements about G-20 is INCORRECT?
a)  The forum came into existence in 2008 in the wake of global financial crisis.
b)  It was disbanded recently in 2015 due to lack of consensus between members
on major global economic issues.
c)  The Prime Minister represents India in the G20 Leaders' Summit.
d)  All of the above are correct.
Answer: B
 G20 is a forum of the Heads of Governments of the 19 major economies and the EU for global cooperation on international economic and financial issues.
The European Union is represented in G20 by the President of the European
Council.
The forum has come into existence with the first summit of the Leaders of G20 held in Washington D.C. in November 2008 in the wake of global financial crisis.
Subsequently, the forum met biannually in 2009 and 2010 and annually since
2011. Frequently organised Leaders' summits of G20 in 2008, 2009 and 2010 resulted in a momentum of its influence because of significant decisions that were taken to avert the impact of Global financial crisis of 2008.
The Prime Minister represents India in the G20 Leaders' Summit.
The Finance Minister of India and the Governor of the Reserve Bank of India represent in the Finance Ministers and the Central Bank Governors meetings. Mr. Arvind Panagariya represents as India's Sherpa in G20.
Ministerial Meetings are represented by the Cabinet Ministers of the respective Ministries.

20 Which of the following is NOT one of the objectives of Disinvestment in India?
a)  Promoting people's ownership in Public Sector Entreprises (PSEs)
b)  Unlock true value of PSEs for investors and government
c)  Ensure better corporate governance of the PSEs
d)  Increase the foreign presence of PSEs
Answer: D
The policy on disinvestment has evolved considerably through President's address to Joint Sessions of Parliament and statement of the Finance Minister's in their Budget Speeches.
The salient features of the Policy are:
(i) Public Sector Undertakings are the wealth of the Nation and to ensure this wealth rests in the hands of the people, promote public ownership of CPSEs;
(ii) While pursuing disinvestment through minority stake sale in listed CPSEs, the Government will retain majority shareholding, i.e. at least 51 per cent of the shareholding and management control of the Public Sector Undertakings;
(iii) Strategic disinvestment by way of sale of substantial portion of Government shareholding in identified CPSEs upto 50 per cent or more, alongwith transfer of management control.
Option (d): PSEs like ONGC (Videsh) have been able to enhance their foreign presence even without much disinvestment. Moreover, it is not a listed objective of the Disinvestment policy, nor is it considered as an aim to be achieved as a consequence of disinvestment.

21 There are many different objectives of watershed management programs across the world. Which of the following is considered amongst them?
1.  To protect, enhance the water resource originating in the watershed and moderate the floods peaks at downstream areas
2.  To improve and increase the production of timbers, fodder and wild life resource in the watershed
3.  To rehabilitate the deteriorating lands in the watershed
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  1 only
c)  2 and 3 only
d)  1, 2 and 3
Answer: D
 Other objectives are:
To protect, conserve and improve the land of watershed for more efficient and sustained production.
To check soil erosion and to reduce the effect of sediment yield on the watershed.
To increase infiltration of rainwater.
To enhance the ground water recharge, wherever applicable.
To reduce the occurrence of floods and the resultant damage by adopting strategies for flood management.
To provide standard quality of water by encouraging vegetation and waste disposal facilities.

22 India's first island district which has been recently granted District status by the concerned State government is
a)  Manoharnagar, Odisha
b)  Majuli, Assam
c)  Anand, Gujarat
d)  Morbi, TamilNadu
Answer: B
 The Assam Government has granted district status to Majuli, a 400 square kilometres island in the Brahmaputra River. With this it becomes India's first island district.
The fluvial riverine island is formed by the Brahmaputra river system. It is the world's largest mid river delta (island) system. The island is surrounded by Subanisri River in the North, main Brahmaputra River on the South and kherkatia Suli, split channel of Brahmaputra River in northeast. People and Culture: Majuli island is mostly inhabited by Mishing tribal people.
http://www.downtoearth.org.in/news/disappearing-majuli-india-s-first-river-island-d istrict-54610

23 DOTS treatment is related to which disease?
a)  Tuberculosis
b)  Polio
c)  Measles
d)  Cholera
Answer: A
Modern anti-TB treatment can cure virtually all patients. It is, however, very important that treatment be taken for the prescribed duration, which in every case is a minimum of 6 months.
Because treatment is of such a long duration and patients feel better after just 1-2 months, and because many TB patients face other problems such as poverty and unemployment, treatment is often interrupted.
Therefore, just providing anti-TB medication is not sufficient to ensure that patients are cured.
The DOTS strategy ensures that infectious TB patients are diagnosed and treated effectively till cure, by ensuring availability of the full course of drugs and a system for monitoring patient compliance to the treatment.

24 Consider the following about earth's biodiversity based on the presently available species inventories.
1.  Majority of all the recorded species are plants.
2.  Number of fungi species in the world is more than the combined total of the species of fishes, amphibians, reptiles and mammals.
3.  Among animals, insects are the most species-rich taxonomic group.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  3 only
c)  2 and 3 only
d)  1, 2 and 3
Answer: C
 Statement 1: More than 70 per cent of all the species recorded are animals, while plants (including algae, fungi, bryophytes, gymnosperms and angiosperms) comprise no more than 22 per cent of the total.
Statement 2: Below is image taken from NCERT that summarizes the species diversity
Statement 3: Among animals, insects make up more than 70 per cent of the total. That means, out of every 10 animals on this planet, 7 are insects.

25 Tejas recently in news is a/an
a)  Indigenously developed Lightweight multi-role fighter jet
b)  Reported old indigenous species of Western Ghats
c)  Underwater observatory in Bay of Bengal to study Seagrass
d)  Indigenously developed micro-nuclear reactor
Answer: A
Tejas is a single-engine lightweight multi-role fighter jet. It has been pegged as world's smallest and ligh
It is outcome of India's LCA programme, which began in the 1983 to replace
country's aging MiG-21 fighters.
It is a tailless and having compound delta wing design. It is powered by a single engine.
It is mounted with inbuilt MultiMode Radar (MMR), Radar Warning
Receiver (RWR) systems.
LCA Tejas has a limited reach of a little over 400-km. It will be mainly used for close air-to-ground operations.
LCA Tejas is not the first indigenous fighter to be inducted into the IAF. In April 1967, IAF had formed the first operational squadron with the indigenous HF-24 Marut fighter.

26 Soil biology and chemistry can be seriously damaged by acid rain. But, the impact of acid rain on soil is less in India because
a)  Acid rains do not occur in India.
b)  Acid rains are restricted to mountainous regions.
c)  Indian soils are mostly alkaline with good buffering ability.
d)  India's forests are not infested with fungal diseases.
Answer: C
Many alluviam soils in India (e.g. Northern plains, Brahmaputra alluvium) are neutral to alkaline in pH.
Black soils are alkaline in nature due to high amount of salts.
Alkaline soils also develop in arid areas having low rainfall, poor drainage, high temperature and high evaporation.
These soils are do not become highly acidic post-acid rain spells, and have good buffering ability, which is why the impact is observed less in Indian soils.
About impact of acid rain on soil: Some microbes are unable to tolerate changes to low pH and are killed.
The optimum pH of most bacteria and protozoa is near neutrality; most fungi prefer an acidic environment, most blue-green bacteria prefer an alkaline environment.
So after a long run of acid rain, microbial species in the soil and water shift from
bacteria-bound to fungi-bound and cause an imbalance in the micro flora.
This causes a delay in the decomposition of soil organic material, and an increase in fungal disease in aquatic life and forests.

27 As per the present arrangements, Appointments Committee of the Cabinet includes
a)  Prime Minister and Minister of Home Affairs only
b)  Prime Minister, Minister of Home Affairs, Minister of Finance, Minister of
External Affairs and Minister of Defence only
c)  Prime Minister, Minister of Home Affairs, Minister of Finance, Minister of External Affairs, Minister of Urban Development and Minister of Corporate Affairs
d)  Prime Minister and all Cabinet Ministers
Answer: A
 There are only two members in the appointments committee of the
Cabinet, PM and MoHA.
Another important Committee is the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs, which includes:
Prime Minister; Minister of Home Affairs; Minister of External Affairs; Minister of Finance, Minister of corporate Affairs, and Minister of Information and Broadcasting, Minister of Urban Development, Minister of Defense, Minister of Parliamentary Affairs etc.
You can see the full list and about other important Cabinet Committees in the Q Source.

28 The Zabti and Dahsala system of Mughal period are related to
a)  Revenue settlement
b)  Military organization
c)  Criminal Justice
d)  Education of Women
Answer: A
The Dahasala or Zabati system of land revenue collection was introduced by Akbar in 1580s to alleviate the problems arising due to fixing prices every year and doing settlements of revenues of previous years.
This system prevailed from Lahore to Allahabad and in the provinces of Malwa and Gujarat. This remained a standard system of revenue assessment during the greater part of the Mughal empire.
In this system, average produce of ten years was derived. One third of this average produce was fixed in Rupees per Bigha and fixed as share of the state (Mal). Rest two third share was left to the cultivators (Kharaj).

29 Consider the following about the role of International Court of Justice (ICJ).
1.  Only States are eligible to appear before the Court, no private entity can move the
ICJ.
2.  It provides individuals and groups with legal counselling and helps them deal with the authorities of any State in major human rights violation situations.
3.  It is the final appellate court for decisions passed by major international tribunals.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  3 only
Answer: A
Statement 1 and 2: The Court has no jurisdiction to deal with applications from individuals, non-governmental organizations, corporations or any other private entity. It cannot provide them with legal counselling or help them in their dealings with the authorities of any State whatever.
Only States are eligible to appear before the Court in contentious cases. At present, this basically means the 192 United Nations Member States.
Statement 3: The Court is not a supreme court to which national courts can turn; it does not act as a court of last resort for individuals. Nor is it an appeal court for any
international tribunal. It can, however, rule on the validity of arbitral awards.
 However, a State may take up the case of one of its nationals and invoke against another State the wrongs which its national claims to have suffered at the hands of the latter; the dispute then becomes one between States.
The Court can only hear a dispute when requested to do so by one or more States. It cannot deal with a dispute of its own motion. It is not permitted, under its Statute, to investigate and rule on acts of sovereign States as it chooses.
The States concerned must also have access to the Court and have accepted its jurisdiction, in other words they must consent to the Court's considering the dispute in question.
This is a fundamental principle governing the settlement of international disputes, States being sovereign and free to choose the methods of resolving their disputes.
Judgments delivered by the Court (or by one of its Chambers) in disputes between States are binding upon the parties concerned.
Judgments are final and without appeal. If either of the parties challenges their scope or meaning, it has the option to request an interpretation.

30 Which state hosts the largest Scheduled Tribe (ST) population in India?
a)  Chattisgarh
b)  Jharkhand
c)  Maharashtra
d)  Madhya Pradesh
Answer: D
MP tops the list with more than 1.5 crore STs, MH follows with around
1.05 crore STs, then Odisha 95 lakhs, then Rajasthan 92 lakhs.
Among North-eastern states highest is in Assam nearly 35 lakhs, followed by
Meghalaya which hosts around 25 lakhsSTs.
No ST population in Punjab, Haryana, Chandigarh, Puducherry and NCT Delhi. Total population of STs in India is around 10.42 crores.
The 
http://tribal.nic.in/WriteReadData/userfiles/file/Statistics/Tribal%20Profile.pdf

31 Consider the following about Bamboo sector in India.
1.  Majority of growing stock of Bamboo is in the North-eastern region, while no major
Bamboo growing areas are found in Central India.
2.  Largest consumption of Bamboo in India is to manufacture paper.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: D
 Statement 1: 28% of area and 66% of growing stock of bamboo in NE
region. 20% of area and 12% of growing stock in MP & Chattisgarh. Image below shows the regional stock of Bamboo in India.
Statement 2: It is widely seen as a wood substitute in India given that we import a
lot of wood. Largest use is in scaffolding, second largest in paper, third largest handicrafts (see distribution in image below)

32 The Prime Minister is incharge of a number of departments in the Central Secretariat. Which of the following is NOT one of them?
a)  Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions
b)  Department of Space
c)  Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
d)  Department of Atomic Energy
Answer: C
As per the present setup of the Council of Ministers, Prime Minister is also in-charge of:
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions; Department of Atomic Energy;
Department of Space; and
All important policy issues and all other portfolios not allocated to any
Minister

33 The Kyoto Protocol is an international agreement linked to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, which commits its Parties by setting
a)  Measurable standards on conservation in protected areas
b)  Stringent mechanisms for curbing wildlife trade
c)  Internationally binding emission reduction targets binding only on developed countries
d)  Minimum afforestation requirements in degraded regions
Answer: C
 It is a standard and easy question, clear answer is (c).
Recognizing that developed countries are principally responsible for the current high levels of GHG emissions in the atmosphere as a result of more than 150 years of industrial activity, the Protocol places a heavier burden on developed nations under the principle of "common but differentiated responsibilities."
The Kyoto Protocol was adopted in Kyoto, Japan in 1997 and entered into force in
2005.
The detailed rules for the implementation of the Protocol were adopted at COP 7 in Marrakesh, Morocco, in 2001, and are referred to as the "Marrakesh Accords." Its first commitment period started in 2008 and ended in 2012.
http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/op-ed/paris-climate-deal-in-paris-taking-stock-of- the-big-challenges/article8061600.ece

34 The "Nairobi Package" was adopted at the WTO's Tenth Ministerial Conference, held in
Nairobi, Kenya in December 2015. It addresses which of the following?
1.  Special Safeguard Mechanism for Developing Country Members
2.  Public Stockholding for Food Security Purposes
3.  Preferential Rules of Origin for Least Developed Countries
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  3 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  1, 2 and 3
Answer: D
It contains a series of six Ministerial Decisions on agriculture, cotton and issues related to least-developed countries (LDCs).
Nairobi Package related to Agriculture includes:
Special Safeguard Mechanism for Developing Country Members
Public Stockholding for Food Security Purposes
Export Competition
LDC issues
Preferential Rules of Origin for Least Developed Countries
Implementation of Preferential Treatment in Favour of Services and Service Suppliers of Least Developed Countries and Increasing LDC Participation in Services Trade
Other issues are listed at the Q source. This is also from where UPSC lifted its question (verbatim) in the recently conducted CAPF 2016.
For your information, according to WTO rules, Afghanistan will become the 164th member of the Organization on 29 July, a month after its instrument of acceptance was deposited at the WTO.
tm

35 The DigiLocker scheme of the Government of India is related to
a)  Securing online banking transactions
b)  Gold bonds
c)  Sharing of e-signed personal documents
d)  Armed forces cyber security
Answer: C
Digital Locker is one of the key initiatives under the Digital India
Programme. Its major objectives are:
Enable digital empowerment of residents by providing them with Digital
Locker on the cloud
Enable e-Signing of documents and make them available electronically and online Minimize the use of physical documents
Ensure authenticity of the e-documents and thereby eliminate usage of fake documents
Secure access to Govt. issued documents through a web portal and mobile application for residents
Reduce administrative overhead of Govt. departments and agencies and make it easy for the residents to receive services
Anytime, anywhere access to the documents by the resident
Open and interoperable standards based architecture to support a well- structured standard document format to support easy sharing of documents across departments and agencies
Ensure privacy and authorized access to residents' data.

36 During the Freedom Struggle, Komagata Maru incident of the early 20th century clearly highlighted the racist exclusion laws in Canada. What was Komagata Maru?
a)  A place located near the borders of Punjab and Pakistan
b)  The memorial of freedom fighters in Canada.
c)  It was a ship that ferried a group of Indian citizens to Canada.
d)  None of the above
Answer: C
 The Komagata Maru incident involved the Japanese steamship Komagata
Maru on which a group of citizens of the British Raj attempted to emigrate to
Canada in 1914 but were denied entry.
The ship returned to Calcutta on 27 September and was stopped by the British. The passengers were put under guard and the ship was allowed to dock in Budge Budge, Calcutta.
The incident gave fuel to the Ghadr movement in India.

37 Which of the following does NOT come within the ambit of the United Nations (UN)?
a)  Maintain international peace and security
b)  Protect Human Rights
c)  Upholding International Law
d)  All come in its ambit.
Answer: D
Due to the powers vested in its Charter and its unique international character, the United Nations can take action on the issues confronting humanity in the 21st century, such as peace and security, climate change, sustainable development, human rights, disarmament, terrorism, humanitarian and health emergencies, gender equality, governance, food production, and more.
Option (a): The Security Council has primary responsibility, under the United
Nations Charter, for the maintenance of international peace and security.
Option (c): The UN Charter, in its Preamble, set an objective: "to establish conditions under which justice and respect for the obligations arising from treaties and other sources of international law can be maintained".
Option (b): Bodies like UNHCR achieve the objective apart from the general agreements and resolutions passed by UN.

38 The Government of India has recently decided to impose travel ban on Indian nationals planning to travel to Libya in view of
a)  Ebola epidemic in Libya
b)  Prevailing security situation in Libya
c)  Major outgo of foreign exchange on account of travel to Libya
d)  Flouting of rules and regulations frequently by Libyan travellers
Answer: B
In view of prevailing security situation in Libya, security threats and challenges to lives of Indian nationals in Libya, the Government of India has decided to impose travel ban on Indian nationals planning to travel to Libya
irrespective of the purpose.
The travel ban is effective from 3 May, 2016 till further orders.
In 2011, a NATO-led coalition began a military intervention in Libya, ostensibly to implement United Nations Security Council Resolution 1973. This led to a situation of civil war in the country.
The second Libyan Civil War is an ongoing conflict among rival groups seeking control of the territory of Libya. The conflict is mostly between the government of the Council of Deputies that was elected democratically in 2014, also known as the "Tobruk government" and internationally recognized as the "Libyan Government"; and the rival Islamist government of the General National Congress (GNC), also called the "National Salvation Government"
Source: http://www.mea.gov.in/press-releases.htm?dtl/26842/Travel_ban_on_Indian
_nationals_travelling_to_Libya

39 Which of the following is NOT related to Good Governance?
a)  Rule of Law and a citizen-friendly government
b)  Higher spending on defence sector
c)  Increased transparency and accountability of the government
d)  Greater use of E-governance
Answer: B
 Good governance must be 'pro-people' and 'pro-active'.
Good governance is putting people at the centre of the development process. It is about improving government processes, brining greater accountability, transparency and rule of law in governance.
It is a shift away from conventional governance that focuses on rules and procedures more than people.
India is the only country in the world that officially celebrates Christmas as 'Good
Governance Day'.

40 Consider the following about the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau.
1.  It is a multi-disciplinary body established by the Ministry of Environment and
Forests under a Cabinet resolution.
2.  It is mandated to collect and collate intelligence related to organized wildlife crime activities and to disseminate the same to State and other enforcement agencies. Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: B
Statement 1: Wildlife Crime Control Bureau is a statutory multi- disciplinary body established by the Government of India under the Ministry of Environment and Forests, to combat organized wildlife crime in the country.
Statement 2: Under Section 38 (Z) of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972, it is mandated to collect and collate intelligence related to organized wildlife crime activities and to disseminate the same to State and other enforcement agencies for immediate action so as to apprehend the criminals, and also to:
Establish a centralized wildlife crime data bank; co-ordinate actions by various agencies in connection with the enforcement of the provisions of the Act
Assist foreign authorities and international organization concerned to facilitate co-ordination and universal action for wildlife crime control Capacity building of the wildlife crime enforcement agencies for scientific and professional investigation into wildlife crimes and assist State Governments to ensure success in prosecutions related to wildlife crimes Advise the Government of India on issues relating to wildlife crimes having national and international ramifications, relevant policy and laws.
It also assists and advises the Customs authorities in inspection of the consignments of flora & fauna as per the provisions of Wild Life Protection Act, CITES and EXIM Policy governing such an item.

41 Standards and Labelling programme for equipment and appliances in 2006, including the energy star rating standards, was initiated by
a)  FICCI
b)  Bureau of Energy Efficiency
c)  Indian Solar Alliance (ISa)
d)  Ministry of Commerce
Answer: B
The Bureau initiated the Standards and Labeling programme for equipment and appliances to provide the consumer an informed choice about the energy saving and thereby the cost saving potential of the relevant marketed product.
The scheme is invoked for 19 equipment/appliances, i.e. Room Air Conditioners, Fluorescent Tube Lights, Frost Free Refrigerators etc.
Most of the appliances are presently under voluntary labelling phase.
As a result, the least-efficient products are removed from the market and more efficient products are introduced.
The most recent additions to the list of labeled products are Diesel Pumpsets & Diesel Generating Set.
During the XII plan, Standards and Labelling programme will target at least 3 more new equipments / appliances including up-gradation of energy performance standards for equipments/ appliances covered during XI Plan.

42 Treasury Bills (T=Bills) often in news are related to
a)  Government's total expenditure on foreign visits
b)  Any bill related to government's revenue that is introduced in the Parliament
c)  Audit reports of Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG)
d)  Government borrowing from markets
Answer: D
There are two types of bills viz. Treasury Bills and commercial bills. While Treasury Bills or T-Bills are issued by the Central Government; Commercial Bills are issued by financial institutions.
These are government bonds or debt securities with maturity of less than a year.
T- bills are issued to meet short-term mismatches in receipts and expenditure. Bonds of longer maturity are called dated securities.

43 Consider the following statements.
1.  A minister cannot be elected as a member of the committee.
2.  The chairman of the committee is appointed by the Speaker from amongst its members and he is invariably from the ruling party.
3.  It has been described as a 'continuous economy committee'.
The above refers to?
a)  Public Accounts Committee
b)  Estimates Committee
c)  Business Committee
d)  Committee on Delegated Legislation
Answer: B
The options are set in a way that you can easily recognize the answer as (b). Also, It is exclusively a committee of the Lower House.
Public Accounts Committee scrutinizes the executive's expenditure, so the dominance of a ruling party member should not be expected in the committee. So, (a) is incorrect.
Business committee and Committee on Delegated Legislation do not deal with economies. So, (c) and (d) are incorrect.
The function of the Estimates committee is to examine the estimates included in the budget and suggest 'economies' in public expenditure. Hence, it has been described as a 'continuous economy committee'.

44 Which of the following acts has/have a bearing on the promotion of culture or regulation of cultural institutions in India?
1.  The Delivery of Books and Newspapers (Public Libraries) Act, 1954
2.  The Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972
3.  The Artistic Society Act (Amendment), 2007
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 only
c)  2 and 3 only
d)  1, 2 and 3
Answer: A
Statement 1 and 2: It is clear by the title of the act that it is concerned with promotion, preservation and regulation of culture and cultural norms in India
Statement 3: It is actually the Asiatic Society Act. The Society was established in
1784 by William Jones who visualised a centre for Asian studies including almost everything concerning man and nature within the geographical limits of the continent.
The Amendment Act deals with the election of the office bearers.
You should be prepared to face such questions as they have been asked in past years by UPSC. Most are lifted directly from Ministry websites.

45 Consider the following matches of tribes with the state they are found in.
1.  Baiga : TamilNadu
2.  Bhot : Kerala
3.  Chakma : Tripura
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 3 only
b)  3 only
c)  2 only
d)  None of the above
Answer: B
 Statement 1: They are found mainly in MP, UP, Chattisgarh, Jharkhand. In a bid to undo historical injustice meted out to primitive tribal communities living in central India,
the government of Madhya Pradesh has for the first time recognised the habitat rights of seven villages in Dindori district, mostly inhabited by the Baigas.
In a meeting held in village Rajni Sarai in 2016, the district administration told the villagers they are free to access all their ancestral rights over land and forests.
Statement 2: are groups of ethno-linguistically related Tibetan people living in the Transhimalayan region of the SAARC countries. In India, they are found mainly in HP, Uttarakhand , Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh and Tripura.
Statement 3: It is an ethnic group concentrated in the Chittagong Hill Tracts of Bangladesh. Today, the geographic distribution of Chakmas is spread across Bangladesh and parts of northeastern India in Tripura mainly.

46 A special technology "Reed bed system" is used for
a)  Painting silk related textiles material in much smaller time than conventional methods
b)  Controlling landslides in mountainous regions
c)  3-D printing of construction materials
d)  Treating industrial wastewaters
Answer: D
A reed-bed, also known as a constructed wetland, is an engineered structure, rather like a pond, that harnesses
natural ecological processes for the breakdown of the organic matter in wastewater. They contain gravels and sands which are usually planted with either the common river reed.
Reed Bed System integrates plants and geomaterials to remove (by absorption and adsorption) pollutants from wastewater
Cattail reed (Typha latifolia) is a perennial herbaceous plant effective
in removing heavymetals and salts.
Root exudates effectively immobilize heavy metals in the rhizosphere Water hyacinth (Eichornia crassipes) effectively absorbs nitrate and phosphate besides heavymetals

47 The year 2014 was observed as the "Year of Farmer Producer Organisations (FPO)" by the Government of India. Consider the following about FPOs.
1.  Farmers can form groups and register themselves under the Indian Companies Act.
2.  FPOs can be created at both State and village levels.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: C
 FPO is one of the important initiatives taken by the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation of the Ministry of Agriculture to mainstream the idea of promoting and strengthening member-based institutions of farmers.
Statement 1: It is aimed at engaging the farmer companies to procure agricultural products and sell them.
Statement 2: Supply of inputs such as seed, fertilizer and machinery, market linkages, training & networking and financial and technical advice are also among the major activities of FPO.
However, many FPOs are yet to be registered under the Indian Companies Act. Registration allows them to reap the benefits given by the government.

48 The Ministry of External Affairs (MEa) and the Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship (MSDE) signed a Memorandum of Understanding for implementation of the Pravasi Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PKVY). The scheme targets
a)  NRI workers living abroad who want to return to homeland after sometime
b)  Indian workforce keen on overseas employment
c)  BPL Indian citizens who intend to start their own enterprise
d)  Overseas Citizen of India (OCI) who wish to upgrade their skillsets
Answer: B
 It is aimed at training and certification of Indian workforce keen on overseas employment in select sectors and job roles, in line with international standards, to facilitate overseas employment opportunities.
As part of collaboration, potential emigrant workers may avail work related skill training under Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY) or any other similar Government skill development program, which would take place at transnational standards.
MSDE through NSDC proposes to establish customised International Skill
Centres to operationalise this initiative.
MEA's role would be to support Pre-Departure Orientation Training (PDOT), which will include language and soft skills training modules. Training offered will also be backed by an internationally recognised assessment and certification system.
Source: http://www.mea.gov.in/press-releases.htm?dtl/26980/Signing_of_MOU_bet ween_the_Ministry_of_External_Affairs_and_Ministry_of_Skill_Development_am
p_Entrepreneurship_for_implementation_of_the_Pravasi_Kaush

49 The rural co-operative credit system in India is primarily mandated to ensure flow of credit to the agriculture sector. Consider the following about regulation of cooperative banks in India.
1.  Banking related functions of these banks are regulated by the RBI.
2.  Management related functions of these banks are regulated by respective State
Governments/Central Government. Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: C
Though the Banking Regulation Act came in to force in 1949, the banking laws were made applicable to cooperative societies only in 1966 through an amendment to the Banking Regulation Act, 1949. Since then there is duality of control over these banks with banking related functions being regulated by the Reserve Bank and management related functions regulated by respective State Governments/Central Government.
The short-term co-operative credit structure operates with a three-tier system - Primary Agricultural Credit Societies (PACS) at the village level, Central Cooperative Banks (CCBs) at the district level and State Cooperative Banks (StCBs) at the State level.
PACS are outside the purview of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 and hence not regulated by the Reserve Bank of India.
StCBs/DCCBs are registered under the provisions of State Cooperative
Societies Act of the State concerned and are regulated by the Reserve Bank.

50 Which of the following have a bearing on the production of Steel in India?
1.  National Electricity Policy
2.  Coal policies and guidelines
3.  Foreign Trade Policy
4.  National Environment Policy
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  3 and 4 only
c)  2 and 3 only
d)  1, 2, 3 and 4
Answer: D
 The question can be solved by common sense and does not even require the knowledge of the above policies.
Statement 1: Electricity goes into the production cost of steel, hence the bearing. Statement 2: Coal is one of the raw materials required in steel production, hence the
bearing.
Statement 3: India exports iron ore and imports coking coal, hence the bearing. Statement 4: Mineral exploration (as raw material for steel) affects the environment,
hence the bearing.

51 "Shram Suvidha" is a
a)  Unified portal for labour and employment
b)  Sub-Mission under PM Skill India Mission
c)  Agency of the Ministry of Labour and Employment working overseas
d)  None of the above
Answer: A
 The Unified Shram Suvidha Portal is developed to facilitate reporting of
Inspections, and submission of Returns.
The Unified Shram Suvidha Portal has been envisaged as a single point of contact between employer, employee and enforcement agencies bringing in transparency in their day-to-day interactions
For integration of data among various enforcement agencies, each inspectable unit under any Labour Law has been assigned one Labour Identification Number (LIN).

52 Forests are an integral part of major ecosystems on earth and are important because they
1.  Control extremes of heat and cold, rendering the climate more equable.
2.  Tend to reduce the relative humidity of the air by capturing it and increaseevaporation
3.  Tend to increase local precipitation
4.  Help to prevent soil erosion, silting up and consequent overflowing of rivers
Select the correct answer using the codes below
a)  1, 3 and 4 only
b)  3 and 4 only
c)  1 and 2 only
d)  1, 2, 3 and 4
Answer: A
 Statement 1: Forests are a major factor of environmental conservation and control extremes of heat and cold, rendering the climate more equable. This effect is particularly marked on the main continental land masses within the tropics as in the north Indian plains where during the long dry seasons the hot dry surface transfers heat energy to the wind.
Statement 2: Forests also tend to increase the relative humidity of the air and retard evaporation. In this way forests afford protection to animals and crops against strong, cold or hot and dry winds, and rays of the sun and prevent desiccation and vegetative retrogression.
Statement 3: Forests tend to increase local precipitation, atleast to the extent of increasing the number of rainy days. Forests enrich the soil with fallen leaves and debris and increase its depth, porosity and water storage capacity
Statement 4: In hilly terrains, forests regulate the water supply, feeding springs in dry weather, promoting a perennial instead of a seasonal stream flow and tending to prevent sudden and violent rises of water during rains and floods. Forests help to prevent soil erosion, landslips, shifting sands and silting up and consequent overflowing of rivers, thus reducing the dangers of floods
On level ground, forests have a draining action; the clearing of forests on wet land increases its swampiness, which in arid regions it may increase the salinity of streams

53 International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) is a/an
a)  Specialized agency of the United Nations (UN)
b)  Fund established by the World Bank for developing countries
c)  Voluntary organization working in developing countries
d)  Agreement under WTO Peace Clause
Answer: A
 The International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), a specialized agency of the United Nations, was established as an international financial institution in 1977 as one of the major outcomes of the 1974 World Food Conference.
The conference was organized in response to the food crises of the early 1970s that primarily affected the Sahelian countries of Africa.
It resolved that "an International Fund for Agricultural Development should be established immediately to finance agricultural development projects primarily for food production in the developing countries"
IFAD is dedicated to eradicating rural poverty in developing countries.

54 Which of the following is NOT a salient provision under the Biological Diversity Act,
2002?
a)  It requires approval from National Biodiversity Authority (NBa) for obtaining Biological Resources for all foreign national
b)  Indian individuals to seek approval before transferring knowledge, research and material to foreigners
c)  It regulates the release of GMOs in the environment.
d)  It restricts the State governments from carving out National parks.
Answer: D
 Other salient provisions of the Biological Diversity Act, 2002
Section - 7: Indians required to provide prior intimation to State Biodiversity Boards for obtaining biological material for commercial purposes. SBB can regulate such access.
Section - 8: Establishment of NBA, its composition. National Biodiversity Fund
Section - 32: State Bio-diversity Fund
Regulate release of GMOs
Section - 36 (4): Measures for protecting the traditional knowledge
Section - 37: Biodiversity heritage sites
Section - 38: Notifications of threatened species
Section - 39: Designation of repositories
Section - 40: Exemption for normally traded commodities from purview of the act.
Section - 41: Establishment of Biodiversity Management Committees by local bodies.
Section - 42: Local Biodiversity Fund
Section - 52 A: Appeals to High Court on the decision of NBA / SBB

55 Biomarker technologies can be used to control
a)  Plasma content in modern reactors
b)  Diseases in rice plant
c)  Polymerization in plastic material
d)  Silicon content in computer chips
Answer: B
 A biomarker, or biological marker, generally refers to a measurable indicator of some biological state or condition.
In medicine, a biomarker can be a traceable substance that is introduced into an organism as a means to examine organ function or other aspects of health
Biomarkers are often measured and evaluated to examine normal biological processes, pathogenic processes, or pharmacologic responses to a therapeutic intervention. Biomarkers are used in many scientific fields.
New Biomarker Technologies are used to control Bacterial Leaf Blight in Rice

56 Stem cell has emerged as a new field of life science in view of its potential clinical applications. A stem cell possesses which of the following properties?
1.  The ability to go through numerous cycles of cell division while maintaining the undifferentiated state
2.  The capacity to differentiate into specialised cell types
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: C
 The classical definition of a stem cell requires that it possess two properties:
Self-renewal: the ability to go through numerous cycles of cell division while maintaining the undifferentiated state
Potency: the capacity to differentiate into specialised cell types.
The ability of stem cells to self-renew and give rise to subsequent generations with variable degrees of differentiation capacities, offers significant potential for generation of tissues that can potentially replace diseased and damaged areas in the body, with minimal risk of rejection and side effects.
http://www.dbtindia.nic.in/programmes/program-medical-biotechnology/stem-cell-r esearch-and-regenerative-medicine

57 Agri Exchange, a trade portal, has been developed by
a)  ITC Pvt. Ltd
b)  National Stock Exchange
c)  Bombay Stock Exchange
d)  Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority
(APEDa)
Answer: D
 It is an online Trade portal, first of its kind, endeavoured by APEDA, Govt. of India
It is a joint collaboration of UNCTAD and Ministry of Agriculture and offers a platform for global buyers and sellers in the Agri business world.
The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority
(APEDa) was established by the Government of India under the Agricultural and
Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Act passed by the
Parliament in December, 1985

58 Which of the following is NOT a World Heritage Site from India?
a)  Buddhist monuments at Sanchi
b)  Buland Darwaja
c)  Mountain Railways of India
d)  Khajuraho group of Monuments
Answer: B
 Option (a): Sanchi is the oldest extant Buddhist sanctuary. Although Buddha never visited the site during any of his former lives or during his earthly existence, the religious nature of this shrine is obvious.
From the time that the oldest preserved monument on the site (Asoka's column with its projecting capital of lions inspired by Achaemenid art) was erected, Sanchi's role as intermediary for the spread of cultures and their peripheral arts throughout the Maurya Empire, and later in India of the Sunga, Shatavahana, Kushan and Gupta dynasties, was confirmed.
Option (c): The Darjeeling Himalayan Railway is intimately linked with the development of Darjeeling as the queen of hill stations and one of the main tea- growing areas in India, in the early 19th century.
It was adopted by the British East India Company as a rest and recovery station for its soldiers in 1835, when the area was leased from Sikkim and building of the hill station began, linked to the plains by road.
Option (d): It contains monuments of two distinct religions, Brahminism and
Jainism. The most important group of monuments is massed in the western zone, not far from the archaeological museum, including the temples of Varaha, Lakshmana, Matangeshwara, Kandariya, Mahadeva Chitragupta, Chopra Tank, Parvati, Vishwanatha and Nandi

59 Which of the following countries is/are NOT members of ASEAN?
1.  Cambodia
2.  China
3.  Myanmar
4.  Bangladesh
5.  Thailand
Select the correct answer using the codes below
a)  2 only
b)  3, 4 and 5 only
c)  1, 2 and 3 only
d)  2 and 4 only
Answer: D
 It is a political and economic organisation of ten Southeast Asian countries
It was formed in 1967 by Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and
Thailand.
Since then, membership has expanded to include Brunei, Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar (Burma), and Vietnam. Its aims include accelerating economic growth, social progress, and socio-cultural evolution among its members, alongside protection of regional stability as well as providing a mechanism for member countries to resolve differences peacefully
ASEAN shares land borders with India, China, Bangladesh, East Timor, and Papua
New Guinea, and maritime borders with India, China, and Australia.

60 The Indian President or the Prime Minister have visited which of the following countries in the past one year?
1.  Namibia
2.  Mexico
3.  USA
4.  Afghanistan
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 3 only
b)  2 and 4 only
c)  2, 3 and 4 only
d)  1, 2, 3 and 4
Answer: D
 Namibia was visited by the President, whereas the rest 3 were visited by the PM
PM visited Mexico in view of the NSG deal and other economic engagements. He visited USA for the defence engagements, India's NSG bid and to settle other
issues of divergence in the India-US relations.
PM recently inaugurated the Salma dam in Afghanistan and discussed security related matters and signed Chabhar port agreement.
Please see the 

61 "Global Financial Stability" Report is published by
a)  World Bank
b)  IMF
c)  United Nations Economic and Social Council
d)  World Economic Forum
Answer: B
 The Global Financial Stability Report provides an assessment of the global financial system and markets, and addresses emerging market financing in a global context.
It focuses on current market conditions, highlighting systemic issues that could pose a risk to financial stability and sustained market access by emerging market borrowers.
The Report draws out the financial ramifications of economic imbalances highlighted by the IMF's World Economic Outlook. It contains, as special features, analytical chapters or essays on structural or systemic issues relevant to international
financial stability

62 Consider the following about the Yoga system of philosophy in India.
1.  The basic text of this school is the Yoga Sutras of Patanjali
2.  As per the system, God is matter, and matter is God.
3.  The system denies the existence of soul and instead focuses on various way of self- mortification of the body to attain salvation
Select the correct answer using the codes below
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  1 only
c)  2 and 3 only
d)  3 only
Answer: B
 Statement 1 and 3: The term is loosely used to imply all the religious exercises and acts of self-mortification of Indian religion, the earnest follower of such practices being a yogi. But, the school does not deny that there is a soul (see description for Statement 2).
In this broad sense yoga has been part of the teaching of every Indian sect, but it was also the name of a distinct school, which emphasized psychic training as the chief means of salvation.
The basic text of this school is the Yoga Sutras of Patanjali; this teacher was traditionally identified with a famous grammarian believed to have lived in the 2nd century B.C., but the sutras in their present form are probably several centuries later.
Statement 2: The God of Yoga was not a creator, but an exalted soul which had existed for eternity without ever being enmeshed in matter.
He was specially symbolized in the sacred syllable OM, which in the Yoga school was much revered, as giving insight into the sublime purity of the soul and thus aiding meditation.
The metaphysical ideas of the Yoga school were originally closely akin to those of
Sankhya, but they differed in that they brought a deity into the picture.
The course of training of the yogi was divided into eight stages including self- control, meditation, breath control, asanas etc.

63 Consider the following provisions
1.  It curtailed the fundamental right to property in India
2.  Any law made to give effect to the Directive Principles in Article 39 (b) or (c)
cannot be challenged on violation of certain fundamental rights.
Which of the following constitutional amendment the above refers to?
a)  25th Amendment Act, 1971
b)  119th Constitutional Amendment, 2013
c)  91st Amendment Act, 2003
d)  86th Amendment Act, 2002
Answer: A
 The clear choice has to (a), because the Right to property was curtailed in India much before, than the present 21st Century. If you were only aware of this fact, other options (after year 2000) could be easily eliminated.

86th amendment was about Right to Education, 91st was about Anti-defection, and
119th was about India-Bangladesh Land Boundary Agreement (LBa).

64 Apart from publishing the Red list of Threatened Species, IUCN also helps the global community with which of the following conservation tools?
1.  Red List of Ecosystems
2.  ECOLEX, which is a source of information on national and international environmental law
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: C
 Statement 1: The IUCN Red List of Ecosystems is a global standard for how it assesses the conservation status of ecosystems. It is applicable at local, national, regional and global levels
It is based on a set of rules, or criteria, for performing evidence-based, scientific assessments of the risk of ecosystem collapse, as measured by reductions in geographical distribution or degradation of the key processes and components of ecosystems. Same categories apply - Collapsed, Critically endangered, Endangered, Threatened etc.
Statement 2: ECOLEX has been designed to be the most comprehensive global source of information on national and international environmental law. It is a web- based environmental law information service, operated jointly by FAO, IUCN and UNEP since 2001. It is a platform that synergizes information on environmental law collected through FAOLEX (FAO), ELIS (IUCN) and InforMEA (UNEP).

65 Environmental costs associated with traditional herbicides, weedicides and insecticides have encouraged the use of eco-friendly bio-control agents. Which of the following can act as Biocontrol agents?
1.  Aspergillus niger
2.  Myrothecium verrucaria
3.  Pseudomonas fluorescens
4.  Bacillus thuringiensis
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  3 and 4 only
c)  4 only
d)  1, 2, 3 and 4
Answer: D
 Statement 1: It is a ubiquitous fungus presents in all types of soil with no specific moisture and pH requirements. It controls a number of devastating soil borne pathogens.
Statement 2: It is used to control root-infecting fungus, Sclerotium rolfsii on groundnut.
Statement 3: Pseudomanas fluorescens is common non-pathogenic saprophyte that colonises in soil, water and on plant surfaces. It produces a soluble greenish fluorescent pigment. P. fluorescens suppress plant diseases by protecting the seeds and roots from fungal infections. This bacterium is mass-produced using fermentation technology.
Statement 4:
b) thuringiensis (commonly known as 'Bt') is a spore forming gram positive crystalliferous bacterium. It is commercially produced worldwide using fermentation technology. The commercial Bt products are produced as dust, wettable powder and emulsifiable concentrates. The toxin genes have also been genetically engineered into several crop plants.
http://agritech.tnau.ac.in/crop_protection/crop_prot_biocontrol%20control_agents.ht ml

66 Which of the following markets is NOT within the regulatory ambit of the Reserve
Bank of India (RBI)?
a)  Money markets
b)  Foreign exchange markets
c)  Agricultural markets
d)  Government Securities Market
Answer: C
 Major market segments under the regulatory ambit of the Reserve Bank are interest rate markets, including Government Securities market and money markets; foreign exchange markets; derivatives on interest rates/prices, repo, foreign exchange rates as well as credit derivatives.
The Government securities market, which trades securities issued by Central and
State Governments,
In the foreign exchange market, the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (Act
42 of 1999), better known as FEMA, 1999, provides the statutory framework for the regulation of Foreign Exchange derivatives contracts.

67 Consider the following about Interlinking of Rivers (ILR) Programme.
1.  Its mission is to ensure greater equity in the distribution of water by enhancing its availability in drought prone and rainfed regions
2.  It covers only Peninsular Rivers and leaves Himalayan Rivers to preserve the pristine ecological balance in the Himalayan region
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: A
 Statement 1: Interlinking of River (ILR) programme is of national importance and has been taken up on high Priority. Minister for Water Resources, RD & GR is monitoring the progress of ILR on weekly basis.
Statement 2: Under the National Perspective Plan (NPP) prepared by Ministry of Water Resources, NWDA has already identified 14 links under Himalayan Rivers Component and 16 links under Peninsular Rivers Component for inter basin transfer of water based on field surveys and investigation and detailed studies.
Out of these, Feasibility Reports of 14 links under Peninsular Component and 2 links (Indian portion) under Himalayan Component have been prepared.

68 Consider the following statements
1.  The rock-cut medieval image of the Jaina saint Gomateshwara can be found in
Mysore, Karnataka
2.  Sittanavasal Cave, Jain complex of caves, can be found in Pudukottai, Tamil Nadu
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: C
 Statement 1: The colossal rock-cut medieval image of the Jaina saint Gomateshwara at Sravana Bejgola in Mysore. He stands bolt upright in the posture of meditation known as kayotsarga, with feet firm on the earth, and arms held downwards but not touching the body, and he smiles faintly.
Statement 2: The Tamil word Sittanavasal means "the abode of great saints". Created by Jains, it is called the Arivar Koil, and is a rock cut cave temple of the Arihants
While the Sittanavasal village is dated from 1st century BC to 10th century AD when Jainism flourished here, the Temple-cave was initially dated to Pallava King Mahendravarman I (580-630 AD) prior to his conversion from Jainism to Hinduism as a Shaivite.

69 The ultimate responsibility of taking due action on the comments of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG) vests with the
a)  President of India
b)  Supreme Court
c)  Parliament
d)  Prime Minister
Answer: C
 CAG reports the activities and finances of the government to the PAC of the Parliament. The CAG is like a watchdog of the Parliament. Since it reports executive's activities, the executive cannot initiate due action on its comments. It must be the other wings of the State. So, (a) and (d) are incorrect.
SC doesn't generally interfere unless the case is brought to it by a party. So, (b) is incorrect
It is Parliament that censures the executive in case of any irregularities. However, it must be noted that the executive enjoys a majority in the house, so any disciplinary action may not be taken by the Parliament.

70 Rajiv Gandhi Equity Saving Scheme (RGESS) is a tax saving scheme for
a)  Retail or individual investors
b)  Corporate houses
c)  Foreign Institutional Investors (FIIs)
d)  Ultra High Net Worth Individuals
Answer: A
 Rajiv Gandhi Equity Saving Scheme (RGESS), is a tax saving scheme announced in the Union Budget 2012-13 and expanded in the subsequent budget
2013-14, designed exclusively for the first time retail / individual investors in securities market, who invest up to Rs. 50,000 in a year and whose annual income is below Rs. 12 lakh.
The investor would get a 50% deduction of the amount invested from the taxable income for that year. This benefit is available for the first three consecutive years for the new investor.

71 The nitrogen cycle is an important process in the ocean. Consider the following statements about it
1.  Nitrogen enters the water through precipitation, runoff or from the atmosphere.
2.  Nitrogen can be utilized by phytoplankton directly from the atmosphere
3.  Ammonia and urea are released into the water by vertical mixing of ocean layers
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1 only
d)  1 and 3 only
Answer: C
 Statement 1: Without supplies of fixed nitrogen entering the marine cycle the fixed nitrogen would be used up in about 2000 years. While the overall cycle is similar to that of land, there are different players and modes of transfer for nitrogen in the ocean. Nitrogen enters the water through precipitation, runoff, or as
N2 from the atmosphere
Statement 2: Phytoplankton need nitrogen in biologically available forms for the initial synthesis of organic matter. Nitrogen cannot be utilized by phytoplankton as N2 so it must undergo nitrogen fixation which is performed predominately by cyanobacteria.
Statement 3: Ammonia and urea are released into the water by excretion from plankton. Nitrogen sources are removed from the euphotic zone by the downward movement of the organic matter. This can occur from sinking of phytoplankton, vertical mixing etc.
Bacteria are able to convert ammonia to nitrite and nitrate but they are inhibited by light so this must occur below the euphotic zone.

72 Which of the following Ministries/Departments is responsible for the implementation of the recommendations of the Finance Commission and Central Pay Commissions?
a)  Department of Personnel
b)  Ministry of Home Affairs
c)  Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance
d)  Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation
Answer: C
 The Department of Expenditure is the nodal Department for overseeing the public financial management system in the Central Government and matters connected with State finances.
The Department is also coordinating matters concerning the Ministry of Finance including Parliament-related work of the Ministry

73 Which of the following statements concerning Central Public Sector Enterprises
(CPSEs) is correct?
1.  CPSEs constitute majority of market capitalization of companies listed at major stock exchanges in India
2.  No CPSE can use the market route to borrow funds
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: D
 Statement 1: CPSEs constitute 11.73% and 11.83% of the total market capitalisation of companies listed at BSE and NSE respectively.
The CPSE with the highest market capitalisation is Coal India Ltd. at Rs.1,97,797 crore (BSE) and Rs. 1,97,702 crore (NSE).
Statement 2: The government had freed PSUs to borrow from the markets (this is defined as IEBR or internal and extra-budgetary resources), thereby reducing budgetary support without really cutting back on the size of funding for PSUs.
Many PSUs float their stocks thereby raising money from the market.
 VSNL was the first CPSE to be divested by way of a Public Offer in
1999-00
ONGC Public Offer in 2003-04 has been the largest CPSE FPO.

74 Digital India is an umbrella programme, covering multiple Government Ministries and Departments, which aims to provide the much needed thrust to the nine pillars of growth areas. Which of the following is NOT one of these pillars?
a)  Reforming Government through Technology
b)  Electronic Delivery of Services
c)  Universal Access to Mobile Connectivity
d)  Handheld devices for All
Answer: D
 It weaves together a large number of ideas and thoughts into a single, comprehensive vision so that each of them can be implemented as part of a larger
goal. Overall coordination is being done by the Department of Electronics and
Information Technology (DeitY).
Digital India aims to provide the much needed thrust to the nine pillars of growth areas, namely Broadband Highways, Universal Access to Mobile Connectivity, Public Internet Access Programme, e-Governance: Reforming Government through Technology, e-Kranti - Electronic Delivery of Services, Information for All, Electronics Manufacturing, IT for Jobs and Early Harvest Programmes. Each of these areas is a complex programme in itself and cuts across multiple Ministries and Departments.

75 The First Battle of Panipat is regarded as one of the decisive battles of Indian history. What is/are the reason(s) behind it?
1.  It reinvigorated Lodi's power and reduced the influence of Babur especially in Delhi and Agra
2.  It led to the economic unification of Eastern, Southern India and South-eastern Asia
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: D
 It was fought between the invading forces of Babur and the Lodi Empire. It took place in north India and marked the beginning of the Mughal Empire.
Statement 1: It broke the back of Lodi power, and brought under Babur's control the entire area up to Delhi and Agra. The treasures stored up by Ibrahim Lodi in Agra relieved Babur from his financial difficulties. The rLch territory up to Jaunpur also lay open to Babur
Statement 2: This was one of the earliest battles involving gunpowder firearms and field artillery. But, its real importance lies in the fact that it opened a new phase in the struggle for domination in north India between the Mughals and existing kingdoms.

76 The Union Rural Development Ministry and ISRO, Department of Space have signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) for geo-tagging the assets created under MGNREGA in each gram panchayat. How will it be helpful?
1.  Checking and curbing leakages in MGNREGA
2.  Effective mapping of terrain for future developmental works
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: C
 Annually around 30 lakh assets are created under the rural job schemes across the country.
The MoU was signed after the Ministry had decided that the geo-tagging of such assets will be done on a mission mode to monitor rural development. The asset created under MGNREGA and other schemes will be completely geo-tagged with photograph through Bhuvan Mobile Platform by Gram Rozgar Sahayak or Junior engineer.
The geo-tagging of assets will help to check and curb leakages and for effective mapping of terrain for future developmental works.
It will also help in using of modern space technology for rural development in planning and execution of projects in a transparent manner
It also had become necessary for online recording and monitoring of assets to ensure quality as huge amount of funds under the recommendations of 14th Finance Commission are now flowing through to Gram Panchayats which will in turn lead to poverty reduction in rural areas

77 Who among the following is NOT a member of the present Atomic Energy
Commission?
a)  Prime Minister
b)  National Security Advisor
c)  Cabinet Secretary
d)  Foreign Secretary
Answer: A
 The Indian Atomic Energy Commission was setup in 1948 in the Department of Scientific Research. It is the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) that is under the direct charge of the Prime Minister. He is not a member of the AEC. So, (a) is wrong.
 According to the Resolution constituting the AEC, the Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Atomic Energy is ex-officio Chairman of the Commission.
The other Members of the AEC are appointed for each calendar year on the recommendation of the Chairman, AEC and after approval by the Prime Minster.
Present members (others apart from given options) are Finance Secretary and Secretary Department of Expenditure, Special Secretary and Financial Adviser, Department of Fertilizers, and others can be seen in the Q Source.

78 Consider the following statements about the National Entrepreneurship Network (NEN).
1.  It is an attached office of the Ministry of Entrepreneurship & Skill Development.
2.  NEN facilitates various programs to raise capital from investors and bankers.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: B
 Statement 1: Wadhwani Foundation established the National Entrepreneurship Network (NEN) in 2003. NEN has built a strong network with 600 colleges, 4000 mentors and 3200 faculty in India that continue to inspire, educate
and support emerging entrepreneurs. Statement 2: It provides:
Access to Mentors: NEN facilitates goal based mentoring for entrepreneurs
Access to Funds: NEN facilitates various programs to raise capital from investors and bankers
The National Entrepreneurship Network provides resources to academic institutions to build and manage Entrepreneurship Education infrastructure and programs for students

79 Zika virus disease is an emerging viral disease transmitted through the bite of an infected Aedes mosquito. Which of the following statements with regard to it is correct?
a)  The Zika virus disease is highly prevalent in India.
b)  It does not affect newborns
c)  There is no vaccine or drug available to prevent/ treat Zika virus disease at present
d)  None of the above
Answer: C
 This is the same mosquito that is known to transmit infections like dengue and chikungunya. Zika virus was first identified in Uganda in 1947.
As of now, the disease has not been reported in India. However, the mosquito that transmits Zika virus, namely Aedes aegypti , that also transmits dengue virus, is widely prevalent in India.
Based on the available information of previous outbreaks, severe forms of disease requiring hospitalization is uncommon and fatalities are rare
World Health Organization has declared Zika virus disease to be a Public Health
Emergency of International Concern

80 Biotechnology harnesses cellular and bio-molecular processes to develop technologies and products that help improve our lives. Apart from genetically modified crops for agriculture, biotechnology finds application in
1.  Therapeutics and diagnostics
2.  Processed food and production of useful industrial products
3.  Waste treatment
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  2 only
b)  1 and 3 only
c)  3 only
d)  1, 2 and 3
Answer: D
 Statement 1: Medical biotechnology covers Development of improved medicines (such as antibiotics and recombinant vaccines).
Statement 2: Agricultural Biotechnology is used for development of plant and
animal products with enhanced quantity and quality. Same is applied in industries to develop microorganisms that can help industrial processes
Statement 3: It can be used in bioremediation to clean up soil and water, waste processing and energy production also.

81 The government has amended the RBI Act to constitute a Monetary Policy Committee
(MPC). Consider the following about it.
1.  It will comprise three members from RBI, including the Governor, who will be the ex-officio chairperson of MPC.
2.  There will be no representation from the government
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: A
 Statement 1: The six-member Committee - tasked with bringing "value and transparency to monetary policy decisions" - will comprise three members from RBI, including the Governor, who will be the ex-officio chairperson, a Deputy Governor and one officer of the central bank.
Statement 2: The other three members will be appointed by the Centre on the
recommendations of a search-cum-selection committee to be headed by the Cabinet
Secretary.
"These three members of MPC will be experts in the field of economics or banking or finance or monetary policy and will be appointed for a period of four years and shall not be eligible for re-appointment," according to the statement.
The Committee is to meet four times a year and make public its decisions following each meeting.
http://www.thehindu.com/business/Economy/centre-notifies-amended-rbi-act-to-ush er-in-monetary-policy-committee/article8780360.ece

82 World Environment Day (WED) is the United Nations' most important day for encouraging worldwide awareness and action for the protection of our environment since its inception in 1974. The theme for 2016 WED was based on
a)  Sustainable human habitats
b)  Global network of protected heritage sites
c)  Illegal trade in wildlife
d)  Rising Industrial emissions
Answer: C
 Since it began in 1974, it has grown to become a global platform for public outreach that is widely celebrated in over 100 countries.
Each WED is organized around a theme that focuses attention on a particularly pressing environmental concern. WED 2016 is themed on the illegal trade in wildlife under the slogan 'Go Wild for Life'. The logo and other materials are available for download here.

83 Which of the following public utilities was discontinued by the Government in 2013?
a)  Telegram
b)  Data processing
c)  Community Service Centre
d)  Broadband
Answer: A
 The growing use of mobile phones and Internet had led to steep decline in the usage of the telegraphic service
So, after stopping telegram service for overseas communication earlier this year, we BSNL (with the approval of the Department of Telecommunications) decided to discontinue it for the domestic market from July 2013
In India, the first telegraph message was transmitted live through electrical signals between Calcutta (now Kolkata) and Diamond Harbour, a distance of about 50 km, on November 5, 1850; and the service was opened for the general public in February
1855.
http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/dot-dash-full-stop-telegram-service-ends-ju ly-15/article4806921.ece

84 The only continent through which Tropic of Cancer, Tropic of Capricorn and Equator all pass is
a)  South America
b)  Africa
c)  Asia
d)  Australia
Answer: B
 The Tropic of Cancer passes through North America, Africa and Asia. The Equator passes through South America, Africa and Asia
The Tropic of Capricorn passes through South America, Africa and Australia
Only through Africa do all the three major parallels of latitudes pass.

85 The Bali Road Map is related to
a)  Trade and food security
b)  Climate Change
c)  Fighting trans-national terrorism
d)  Hunger and Malnutrition
Answer: B
 The Bali Road Map was adopted at the 13th Conference of the Parties and the 3rd Meeting of the Parties in December 2007 in Bali. The Road Map is a set of a forward-looking decisions that represent the work that needs to be done under various negotiating "tracks" that is essential to reaching a secure climate future
The Bali Road Map includes the Bali Action Plan, which charts the course for a new negotiating process designed to tackle climate change
The Bali Action Plan is divided into five main categories: shared vision, mitigation, adaptation, technology and financing
The shared vision refers to a long-term vision for action on climate change, including a long-term goal for emission reductions

86 Carbon dioxide is naturally captured from the atmosphere through biological, chemical, or physical processes. Carbon sequestration is the process involved in carbon capture and the long-term storage of atmospheric CO2. Which of the following can artificially achieve similar results?
a)  Sequestration by aging oil fields
b)  Absorption by plastic structures
c)  Simulation of forest Fires
d)  Cloud seeding
Answer: A
  Carbon sequestration describes long-term storage of carbon dioxide or other forms of carbon to either mitigate or defer global warming and avoid dangerous climate change
Artificial processes have been devised to produce similar effects, including large- scale, artificial capture and sequestration of industrially produced CO2 using
subsurface saline aquifers, reservoirs, ocean water, aging oil fields, or other carbon sinks.
Options (b) and (c) generate CO2, not capture it.
Option (d) is linked to inducing rainfall and not capturing carbon
Option (a): Ways to sequester carbon:
Transport of the captured and compressed CO2 (usually in pipelines). Underground injection and geologic sequestration (also referred to as storage) of the CO2 into deep underground rock formations.

87 Which of the following social reforms was/were introduced by Akbar?
1.  He restricted the practice of Sati
2.  Widow Remarriage was banned in view of the exploitation of women.
3.  The sale of intoxicants was restricted
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 3 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  2 only
d)  1, 2 and 3
Answer: A
 Statement 1: Akbar introduced a number of social and educational reforms. He stopped sail, the burning of a widow, unless she herself, of her own free will, persistently desired it. Widows of tender age who had not shared the bed with their husbands were not to be burnt at all.
Statement 2: Widow Remarriage was also legalised. Akbar was against anyone having more than one wife unless the first wife was barren. The age of marriage was raised to 14 for girls and 16 for boys
Statement 3: The sale of wines and spirits was restricted
 Not all these steps were, however, successful. As we know, the success of social legislation depends largely on the willing cooperation of the people. Akbar
was living in an age of superstition and it seems that his social reforms had only limited success
Akbar also revised the educational syllabus, laying more emphasis on moral education and mathematics, and on secular subjects such as agriculture, geometry, astronomy, rules of government, logic, history, etc. He also gave patronage to artists, poets, painters and musicians

88 Apart from Constitutional provisions, which of the following has/have a bearing on the functioning of CAG in India?
a)  Parliamentary laws
b)  Supreme Court Judgments
c)  Instruction of Government of India
d)  All of the above
Answer: D
 Option (a): The Comptroller and Auditor General's (Duties, Powers and
Conditions of Service) Act, 1971 was enacted by the Parliament.
Option (b): For e.g. in Arvind Gupta Vrs. Union of India, the SC dealt with the powers of CAG to Conduct Performance Audit.
Option (c): For e.g. Clarification was sought by CAG from the government once whether Performance Audit falls within the scope of audit by C&AG under the Comptroller and Auditor General's (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service)Act,
1971.
The Department of Economic Affairs instructed that it does.

89 Which of the following is/are the advantages of the minimum tillage system of soil conservation?
1.  Seed germination is higher with minimum tillage system
2.  Less nitrogen has to be added as rate of decomposition of organic matter becomes very fast.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: D
Conservation tillage is any method of soil cultivation that leaves the previous year's crop residue (such as corn stalks or wheat stubble) on fields before and after planting the next crop, to reduce soil erosion and runoff.
In conventional tillage, energy is often wasted and sometimes, soil structure is destroyed. Recently considerable changes have taken place in tillage practices and several new concepts have been introduced namely, minimum tillage, zero tillage, stubble mulch tillage
Minimum tillage is aimed at reducing tillage to the minimum necessary for ensuring a good seedbed, rapid germination, a satisfactory stand and favourable growing conditions
 Advantages of minimum tillage:
Improved soil conditions due to decomposition of plant residues in situ; Higher infiltration caused by the vegetation present on the soil and channels formed by the decomposition of dead roots;
Less resistance to root growth due to improved structure;
Less soil compaction by the reduced movement of heavy tillage vehicles and less soil erosion compared to conventional tillage
Disadvantages of minimum tillage
Seed germination is lower with minimum tillage.
In minimum tillage, more nitrogen has to be added as rate of decomposition of organic matter is slow.
Nodulation is affected in some leguminous crops like peas and broad beans
Sowing operations are difficult with ordinary equipment.
Continuous use of herbicides cause pollution problems and dominance of perennial problematic weeds.
In the light of the above, hence, both statements 1 and 2 are wrong.

90 Bharat Stage is related to
a)  Theatre and Drama
b)  Satellite launches
c)  Vehicular Pollution standards
d)  Food production
Answer: C
 Bharat Stage emission standards, introduced in 2000, are emission standards that have been set up the Central government to regulate the output of air pollutants from internal combustion engine equipment, including motor vehicles.
Emission Norm cover CO, Hydrocarbons ,NOx, HC+NOx , Particulate matter (PM). The different norms are brought into force in accordance with the timeline and
standards set up by the Central Pollution Control Board which comes under the
Ministry of Environment and Forests and Climate Change
The Bharat Stage norms are based on European regulations. In 13 major cities, Bharat Stage IV emission standards were put in place in April 2010. BS-IV norms were supposed to come into effect nationwide from April 2017.

91 What is the objective of a "Citizen Charter"?
a)  To increase the coordination between different departments of the
Government that deal with citizens
b)  To make service-delivery more citizen-friendly
c)  To increase the penetration of Government in remote areas
d)  To provide all government services free of cost of citizens
Answer: B
 Citizen's Charter is a document which represents a systematic effort to focus on the commitment of the Organisation towards its Citizens in respects of
Standard of Services, Information, Grievance Redress etc.
The Citizen's Charter is not legally enforceable and, therefore, is non-justiciable
However, it is a tool for facilitating the delivery of services to citizens with specified standards, quality and time frame etc. with commitments from the Organisation and its clients.
A good Citizen's Charter should have the following components:- Vision and Mission Statement of the Organisation
Details of Business transacted by the Organisation
Details of 'Citizens' or 'Clients'
Statement of services including standards, quality, time frame etc. provided to each Citizen/ Client group separately and how/ where to get the services Details of Grievance Redress Mechanism and how to access it
Expectations from the 'Citizens' or 'Clients'
Additional commitments such as compensation in the event of failure of service delivery.

92 Which of the following is/are related to generation of Bio-energy?
1.  Pyrolysation
2.  Atmospheric and high pressure gasification
3.  Bio-methanation
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1 only
d)  1, 2 and 3
Answer: D
 Bioenergy is energy derived from the conversion of biomass where biomass may be used directly as fuel, or processed into liquids and gases.
Traditional biomass use refers to the use of wood, charcoal, agricultural resides and animal dung for cooking and heating in the residential sector. It tends to have very low conversion efficiency (10% to 20%) and often unsustainable supply.
The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy has proposed to take up focused
RD&D projects in the area of bio-energy resource identification and biomass conversion to energy through combustion, pyrolysation, atmospheric and high pressure gasification, plasma, bio-methanation and Biogas.
In favourable circumstances, producing energy from biomass can be cost competitive today, in particular heat.
However, in many cases, economic incentives are currently needed to off-set cost differences between bioenergy and fossil fuel-generated electricity and heat. Such support is justified by the environmental, energy security and socio-economic advantages associated with sustainable bioenergy.
http://www.downtoearth.org.in/blog/don-t-get-dazzled-by-these-stars-43301

93 Water finds a mention in the Constitution of India in the
a)  Directive Principles of State Policy
b)  Seventh Schedule
c)  Both (a) and (b)
d)  None
Answer: B
  It has relation to Article 246 (see here http://mowr.gov.in/forms/list.aspx?lid=307&Id=4)Article 262 (inter-state river water disputes), and Seventh Schedule (division of powers between Centre and States on water resources).
In case of disputes relating to waters, Article 262 provides:
Parliament may by law provide for the adjudication of any dispute or complaint with respect to the use, distribution or control of the waters of, or in, any inter-State river or river valley.
Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Parliament may, by law provide that neither the Supreme Court nor any other court shall exercise jurisdiction in respect of any such dispute or complaint as is referred to in Clause

94 Which of the following statements is INCORRECT about the Prime Minister's National
Relief Fund (PMNRF).
a)  It was constituted by the Parliament.
b)  It is primarily utilized to render immediate relief to families of those killed in natural calamities
c)  The fund consists entirely of public contributions and does not get any budgetary support.
d)  Disbursements from PMNRF are made with the approval of the Prime
Minister
Answer: A
 It was established with public contributions to assist displaced persons from Pakistan
The resources of the PMNRF are now utilized primarily to render immediate relief to families of those killed in natural calamities like floods, cyclones and earthquakes, etc. and to the victims of the major accidents and riots. Assistance from PMNRF is also rendered, to partially defray the expenses for medical treatment like heart surgeries, kidney transplantation, cancer treatment, etc.
The fund consists entirely of public contributions and does not get any budgetary support
The corpus of the fund is invested with PSU banks in various forms. Disbursements are made with the approval of the Prime Minister
PMNRF has not been constituted by the Parliament. The fund is recognized as a Trust under the Income Tax Act and the same is managed by Prime Minister or multiple delegates for national causes
PMNRF operates from the Prime Minister's Office, South Block, New Delhi and does not pays any license fee.
PMNRF is exempt under Income Tax Act, 1961 under Section 10 and 139 for return purposes.

95 Consider the following statements about developments in Science and Technology in
India in the Medieval Period
1.  Indians could take full advantage of growing international trade due to India's modern naval technology of ship-building which was at par with Europeans.
2.  The mechanical clock technology was not known to India even before Europeans invented it.
3.  Artillery technology was developed in India before European developed it, but the
European artillery technology came to be superior to that of India's. Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 only
c)  2 and 3 only
d)  1, 2 and 3
Answer: B
 Statement 1: We could not take full advantage of growing international trade due to our weakness in the naval field. The Turkish and Mughal ruling classes had no traditions of connection with the sea.
While the Mughals were quick to recognise the importance of foreign trade and for that reason, gave patronage and support to the European trading companies, they had little understanding of the importance of naval power in the economic development of a nation.
Statement 2: India's lagging behind in the field of naval power was a reflection of its growing backwardness in the field of science and technology all round. Even the mechanical clock which brought together all the European inventions in the field of dynamics was not known in India during the seventeenth century.
Statement 3: The superiority of the Europeans in the field of artillery was freely acknowledged. Even where Indian craftsmen were able to copy European developments for example in the field of ship-building- little ability to innovate was displayed

96 Which of the following statements about the Steel Sector in India is INCORRECT?
a)  India produces both pig iron and sponge iron
b)  Steel prices in India are administered and regulated by the Government
c)  Iron & steel are importable and exportable without restrictions as per the extant policy
d)  India is behind China in volume of steel production
Answer: B
 Option (a): India produces Steel > Sponge Iron > Pig iron.
Option (b): Steel industry was de-licensed and de-controlled in 1991 & 1992 respectively. Price regulation of iron & steel was abolished on 16.1.1992. Since then steel prices are determined by the interplay of market forces.
Option (c): Just like other commodities, they are allowed to be imported or exported freely.
Option (d): China remained the world's largest crude steel producer in 2014 (823
mt) followed by Japan (110.7 mt), the USA (88.2 mt) and India (86.5 mt) at the 4 th position.

97 Which of the following statements about the official Mir Bakshi of Mughal period is correct?
a)  The head of the military department was called the Mir Bakhshi
b)  The Mir Bakshi was the head of the intelligence and information agencies of the empire
c)  Both (a) and (b)
d)  None
Answer: C
 It was the Mir bakhshi and not the diwan who was considered the head of the nobility. Therefore, only the leading grandees were appointed to this post
Recommendations for appointment to mansabs or for promotions, etc, were made to the emperor through the mir bakhshi.
Once the emperor had accepted a recommendation, it was sent to the diwan for confirmation and for assigning a jagir to the appointee. The same procedure was followed in case of promotions.
The mir bakhsi was also the head of the intelligence and information agencies of the empire. Intelligence officers (bands) and news reporters (waqia-nawis) were posted
to all parts of the empire. Their reports were presented to the emperor at the court through the mir bakhshi.

98 A "Point of Order" raised in the Parliament is related to
a)  Order of sitting of opposition and ruling party members in the House
b)  Matters of urgent attention brought before the Government
c)  Interpretation or enforcement of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business
d)  Zero hour matters that are raised without any notice
Answer: C
 A Point of Order relates to the interpretation or enforcement of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the House or convention or such Articles
of the Constitution as regulate the business of the House and raises a question which is within the cognizance of the Speaker.
A Point of Order may be raised only in relation to the business before the House at the moment, provided that the Speaker may permit a Member to raise a Point of Order during the interval between the termination of one item of business and the commencement of another if it relates to maintenance of order in, or arrangement of business before, the House.
A Member may formulate a Point of Order and the Speaker shall decide whether the point raised is a Point of Order and if so give the decision thereon, which is final.

99 Consider the following about the World Bank.
1.  The World Bank is led by a Board of Governors, made up of a representative for each of the shareholder countries of the Bank
2.  The World Bank President is appointed by the majority shareholders of the bank from nominees of all nationalities on rotation basis.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: A
 Statement 1: The World Bank is led by a Board of Governors, made up of a representative for each of the 185 shareholder countries of the Bank. The Board of Governors serves as the policy-making body for the Bank. Because it only meets once a year, the Board of Governors elects a 24-person Board of Directors (also called Executive Directors) which meets bi-weekly
Statement 2: The President of the World Bank is responsible for the overall management of the Bank, and s/he serves as the Chair of the Bank's Board of Directors. The president holds a five-year, renewable term.
There is a long-standing, informal agreement dating from the establishment of the World Bank in 1944 that its president will be a United States national, while the managing director of the International Monetary Fund will be a European national. Therefore, the past ten Bank presidents have been American. There has never been a female Bank president.
For the selection of the President, the Board of Directors must approve the nominee by a supermajority of 85%.
The voting power of each member is based on its share of contributions to the
Bank, which is expressed as a percentage of the total of votes held by all of the shareholders.
The US is the largest shareholder in the Bank with 16.41% of the votes. The voting weight of the US gives it the ability to block a supermajority decision The five largest shareholders appoint an executive director, while other member countries are represented by elected executive directors

100 Zimmerman Plan, with reference to the Indian freedom struggle, was about
a)  Mobilizing Indian support from abroad to incite a rebellion against the British government
b)  A carefully drafted strategy to bring constitutional reforms via the Central
Executive Council
c)  Blowing up all Indian presses publishing in English language
d)  Supporting the Home Rule League in a clandestine manner
Answer: A
 The "Berlin committee for Indian independence" was established in 1915 by Virendra Nath Chattopadhya, including Bhupendra Nath Dutt & Lala Hardayal under "Zimmerman plan" with the full backing of German foreign office.
Their goal was mainly to achieve the following four objectives: Mobilize Indian revolutionaries abroad.
Incite rebellion among Indian troops stationed abroad
Send volunteers and arms to India
Even to Organized an armed invasion of British India to gain India's independence and send British back to home
