

1 The difference between a Sanctuary and a National Park mainly lies in
a)  Area, size and government control
b)  PRIs v/s state government control
c)  Rights of people living inside
d)  Regulation of poaching and hunting
Answer: C
 Consider this. Anamudi Shola National Park lies only in 7.5 Km2 whereas Pulicat Lake Bird Sanctuary lies in more than 327 km2. On the other hand, Temple Island sanctuary in Andaman is in merely 1 km2 area, whereas Mahatma Gandhi Marine National Park in Andaman lies in more than 281 Km2. So, area and size is not the essential difference between both. Option (a) is wrong.
PRis do not control the activities in sanctuaries or national parks. Either the state governments, or the National Board of Wildlife does so. Option (c) is wrong.
Poaching and hunting are regulated in both. So, option (d) is also wrong.
The difference between a Sanctuary and a National Park mainly lies in
the vesting of rights of people living inside. Unlike a Sanctuary, where certain rights can be allowed, in a National Park, no rights are allowed.
No grazing of any livestock shall also be permitted inside a National Park while in a
Sanctuary, the Chief Wildlife Warden may regulate, control or prohibit it.
In addition, while any removal or exploitation of wildlife or forest produce from a Sanctuary requires the recommendation of the State Board for Wildlife, removal etc., from a National Park requires recommendation of the National Board for Wildlife (However, as per orders of Hon'ble Supreme Court dated 9th May 2002 in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 337 of 1995, such removal/ exploitation from a Sanctuary also requires recommendation of the Standing Committee of National Board for Wildlife).

2 Wular Lake, the largest freshwater lake in India, has been formed due to
a)  Flooding of many small riverine islands
b)  Ox-bow lakes
c)  Filling of glacier basin
d)  Tectonic activity
Answer: D
Some lakes are the result of the action of glaciers and ice sheets, while others have been formed by wind, river action, and human activities.
A meandering river across a flood plain forms cut-offs that later develop into ox- bow lakes. Spits and bars form lagoons in the coastal areas, eg the Chilika lake, the Pulicat lake, the Kolleru lake.
Most of the fresh water lakes are in the Himalayan region. They are of glacial origin. In other words, they formed when glaciers dug out a basin, which was later filled
with snowmelt.
The Wular lake in Jammu and Kashmir, in contrast, is the result of the tectonic activity. It is the largest freshwater lake in India.

3 Which of the following can be called as 'factors of production'?
1.  Human labour
2.  Land
3.  Consumer goods
4.  Capital goods
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1, 2 and 3 only
b)  2, 3 and 4 only
c)  1 only
d)  1, 2 and 4 only
Answer: D
Human labour and land contribute to production. So, statements 1 and
2 are correct.
Capital goods are machines which are used to produce other goods. So, statement 4 is also correct.'
Consumer goods are finished products. They are not factors of production, but products. So, statement 3 is wrong.
It describes the inputs that are used in the production of goods or services in the attempt to make an economic profit. The factors of production include land, labor, capital and entrepreneurship.
Capital can be further divided into fixed (machines etc) and working capital (money, raw material etc).

4 Consider the following statements.
1.  Assertion (a): Coastal regions in India do not have irrigation facilities.
2.  Reason (R): Farming in coastal areas is completely rain-fed due to high rainfall near the sea.
In the context of the above, which of these is correct?
a)  A is correct, and R is an appropriate explanation of A.
b)  A is correct, but R is not an appropriate explanation of A.
c)  A is correct, but R is incorrect.
d)  Both A and R are incorrect.
Answer: D
Rainfall in coastal areas is not adequate, especially some of the eastern coasts. This is why coastal areas have a well-developed irrigation infrastructure. Statement A is wrong, and so is R.
Groundwater system irrigation is the largest in India. In 2010, only about
35% of total agricultural land in India was reliably irrigated. About 2/3rd cultivated land in India is dependent on monsoons.
Riverine plains in India are well-irrigated. In contrast, plateau regions such as the
Deccan plateau have low levels of irrigation.

5 Consider the following statements about Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO).
1.  It is an agency of the United Nations
2.  It serves only developing and Least Developed Countries (LDCs).
3.  It created the Codex Alimentarius Commission to develop food standards.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  2 and 3 only
b)  1 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  2 only
Answer: C
 Its world headquarters are located in Rome. It leads international efforts to defeat hunger.
Serving both developed and developing countries, FAO acts as a neutral forum where all nations meet as equals to negotiate agreements and debate policy.
FAO is also a source of knowledge and information, and helps developing countries and countries in transition modernize and improve agriculture, forestry and fisheries practices, ensuring good nutrition and food security for all.
FAO and the World Health Organization created the Codex Alimentarius Commission in 1961 to develop food standards, guidelines and texts such as codes of practice under the Joint FAO/ WHO Food Standards Programme.

6 Use of chemical fertilizers is discouraged because
1.  Its minerals take long time to become available to plants.
2.  It may kill soil micro-organisms.
3.  Agricultural run-off may cause eutrophication of fresh water bodies
4.  High levels of fertilizer may cause the breakdown of the symbiotic relationships between plant roots and mycorrhizal fungi.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  2 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1, 3 and 4 only
d)  2, 3 and 4 only
Answer: D
 Chemical fertilizers provide minerals which dissolve in water and are immediately available to plants. So, statement 1 is wrong.
But these minerals may not be retained in the soil for long. They may escape from the soil and pollute groundwater, rivers and lakes. So, statement 3 is correct.
Chemical fertilizers can also kill bacteria and other microorganisms in the soil. This means some time after their use, the soil will be less fertile than ever before, and some symbiotic relations based on micro-organisms will be broken. So, statement 2 and 4 are correct.
It has been explained very well here. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fertilizer#Environmental_effects
UPSC 2015 Prelims question statements on Nitrogen fertilizers was straight lifted from here.

7 Apart from Article 21A, which of the following constitutional articles have a bearing on education?
1.  Article 3
2.  Article 13
3.  Article 28
4.  Article 30
5.  Article 51A
6.  Article 243G
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1, 2 and 6 only
b)  3, 4 and 5 only
c)  2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 only
d)  All of the above
Answer: C
You should remember important constitutional articles.
Article 3 is about creation/alteration etc of states. Hence, statement 1 is wrong. Article 13 is about laws inconsistent with or in derogation of the fundamental rights
(read education here). So, statement 2 is correct.
Article 28 is about the freedom as to attendance at religious instruction or religious worship in certain educational institutions. So, statement 3 is correct.
Article 30 is about the right of minorities to establish and administer educational institutions. So, statement 4 is also correct.
Article 51A is set of fundamental duties: one of which is to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and reform. So, statement 5 is also correct.
Article 243G talks about the powers/authority/responsibility of Panchayats, which also covers school education. So, statement 6 is also correct.
http://mhrd.gov.in/constitutional-provision
Check other tabs to the right under constitutional provisions.

8 Who is the 'Visitor' of Central Universities in India?
a)  Prime Minister of India
b)  President of India
c)  An Academician appointed by Union Ministry of Human Resource
Development (MHRD)
d)  Chairman, University Grants Commission (UGC)
Answer: B
 The President of India is the Visitor of 114 central institutions. This includes Central Universities, NITs, IITs, IISERs etc. under the
administrative control of Ministry of HRD. Some of the institutions are under the
administrative control of Ministry of Shipping, Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Sports, Ministry of Textiles and Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers. The powers of the President as a Visitor of these institutions are defined in their respective Acts.
Some of his powers are to inspect the university, chair conference of Directors, power to annul unconstitutional provisions/rules w.r.t to the Universities.
http://mhrd.gov.in/higher_education

9 Which of the following are MDG 2015 targets which have been achieved by India?
1.  Universal primary education
2.  Reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS
3.  Eliminate poverty from urban areas
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 only
b)  1 and 3 only
c)  2 only
d)  2 and 3 only
Answer: C
Eliminating poverty from urban areas is not a target under MDG 2015. Hence, statement 3 is incorrect.
India has neither been able to nor likely to achieve universal primary education by the end of 2015, as per a Ministry report (given below). So, statement 1 is also wrong.
MDG 6: Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases

10 How has India benefitted from signing the Indus water treaty with Pakistan?
a)  The treaty declares India to be the owner of Indus water resources.
b)  The treaty bans Pakistan from constructing and embankments or dams on the
Indus river system.
c)  As per the treaty, to obtain water from Indus, Pakistan is obliged to share it irrigation infrastructure with India.
d)  None of the above
Answer: D
According to this agreement; three rivers: ravi, satluj and beyas were given to india and the other three: sindh, jehlam and chenab were given to Pakistan. So, option (a) is clearly wrong.
The treaty does not ban Pakistan from creating dams, as it is a lower riparian state. India's embankment construction activities may be questioned by Pakistan, if it threatens its water resources. Recent Kishenganga water dispute is a case in point. Option (b) is incorrect.
Option (c) was not provided for by the treaty.
A transition period of 10 years was permitted in which India was bound to supply water to Pakistan from these rivers until Pakistan was able to build the canal system for utilization of waters of Jhelum, Chenab and the Indus itself, allocated to it under the treaty.
Pakistan also received one-time financial compensation for the loss of water from the eastern rivers. India has now secured full rights for use of the waters of the three rivers allocated to it. The treaty resulted in partitioning of the rivers rather than sharing of their waters.
The countries agree to exchange data and co-operate in matters related to the treaty. For this purpose, treaty creates the Permanent Indus Commission, with a commissioner appointed by each country.

11 Which of the following organizations publish the 'International Poverty Line'?
a)  United Nations Development Program (UNDP)
b)  World Food Programme (WFP)
c)  International Labour Organization (ILO)
d)  World Bank
Answer: D
 The World Bank has been publishing poverty line since
1990 World Development Report (WDR) on Poverty. It has anchored its international poverty lines to the national poverty lines used in the poorest countries.
In 2008, the World Bank came out with a figure (revised largely due to inflation) of
$1.25 at 2005 purchasing-power parity (PPP). The common international poverty line has in the past been roughly $1 a day
In 2015 World Bank updated international poverty line to US $1.90 a day. Determining the poverty line is usually done by finding the total cost of all the
essential resources that an average human adult consumes in one year.
Note: World Bank should not be confused with the United Nations World Bank
Group, a member of the United Nations Economic and Social Council.

12 The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGa) intends to enhance livelihood security in rural areas by providing at least 100 days of guaranteed wage employment in a financial year to willing households. Which of the following statements about it is INCORRECT?
a)  Any type of skilled or unskilled work can be allotted under MGNREGA.
b)  One of the aims of MGNREGA is to create durable assets.
c)  MGNREGA is to be implemented mainly by gram panchayats (GPs) as the involvement of contractors is banned.
d)  If work is not provided within 15 days of applying, applicants are entitled to
an unemployment allowance.
Answer: A
Only unskilled manual work is allotted under MGNREGA. So, statement 1 is incorrect.
MGNREGA aims at creating durable assets like roads, canals etc. So, statement 2 is correct.
Contractors cannot be used in allotting MGNREGA work. So, statement 3 is correct. It aims to guarantee the 'right to work'. Employment is to be provided within 5 km
of an applicant's residence, and minimum wages are to be paid. If work is not
provided within 15 days of applying, applicants are entitled to an unemployment allowance. Thus, employment under MGNREGA is a legal entitlement. So, statement 4 is also correct.
The statute is hailed by the government as "the largest and most ambitious social security and public works programme in the world". In its World Development Report 2014, the World Bank termed it a "stellar example of rural development. Work is provided to every household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work.
Apart from providing economic security and creating rural assets, NREGA can help in protecting the environment, empowering rural women, reducing rural-urban migration and fostering social equity, among others.

13 Apart from Supreme Court, writs to enforce fundamental rights can be issued by
1.  District Courts
2.  National Police Commission
3.  Lok Adalats
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1, 2 and 3 only
b)  1 and 3 only
c)  2 only
d)  None of the above
Answer: D
The Parliament is authorized to extend the power to issue writs to any other court other than the SC and the HCs. But it has not extended the same to any other body in India. So, all statements are wrong.
Lok adalat and District courts thus only solve disputes and do not interfere pro- actively in matter of violations of fundamental rights.
National Police Commissions are constituted by government to reform the police system in the country. So, statement 2 is also wrong.

14 Village Grain Banks Scheme is concerned with
a)  Providing loans to small and marginal farmers in case of crop loss
b)  Providing facility to borrow food grains in food scarce and calamity hit areas
c)  Giving loans for food supply chain creation in rural areas
d)  Providing a single window mechanism for farmers to procure agricultural inputs
Answer: B
 Since 2004, it is being run by Department of Food & Public Distribution. The main objective of the scheme was to provide safeguard against starvation during the period of natural calamity or during lean season when the marginalized food insecure households did not have sufficient resources to purchase rations.
Such people in need of food grains will be able to borrow food grains from the Village Grain Bank. The grain banks are to be set up in food scarce areas like the drought prone areas, the hot and cold desert areas, tribal areas and the inaccessible hilly areas which remain cut off because of natural calamities like floods, etc.
These villages are to be notified by the concerned State Government/Union Territory. The scheme envisages inclusion of all willing BPL/AAY families in the villages to be identified by the State Government in food deficit areas.
The quantity to be lent and the period of repayment is to be decided by the Group themselves. Village Panchayat/Gram Sabha, Self Help Group for NGOs etc are identified by the state governments and eligible for running the Grain banks.
The scheme has been discontinued w.e.f. 2014.
Improvisation Chapter 4: Economics 9th NCERT: Page 52

15 Wangala Festival is
a)  a major religious procession of Khonds in Sikkim
b)  annual post-harvest festival of the Garos tribes of North east India
c)  a literary event commemorating the writings of vernacular language authors of eastern India
d)  None of the above
Answer: B
The Wangala is a Garo post-harvest festival that marks the end of the agricultural year. It is an act of thanksgiving to the sun god of fertility, known as Misi-A-Gilpa-Saljong-Galapa.
A nagara (a special drum used for calling the people on solemn occasions) is beaten. The social aspect of the Wangala Festival goes on in the villages for a number of days, with eating, drinking and merrymaking.
This is the most popular festival of the Garo Hills, and is held in November, the precise date being fixed by the headman.
The men and women dance in mirthful gaiety with the beating of drums, blowing of the buffalo horn trumpets and bamboo flutes. The men wear dhotis, half-jackets and turbans with feathers. The women wear colourful dresses made of silk, blouses and a head-wrap with feathers.
The highlight of the festival is when 300 dancers and 100 drums descend on the field in all their splendour in celebration.
Source: http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-features/tp-fridayreview/moment ous-movements/article7135285.ece
http://www.thehindu.com/features/friday-review/music/rahman-team-to-record-wan gala-beat-for-cwg-ceremony/article47219.ece

16 In India, Minimum Support Prices (MSP) are announced for
1.  Pulses
2.  Oilseeds
3.  Tea
4.  Coffee
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1, 3 and 4 only
d)  All of the above
Answer: A
 You can see the list of crops here
http://eands.dacnet.nic.in/PDF/MSP17.06.2015.pdf
Minimum Support Price (MSP) is a form of market intervention by the Government of India to insure agricultural producers against any sharp fall in farm prices.
The minimum support prices are announced by the Government of India at the beginning of the sowing season for certain crops on the basis of the recommendations of the Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices (CACP).
The major objectives are to support the farmers from distress sales and to procure food grains for public distribution. In case the market price for the commodity falls below the announced minimum price due to bumper production and glut in the market, govt. agencies purchase the entire quantity offered by the farmers at the announced minimum price.

17 Gold Monetisation Scheme (GMS) 2015 is available to
a)  Only Non-Resident Indians (NRIs)
b)  Both NRIs and resident Indians
c)  Only Indian citizens with income above a certain threshold
d)  All resident Indians
Answer: D
It was launched to reduce the physical demand for gold and fish out
20,000 tonnes of the precious metal lying idle with households and institutions.
GMS 2015 will offer option to resident Indians to deposit their precious metal and earn an interest on it and will replace the existing Gold Deposit Scheme (GDS) 1999.
All residents can invest in this scheme but are subjected to Know Your
Customer (KYC) Scheme. The tagline of the Scheme is,
18 Consider the following about Rhizobium.
1.  It colonises legume plant's root nodules.
2.  It provides food to those symbiotic species which cannot manufacture food.
3.  It grows by the technique of vegetative propagation.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  2 only
Answer: A
Rhizobium is a soil bacteria that fixes nitrogen, so it can't manufacture food. Hence, statement 2 is incorrect.
Only plants are capable of growth through vegetative propagation (i.e. growing another full plant with parts of a plant). Hence, statement 3 is incorrect.
Both bacteria and blue-green algae can fix nitrogen directly from the atmosphere, but this is less vital to plant development than the symbiotic relationship between the bacteria genus Rhizobium and leguminous plants and certain trees and shrubs.
Some nitrogen-fixing bacteria, such as Azotobacter, Clostridium pasteurianum, and Klebsiella pneumoniae, are free-living, whereas species of Rhizobium live in an intimate association with leguminous plants. Rhizobium organisms in the soil recognize and invade the root hairs of their specific
plant host, enter the plant tissues
In return for secretions (food) from their host that encourage their growth and multiplication,

19 Which authority in India maintains the Voter's list for a particular state?
a)  Chief Electoral Officer of the State
b)  District Magistrates of the concerned areas
c)  Chief Secretary
d)  Zila Parishad
Answer: A
In a democratic election, the list of those who are eligible to vote is prepared much before the election and given to everyone. This list is officially called the Electoral Roll and is commonly known as the Voters' List.
Election Commission of India has been transparent enough and has been urging its CEOs in the states to set up their own web-sites too.
The CEO of a state is usually a senior IAS officer.

20 Which of these may NOT be a good reason to say that elections in a certain country are democratic?
a)  If it has very large voter base.
b)  If an independent and powerful body supervises elections.
c)  If all candidates have a fair chance of competing and winning in elections.
d)  If the losing parties peacefully accept the electoral verdict.
Answer: A
There may be confusion between option (a) and (c). Option (a) is more appropriate because merely a large voter base does not ensure successful and democratic elections. For e.g. Iraq may have a large voter base, many agencies alleged that its 2003 elections were not democratic. Malpractices, rigging etc can take place in countries with large voter base. In such cases, elections will not be fair and democratic
Options (c) and (d) show the political situation in the country. For e.g. if in Pakistan, the incumbent government does not have any chances of losing (as it controls state institutions), the elections may not be considered democratic!
To ensure the above option (b) is necessary.

21 Magnesium deficiency in plants can cause degradation of chlorophyll in old leaves. In what type of soil is Magnesium deficiency most likely to occur due to leaching?
a)  Red soil with high loam content
b)  Strongly acidic, light and sandy soils
c)  Clayey soil which has high mineral adhesion
d)  Any soil in areas of moderate rainfall
Answer: B
In strongly acidic, light, sandy soils magnesium can be easily leached away. So, option (b) is correct.
In all other soils, where adhesion, denseness or less leaching occurs, magnesium may not be leached. So, options (a), (c) and (d) are incorrect.
Magnesium is an essential macro nutrient found from 0.2-0.4% dry matter and is necessary for normal plant growth.
Magnesium has an important role in photosynthesis because it forms the central atom of chlorophyll. Therefore, without sufficient amounts of magnesium, plants begin to degrade the chlorophyll in the old leaves
Low amounts of Mg lead to a decrease in photosynthetic and enzymatic activity within the plants.
Plants deficient in magnesium also produce smaller, woodier fruits.
Excess potassium, generally due to fertilizers, further aggravates the stress from the magnesium deficiency, as does aluminium toxicity.
Applying home-made compost mulch can prevent leaching during excessive rainfall and provide plants with sufficient amounts of nutrients, including magnesium

22 International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights does NOT
recognize which human right?
a)  Right to work opportunity
b)  Right to social security and insurance
c)  Right to adequate housing
d)  Right against indulgement in war by the State
Answer: D
 ICESCR is a multilateral treaty adopted by the UN General Assembly in 1966, coming into force since 1976.
It commits its parties to work toward the granting of economic, social, and cultural rights (ESCR) to the Non-Self-Governing and Trust Territories and individuals, including labour rights and the right to health, the right to education, and the right to an adequate standard of living. As of 2015, the Covenant has 164 parties. Six countries, including the United States, have signed but not ratified the Covenant
The Covenant is monitored by the UN Committee on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights.

23 Why is the colour of a candle flame yellow, whereas flame of a kitchen stove is blue?
a)  Temperature in candle flame is higher than that of kitchen stove
b)  The amount of fuel burning per unit of time is very less in a candle as compared to a kitchen stove
c)  Fuel burns completely in a stove and has better exposure to oxygen than in a candle
d)  All of the above
Answer: C
The LPG gas in the stove is a Saturated Hydrocarbon. Being a gas with large surface area, it gets sufficient oxygen for burning.
Paraffin wax in candles is unsaturated hydrocarbon. Since its a solid, it does not burn completely due to insufficient oxygen reaching to the fuel (inner portion). This causes a bright yellow flame to form and release Carbon Dioxide on combustion.
In the most common type of flame, hydrocarbon flames, the most important factor determining color is oxygen supply and the extent of fuel- oxygen pre-mixing, which determines the rate of combustion and thus the
temperature and reaction paths, thereby producing different color hues.
Different flame types of a Bunsen burner depend on oxygen supply. In the diagram above, on the left a rich fuel with no premixed oxygen produces a yellow sooty diffusion flame; but on the right a lean fully oxygen premixed flame produces no soot and the flame color blue.
The same thing happens in a candle and a stove.

24 A 'by-election' is held when
a)  A party candidate during elections withdraws or dies
b)  Vacancy caused by death or resignation of a legislator is to be filled between general elections
c)  The Election Commission of India thinks it to be in the best-interest of the nation.
d)  There is no decisive winner in a general election
Answer: B
 In most cases these elections occur when the incumbent died or resigned, but they also occur when the incumbent becomes ineligible to continue in office (because of a recall, ennoblement, criminal conviction, or failure to maintain a minimum attendance).
Less commonly, these elections have been called when a constituency election is invalidated by voting irregularities.

25 In a wildlife sanctuary, generally which of the following activities are regulated?
1.  Plantation and cultivation
2.  Grazing
3.  Tourism
4.  Scientific research
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 4 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1 and 2 only
d)  All of the above
Answer: D
 To protect our flora and fauna and their habitats, protected areas called sanctuaries, national parks and biosphere reserves have been earmarked. Plantation, cultivation, grazing, felling trees, hunting and poaching are prohibited there.
As per the Wildlife Act, The Chief Wildlife Warden may, on application, grant to any person a permit to enter or reside in a sanctuary for all or any of the following purposes, namely:
Investigation or study of wildlife and purposes ancillary or incidental thereto;
Photography; Scientific research; Tourism;
Transaction of lawful business with any person residing in the sanctuary.

26 Which of the following describes the 'Mission' of the Atomic Energy Regulatory
Board most appropriately?
a)  Safeguarding public health and environment from hazards of nuclear energy
b)  Addressing energy security of the nations by establishing high endnuclear power stations
c)  Supervising quality research in matters of fundamental nuclear energy to serve national interest
d)  Oversee the technical operations of nuclear power centres in India
Answer: A
 The Mission of the AERB is to ensure the use of ionising radiation and nuclear energy in India does not cause undue risk to the health of people and the environment.
It was established in 1983 by the President of India.
AERB is supported in its functions by a number of committees. Members of all the AERB committees are recognized experts with long experience in the relevant fields. The regulatory authority of AERB is derived from the rules and notifications promulgated under the Atomic Energy Act, 1962 and the Environmental (Protection) Act, 1986.

27 Consider the following statements.
1.  It lies in the Satpura Range of Madhya Pradesh.
2.  It includes Bori sanctuary and Satpura national park.
3.  It is a part of the World Network of Biosphere Reserves, UNESCO.
The above statements refer to?
a)  Panna Biosphere Reserve
b)  Panchmari Biosphere Reserve
c)  Achanakmar-Amarkantak Biosphere Reserve
d)  Simlipal Biosphere Reserve
Answer: B
 The conservation area was created in 1999 by the
Indian government. It also houses Pachmarhi Sanctuary.
The reserve is composed primarily of forest habitats, and is an important transition zone between the forest species of western and eastern India.
The endemic fauna includes chinkara, nilgai, wild dogs, the Indian Wolf,
bison, Indian giant squirrels, and flying squirrels.

28 Why the difference between the durations of day and night is felt hardly at
Kanyakumari but not so much in Kashmir?
a)  Due to difference of altitude of two places above Mean Sea Level(MSL)
b)  Due to difference in latitudes of two places
c)  Due to difference in longitudes of two places
d)  Due to difference in proximity with ocean of the two places
Answer: B
 The latitudinal extent influences the duration of the day and night, as one moves from south to north.
At the Equator, the daytime period is always almost twelve hours in length, no matter what the season. The sun always rises nearly perpendicular to the horizon, and moves in a similar fashion.
In other latitudes, sun's rays are more slanted than they are at equator. So, its natural that days will be shorter in higher latitudes (as evening and night are caused earlier due to slant of sun's rays).
As latitude increases to 80

29 Consider the following statements.
1.  Lok Sabha exercises more powers in matters of money bills than Rajya Sabha.
2.  Council of Ministers can be appointed only by the Lok Sabha.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: A
 Once the Lok Sabha passes the budget of the government or any other money related law, the Rajya Sabha cannot reject it. The Rajya Sabha can only delay it by 14 days or suggest changes in it. The Lok Sabha may or may not accept these changes. Thus, statement 1 is correct.
Council of Ministers is not appointed by the Lok Sabha. It is done by the President. Ministers can come both from Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha. Statement 2 is incorrect.

30 Consider the following statements about In-vitro fertilization.
1.  It leads to irreversible genetic changes in the embryo.
2.  It is illegal in India.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: D
Though nations like Costa Rica, and China (for some time) banned IVF, it is not banned in India. In fact, the second successful IVF birth took place in India. So, statement 2 is wrong.
Even if the 
genetic disorder are very little. Otherwise, genetic changes do not occur in a 
In vitro fertilization or fertilisation (IVF) is a process by which an egg is fertilised by sperm outside the body: in vitro ("in glass"). The fertilised egg (zygote) is cultured for 2

31 Even though electromagnetism is far stronger than gravitation, electrostatic attraction is not relevant for large celestial bodies. Why?
1.  Net electric charge of such bodies is zero.
2.  Electromagnetic force is a short-range force.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: A
Electromagnetic attraction is not relevant for large celestial bodies, such as planets, stars, and galaxies, simply because such bodies contain equal numbers of protons and electrons and so have a net electric charge of zero. Nothing "cancels" gravity, since it is only attractive, unlike electric forces which can be attractive or repulsive. So, statement 1 is correct.
Electromagnetism is infinite-ranged like gravity. So, statement 2 is wrong.
Gravitation is by far the weakest of the four interactions. For e.g. even a small magnet is able to hold the pin against the gravitational pull of the entire Earth!
Yet gravitation is very important for macroscopic objects and over macroscopic distances for the following reasons. Gravitation:
is the only interaction that acts on all particles having mass, energy and/or momentum;
has an infinite range, like electromagnetism but unlike strong and weak interaction;
cannot be absorbed, transformed, or shielded against;
always attracts and never repels.

32 APJ Abdul Kalam Amrut Yojna relates to
a)  Providing one cooked meal to pregnant, lactating women in tribal areas
b)  Improving the vaccination rates in rural India to tackle preventable diseases
c)  Registering all Mid-Day meal serving NGOs and providing them single window administrative clearances
d)  None of the above
Answer: A
 To curb malnutrition among tribal children by providing nutrition to pregnant women for 6 months when the child's growth is at its peak. It was recently approved by Maharashtra government.
The scheme is an initiative of Tribal Development department of state government.
Implementation will be done by Anganwadis falling under Women and Child Welfare Department in 16 districts of states having tribal population will implement it.
The scheme Plan is to provide one full hot cooked nutritious food to every pregnant (in third trimester) and lactating mother (first three months post-delivery) in tribal areas.
Source: http://www.dnaindia.com/india/report-maharashtra-government-s-fre e-for-moms-meal-eyes-healthy-tribal-kids-2141766

33 The National River Conservation Directorate (NRCD) is under
a)  Ministry of Environment and Forests
b)  Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation
c)  Ministry of Water Resources
d)  Ministry of Urban Answer: A
 The National River Conservation Directorate
(NRCD) in the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change is implementing the Centrally Sponsored Schemes of National River Conservation Plan (NRCP) and National Plan for Conservation of Aquatic Eco-systems'(NPCa) for conservation of rivers, lakes and wetlands in the country.
The objective of the River Action Plans is to improve water quality of rivers through implementation of pollution abatement schemes in identified polluted stretches of rivers. NPCA aims at conserving aquatic ecosystems (lakes and wetlands) through implementation of sustainable conservation plans, and governed with application of uniform policy and guidelines.

34 As compared to their Himalayan counterparts, Peninsular Rivers have
1.  Shorter courses
2.  Deeper beds
3.  Higher gradient load
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above
Answer: A
Many peninsular rivers flow over hard rocky surfaces, where bed or lateral erosion is not significant, leading to lower sediment load.
On the other hand, in Himalayan Rivers, course is deeper, gradient higher and course longer, which results in greater sediment load.
So, only statement 1 is correct, others are wrong.
Himalayan Rivers have many other depositional features in their floodplains. They also have well-developed Deltas.
Most of the rivers of peninsular India originate in the Western Ghats and flow towards the Bay of Bengal.
Thus, a large number of the Peninsular Rivers are seasonal, as their flow is
dependent on rainfall. During the dry season, even the large rivers have reduced flow of water in their channels.

35 Which of the following institutions can expand and increase the scope of fundamental rights in the constitution?
1.  President of India
2.  Supreme Court
3.  High Court
4.  Parliament
5.  National Human Rights Commission
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  2 and 4 only
b)  2, 3 and 4 only
c)  1, 2, 4 and 5 only
d)  1 and 4 only
Answer: B
In matters of constitutional amendment (e.g. amending fundamental right), the President is a mere rubber stamp. He cannot disagree or send back any constitutional amendment. He must sign it. Statement 1 is this incorrect.
Alongwith SC, HCs also interpret and expand fundamental rights. For e.g. Delhi HC gave a judgment on LGBT community, by declaring section 377
IPC as unconstitutional. SC has expanded the meaning of Right to life and liberty (Article 21) which now also covers Right to a safe environment, Right to Dignity etc

36 Eyes can be donated by people
1.  Of any age
2.  Using spectacles
3.  Suffering from AIDS
4.  Suffering from Tetanus and Cholera
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 3 only
b)  1, 2 and 4 only
c)  2 and 4 only
d)  1 and 2 only
Answer: D
 Eyes can be donated by any person to visually challenged persons suffering from corneal blindness, The person may be male or female of any age; of any social status; using spectacles; suffering from
any normal disease but not AIDS, Hepatitis B or C, Rabies, Leukemia, Tetanus, Cholera, Encephalitis.
The eyes have to be donated within 4-6 hours after death at any place, home or hospital.
A person who wants to donate the eyes has to pledge eyes during his/her lifetime to any registered eye bank.

37 If there is a difference between the two Houses of Parliament on ordinary legislation, the matter
a)  must be referred to the President of India, whose opinion shall be final and binding
b)  can be referred to the Supreme Court of India for its advisory jurisdiction
c)  will be referred to a joint sitting of the Parliament convened by the President
d)  will be settled through a Joint Parliamentary Committee setup by both the houses
Answer: C
 Any ordinary law needs to be passed by both the Houses. But if there is a difference between the two Houses, the final decision is taken in a joint session in which members of both the Houses sit together. Because of the larger number of members, the view of the Lok Sabha is likely to prevail in such a meeting.
However, Lok Sabha exercises more powers in money matters. Once the Lok
Sabha passes the budget of the government or any other money related law,
the Rajya Sabha cannot reject it. The Rajya Sabha can only delay it by 14 days or suggest changes in it. The Lok Sabha may or may not accept these changes.

38 When the earth crosses the tail of a comet, it indicates
a)  an impending solar spot cycle
b)  possible sight of a meteor shower
c)  an impending high tide event in oceans
d)  None of the above
Answer: B
A meteor shower is a celestial event in which a number of meteors are observed to radiate, or originate, from one point in the night sky.
A meteor shower is the result of an interaction between a planet, such as
Earth, and streams of debris from a comet.
A comet is an icy small Solar System body that, when passing close to the Sun, heats up and begins to outgas, displaying a visible atmosphere or coma, and sometimes also a tail. These phenomena are due to the effects of solar radiation and the solar wind upon the nucleus of the comet.
Some people think that comets are messengers of disasters, such as wars, epidemics and floods. But these are all myths and superstitions. Appearance of a comet is a natural phenomenon.

39 Which of the following institutions resolves the disputes between Centre and
States arising out of official decisions?
a)  Union Finance Commission (UFC)
b)  Supreme Court (SC)
c)  Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT)
d)  Chairman, Rajya Sabha
Answer: B
Finance Commission is not a dispute resolving body. It recommends allocation of tax resources between Centre and states. So, option (a) is wrong.
CAT resolves disputes between the officials and government with regard to personnel matters like promotion, recruitment etc. So, option (c) is wrong.
Chairman, RS, only presides over the meetings of the Rajya Sabha. Rajya Sabha may discuss disputes over decisions of Centre and States. It cannot pass a final and binding judgment alone. So, option (d) is wrong.
Supreme Court and the High Courts in India settle disputes arising out of governmental decisions. For e.g. reservation of creamy layer OBCs in 'Indira Sawhney and others Vs Union of India case'.

40 Water can be considered polluted due to
1.  High concentration of nutrients
2.  Higher temperature
3.  Presence of larvae eating fish
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  None of the above
Answer: A
Freshwater fishes like mosquitofish are used to feed on larvae to biocontrol mosquito population. Such fishes are not a sign of water pollution. Statement 3 is incorrect.
Hot water released from plants and industries raises the average temperature
of the waterbody, adversely affecting the animals and plants living in it. It is a form of pollution. Statement 2 is correct.
Statement 1 causes eutrophication (algal boom) in water bodies resulting in higher consumption of oxygen and loss to aquatic life: hence, correct.

41 The climate and associated weather conditions in India are governed by
1.  Pressure and surface winds
2.  Upper air circulation
3.  Tropical easterly jet stream
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  3 only
d)  All of the above
Answer: D
 Consider this - during winter, there is a high- pressure area north of the Himalayas. During summer, there is a low pressure trough in the Northern plains. Winds blow and fill the depression also bringing monsoon. So, clearly statement 1 is correct.
For statement 2- jet streams are an important component of upper air circulation which is dominated by westerly flow. These jet streams blow south of Himalayas, all through the year except in summer affecting India's climate and weather. So, statement 2 is also correct.
Also, the western (not eastern) cyclonic disturbances experienced in the north and north-western parts of the country are brought in by this westerly flow which affects rainfall in Northern and north-western India.
In summer, the subtropical westerly jet stream moves north of the Himalayas with the apparent movement of the sun. An easterly jet stream, called the tropical easterly jet stream blows over peninsular India, approximately over
14°N during the summer months. So, statement 3 is also correct.
42 Which of the following is NOT essential to have and sustain a democracy?
a)  Protection of the fundamental rights of all citizens
b)  Freedom to express views, freedom to organise and freedom to pro
c)  Political equality of citizens
d)  A written constitution
Answer: D
A democracy cannot exist without giving some fundamental rights of citizens and to safeguard them via institutional mechanisms. Option (a) is essential.
Without freedom to opine, express, organize and pro
Political equality of citizens refers to equal voting rights, equal eligibility for public offices etc. In a sense, it is one man, one vote as per BR Ambedkar. Option (c) is the heart of democracy.
A democracy can exist without a written constitution. Britain is the best example. Moreover, nations having a written constitution may not be democratic, e.g, Syria. However, it is essential to have laws/rules that protect citizen's rights. Option (d) is correct.

43 Sandalwood, khair, kusum, arjun and mulberry which are commercially important tree species are found in
1.  Tropical deciduous forests
2.  Tropical evergreen forests
3.  Montane forests
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  1 only
c)  2 and 3 only
d)  2 only
Answer: B
 Silver fir, junipers, pines and birches are the common trees of montane forests. So, statement 3 is wrong.
Teak is the most dominant species of deciduous forests. In dry deciduous
forests, Sal, Peepal, Neem grow. In moist deciduous, the ones mentioned in the question grow. So, statement 1 is correct.
On the other hand, in evergreen forests, commercially important trees like ebony, mahogany, rosewood, rubber and cinchona grow. So, statement 2 is wrong.

44 Which of the following organizations provide direct loans to governments?
a)  International Monetary Fund (IMF)
b)  World Bank (WB)
c)  Asian Development Bank (ADB)
d)  All of the above
Answer: D
 World Bank provides low-interest loans, zero to low-interest credits, and grants to developing countries. These support a wide array of investments in such areas as education, health, public administration, infrastructure, financial and private sector development, agriculture, and environmental and natural resource management.
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) is an organization of 188 countries, working to foster global monetary cooperation, secure financial stability, facilitate international trade, promote high employment and sustainable economic growth, and reduce poverty around the world.
ADF from ADB is a major instrument of concessional financing that has supported equitable and sustainable development in Asia since 1973. Funded by ADB's member countries, it offers loans at very low interest rates as well as grants to help reduce poverty in ADB's poorest member countries.

45 In 2005, the Supreme Court has declared the Presidential Proclamation dissolving the Bihar Assembly as unconstitutional. Among the following, which democratic feature of Indian polity does this case safeguards?
a)  Respect for Rights
b)  Rule of Law
c)  Right to Public office
d)  Universal Adult Franchise
Answer: B
There is no 'right to public office' in a democracy. It is equality of opportunity in matters of public employment. So, option (c) is wrong.
There are no fundamental rights involved in adjudicating such cases. Option
(a) is wrong.
Universal adult franchise was not affected in any way by the dissolution and the order of SC. Option (d) is wrong.
The SC held that dissolution was not as per the provisions of the constitution and illegal. Hence, safeguarding the assembly was the protection of rule of law. Option (b) is correct.

46 National Green Tribunal (NGT) has recently banned straw burning in some
North-western states of India because it emitted
1.  Lead
2.  Arsenic
3.  Particulate Matter
4.  Hexafluroine
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  3 only
c)  3 and 4 only
d)  All of the above
Answer: C
 Straw Burning is age-old agricultural practice followed by farmers biannually by setting fire to their fields to clear the land of residue (Straw) of one harvest and sow the next.
It is mainly carried in Northern western states in the month of November to
save time under the rice-wheat crop rotation and to make the land more fertile and kill pests.
The open field burning emits Carbon Dioxide (CO2), Carbon monoxide (CO)
and Nitrous Oxide (NO) along with particulate matter
Earlier, Union Government had proposed to provide incentives to farmers and promoting efficient farming practices with subsidies to stop this menace.
Source: http://www.hindustantimes.com/chandigarh/ignoring-ngt-orders-burn ing-of-straw-on-in-punjab-haryana/story-
ULq4klXQ4dG494P0wC4MWJ.html

47 Large scale deforestation in a forest can cause fertility of soil to decline. Why?
1.  Soil can be leached easily due to heavy rain
2.  Microbial activity in soil increases significantly
3.  Nutrient content of the soil changes.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  1 only
Answer: C
Removal of the top layer of the soil during deforestation exposes the lower, hard and rocky layers. This soil has less humus and is less fertile. So, statement 3 is correct.
Microbial activity in soil actually decreases due to the loss of biodiversity and the forest. Statement 2 is incorrect.
As the soil is exposed, rainwater can easily leach washing off nutrients in run-off water. Statement 1 is correct.
Deforestation is a major cause which leads to the change in soil properties.
Physical properties of the soil get affected by plantation and vegetation. Trees prevent soil erosion. Fewer trees result in more soil erosion. Gradually the
fertile land gets converted into deserts. It is called desertification.
Deforestation also leads to a decrease in the water holding capacity of the soil.
The movement of water from the soil surface into the ground (infiltration rate) is reduced. So, there are floods. The other properties of the soil like nutrient content, texture, etc., also change because of deforestation.

48 Consider the following about Antibiotics.
1.  They are used against both bacteria and viruses.
2.  When taken unnecessarily they may kill the beneficial bacteria in the body.
3.  Regular use of high doses of antibiotics may make them ineffective.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  2 only
b)  1 and 3 only
c)  1 and 2 only
d)  2 and 3 only
Answer: D
Antibiotics do not work against viruses. Many common respiratory tract infections (RTIs) — such as colds and flu — are caused by viruses, where they can't be of any use. So, statement 1 is incorrect. Frequent and high usage of anti-biotics makes the patient suffer from antibiotic resistance where further strains of bacteria are unaffected by the antibiotic. Besides, antibiotics kill bacteria without much discrimination. Beneficial bacteria may also be killed. So, statements 2 and 3 are correct. 
They are a type of antimicrobial used in the treatment and prevention of bacterial infection. They may either kill or inhibit the growth of bacteria. Several antibiotics are also effective against fungi and protozoans, and some are toxic to humans and animals, even when given in therapeutic dosage.
Chapter 2: Science 8th NCERT: Page 21

49 Main tributaries of Kaveri are
1.  Bhavani
2.  Amravati
3.  Brahmani
4.  Baitarini
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  3 and 4 only
d)  1 and 4 only
Answer: A
The Kaveri rises in the Brahmagri range of the Western Ghats and it reaches the Bay of Bengal in south of Cuddalore, in Tamil Nadu. Total length of the river is about 760 km.
Its main tributaries are Amravati, Bhavani, Hemavati and Kabini. Its basin drains parts of Karnataka, Kerala and Tamil Nadu.
The river Kaveri makes the second biggest waterfall in India. It is known as
Sivasamudram.
The Damoder, the Brahmani, the Baitarni and the Subarn rekha are major rivers flowing towards east, not tributaries.

50 Consider the following about the Election Commission of India (ECI).
1.  The Chief Election Commissioner (CEC) is appointed by the President of India.
2.  It enjoys the same kind of independence that the judiciary enjoys.
3.  Once appointed, the Chief Election Commissioner is fully answerable to the government for its powers and responsibilities.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  1 and 2 only
Answer: D
The ECI is an independent body. It is not answerable to the government. Answerability on day to day matters and even major policy decisions can tend to erode autonomy. Its autonomy is central to the Indian democracy. Hence, statement 3 is incorrect.
ECI commissioners enjoy security of tenure, salary charged on Consolidated Fund of India, independence from government interference, difficult process of impeachment etc. Hence, they enjoy similar independence as judges do.

51 Why are the western slopes of the Western Ghats covered with thick forests and not the eastern slopes?
1.  Eastern side falls in rain-shadow zone
2.  No protected forests exist on the eastern slopes.
3.  Soil in eastern slope cannot support vegetation due to absence of nutrients.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1 only
d)  1 and 3 only
Answer: C
 When moisture laden winds cause rainfall in western slopes, upon moving to eastern sides they lose much of their moisture. Rainfall is less, and thus vegetation is less thick at eastern slopes. So, statement 1 is correct.
Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve extends to Eastern Slopes as well. So, statement 2 is wrong.
Eastern slopes does support vegetation, as the soil is not highly leached. It contains red as well as laterite soil. Statement 3 is incorrect.

52 Consider the following about blue-green algae.
1.  They can fix atmospheric nitrogen in aerobic conditions.
2.  They can be used as bio-fertilizer.
3.  They do not perform photosynthesis unlike normal algae.
4.  They can be used to produce algal biofuel.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1, 2 and 4 only
b)  2 and 4 only
c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above
Answer: A
  Blue-green Algae, also called as Cyanobacteria obtain their energy through photosynthesis.
Nitrogen-fixation by the cyanobacteria such as (Anabaena, a symbiont of the aquatic fern Azolla), provides rice plantations with biofertilizer. Free-living cyanobacteria are also present in the water column in rice paddies
Recent studies suggest that significant exposure to high levels of some species of cyanobacteria producing toxins such as BMAA can cause amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). The Gulf War veterans' cluster is a notable example.
Currently, efforts are underway to commercialize algae-based fuels such as diesel, gasoline, and jet fuel. Like fossil fuel, algae fuel releases CO2 when burnt, but unlike fossil fuel, algae fuel and other biofuels only release CO2 recently removed from the atmosphere via photosynthesis as the algae or plant grew.
Recent research has suggested the potential application of cyanobacteria to the generation of renewable energy by converting sunlight into electricity.
Several cases of human poisoning have also been documented due to blue- green algae, but a lack of knowledge prevents an accurate assessment of the risks.

53 The highest formal authority in India is carried by
a)  Prime Minister of India
b)  President of India
c)  Cabinet Secretary
d)  Heads of independent Constitutional bodies
Answer: B
 President is the head of the state and is the highest formal authority in the country. All executive actions of the government are taken in his name.
Prime Minister is the head of the government and actually exercises all governmental powers. He takes most of the decisions in the Cabinet meetings. So, option (b) is correct.
As per Article 53 of the Constitution-
a)  The executive power of the Union shall be vested in the President and shall be exercised by him either directly or through officers subordinate to him in accordance with this Constitution.
b)  (b) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the supreme command of the Defence Forces of the Union shall be vested
in the President and the exercise thereof shall be regulated by law.

54 Which of the following planets in the solar system are less dense than water?
a)  Mercury, Venus and Saturn
b)  Venus and Neptune
c)  Mars and Jupiter
d)  Saturn only
Answer: D
 Saturn has the lowest density of all the planets in the Solar System. The actual number is 0.687 grams per cubic centimeter. This is actually less dense than water; if you had a large enough pool of water, Saturn would float.
Jupiter has an average density of 1.33 grams per cubic centimeter. So it wouldn't float on water. And Earth, the densest planet in the Solar System,
measures 5.51 grams/cubic centimeter.

55 The Council of Ministers is held accountable to and controlled by
a)  Both houses of Parliament
b)  Chairman, Rajya Sabha
c)  Lok Sabha
d)  President of India
Answer: C
 Parliament consists of both houses. Rajya Sabha is not an elected chamber and thus cannot control the council of ministers. Option (a) is wrong.
Hence, option (b) is also wrong.
President of India can only advise/question the CoM on matters sent by it for consideration. Option (d) is wrong.
Only a person who enjoys the support of the majority of the members in the Lok Sabha is appointed the Prime Minister. If the majority of the Lok Sabha members say they have 'no confidence' in the Council of Ministers, all ministers including the Prime Minister, have to quit. The Rajya Sabha does not have this power.

56 Carbon monoxide can be produced from or found in
1.  Incomplete burning of petrol and diesel
2.  Naturally in groundwater and ice caps
3.  Operation of a kitchen stove in enclosed space
4.  Eruption of volcanoes
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 3 only
b)  2 and 4 only
c)  1, 2 and 3 only
d)  1, 3 and 4 only
Answer: D
 Any hydrocarbon fuel when oxidized in low presence of oxygen, it forms carbon monoxide instead of dioxide. So, statements 1 and 3 are correct.
Carbon dioxide (not carbon monoxide) is found naturally in groundwater, ice caps, glaciers etc. So, statement 2 is incorrect.
The principal components of volcanic gases are water vapour (H2O), CO2, CO, SO2 or hydrogen sulphide, nitrogen, argon, helium, neon, methane and hydrogen. So, statement 4 is correct.
It is also generated from natural and man-made fires (such as forest and bushfires, burning of crop residues, and sugarcane fire-cleaning). Carbon monoxide occurs dissolved in molten volcanic rock at high pressures in the Earth's mantle.
Worldwide, the largest source of carbon monoxide is natural in origin, due to photochemical reactions in the troposphere.

57 The last natural refuge of the endangered Manipur brow-antlered deer (Sangai) is in
a)  Loktak Lake
b)  Hajong Lake
c)  Sendra Lake
d)  Kolleru Lake
Answer: A
 The sangai is an endemic, rare and endangered subspecies of
brow-antlered deer found only in Manipur, India. It is also the state animal of
Manipur.
Its habitat is located in the southern parts of the Loktak Lake, which is the largest freshwater lake in eastern India. It is also one of the seven Ramsar
sites of international importance. The habitat of the sangai is now protected as
the Keibul Lamjao National Park.
The sangai was believed to be almost extinct by 1950.
Habitat destruction and poaching are two major threats to sangai.

58 Which of the following statements about the provisions of the Forest
Conservation Act (1980) is CORRECT?
a)  State governments cannot de-reserve forests without the prior approval of Central Government.
b)  It consolidates the law relating to forests, the transit of forest-produce.
c)  It recognizes the rights of traditional forest dwellers over the forest areas.
d)  National parks and biosphere reserves are constituted under this Act.
Answer: A
National parks and biosphere reserves are constituted under
Wildlife Conservation Act. So, option (d) is wrong.
The Indian Forest Act, 1927 consolidates the law relating to forests, the transit of forest-produce and the duty leviable on timber and other forest- produce. So, option (b) is wrong.
The Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006, recognizes the rights of forest-dwelling Scheduled Tribes and other traditional forest dwellers over the forest areas inhabited by them and provides a framework for according the same. So, option (c) is wrong.
 The Forest Conservation Act 1980 was enacted to help conserve the country's forests. It strictly restricts and regulates the de-reservation of forests or use of forest land for non-forest purposes without the prior approval of Central Government. To this end the Act lays down the pre-requisites for the diversion of forest land for non-forest purposes.

59 Which of the following rivers do NOT make 'delta'?
1.  Mahanadi
2.  Tapi
3.  Narmada
4.  Godavari
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  3 and 4 only
d)  1 and 4 only
Answer: B
  Most of the major rivers of the Peninsula such as the Mahanadi, the Godavari, the Krishna and the Kaveri flow eastwards and drain
into the Bay of Bengal. These rivers make deltas at their mouths. There are numerous small streams flowing west of the Western Ghats.
The Narmada and the Tapi are the only long rivers, which flow west and make estuaries. The drainage basins of the peninsular rivers are comparatively small in size.

60 Right to Constitutional Remedies is
a)  A fundamental right
b)  A constitutional right
c)  A Legal right
d)  A right based on the directions issued by the executive
Answer: A
 Right to constitutional remedies is a fundamental right. The Courts can issue writs to enforce this right when any of the fundamental rights are violated.
You can understand it better this way. Right to vote is not a fundamental
right, but it is a constitutional right. The Supreme Court cannot issue a writ to enforce a constitutional right. A party can, however, file a case citing his rights. So, option (a) is correct, not (b).
Legal right is any right conferred by law, for e.g. right to work for 100 days for a household in rural areas is given by MGNREGA.
 Fundamental Rights are guaranteed against the actions of the Legislatures, the Executive, and any other authorities instituted by the government. There can be no law or action that violates the Fundamental Rights. If any act of the Legislature or the Executive takes away or limits any of the Fundamental Rights it will be invalid.

61 Consider the following about the Indian Agricultural Research Institute (IARI).
1.  It has been established under an Act of the Parliament.
2.  It did not contribute to the Indian "Green Revolution" of the 1970s as it was established after it.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: D
 It was established in 1905 at Pusa (Bihar) with a generous grant from an American philanthropist. No Parliamentary act established it. So, statement 1 is wrong.
During the fifties, the advancement of scientific disciplines constituted the core program of IARI and provided the base for its fast expansion in the
1960's and 1970's. So, it also claims credit for enabling the Green Revolution, in part by developing rust resistant strains of wheat, apart from the HYVs introduced from abroad.
Green Revolution in India was a period during which agriculture in
India increased its yields due to improved agronomic technology.
The introduction of high-yielding varieties of seeds and the increased use of chemical fertilizers and irrigation led to the increase in production needed to make India self-sufficient in food grains, thus improving agriculture in India.
In many areas, Green Revolution is associated with the loss of soil fertility due to increased use of chemical fertilizers. Also, continuous use of groundwater for tubewell irrigation has reduced the water -table below the ground.

62 Consider the following about National Human Rights Commission.
1.  The Commission is independent of the government.
2.  It is a constitutional authority.
3.  Its recommendations are binding on the courts but not government.
4.  There is no fee to approach the NHRC.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 only
b)  1 and 4 only
c)  1, 3 and 4 only
d)  2 and 3 only
Answer: B
 The NHRC cannot by itself punish the guilty. That is the responsibility of courts. The NHRC is there to make independent and credible inquiry into any case of violation of human rights. Thus, its recommendations are not binding on neither the courts not the government. Statement 3 is incorrect.
The commission has been established by law as autonomous of the government, and not by the constitution, so statement 2 is wrong, and 1 is correct.
Any citizen of India can write a letter to the NHRC to complain against the violation of human rights. There is no fee or any formal procedure to approach the NHRC. So, statement 4 is correct.

63 The shape of a motor vehicle affects its
1.  Fuel efficiency
2.  Speed
3.  Overall performance
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  2 only
d)  All of the above
Answer: D
  When objects move through fluids (e.g. air), they have to overcome friction acting on them. Their bodies must be designed in shapes which would make them not to lose much energy in overcoming friction. A body that is poorly designed will lose a lot of fuel in just overcoming the drag exerted on it. Its fuel efficiency will be lesser. So, statement 1 is correct.
Since drag exerts a backward force, it reduces the speed of the vehicle. So, statement 2 is correct.
The above also affect a vehicle's acceleration, wear and tear etc, and thus affect the vehicle's overall performance. So, statement 3 is also correct.

64 Which of the following problem(s) occur when using dry ice as a fire extinguisher?
1.  It causes harm electrical equipment nearby resulting in fire.
2.  It aggravates fire situations caused due to oil spills.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: D
  The above problems are not related with dry ice, but water.
If electrical equipment is on fire, water may conduct electricity and harm those trying to douse the fire. Water is also not suitable for fires involving oil and petrol. So, it sinks below the oil, and oil keeps burning on top.
On the other hand, CO2, being heavier than oxygen, covers the fire like a blanket. Since the contact between the fuel and oxygen is cut off, the fire is controlled. The added advantage of CO2 is that in most cases it does not harm the electrical equipment.
Hence, both statements are incorrect.

65 Red Data Book, IUCN, keeps a record of all the endangered animals and plants. Which of the following institutions contribute to the red list?
1.  BirdLife International
2.  World Conservation Monitoring Centre
3.  Greenpeace
4.  Environmental Defense Fund
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  3 and 4 only
b)  1 and 2 only
c)  1, 3 and 4 only
d)  2, 3 and 4 only
Answer: B
 You can apply elimination by just knowing that Greenpeace cannot contribute to a Red List. It only focuses its campaigning on worldwide issues such as climate change, deforestation.
Moreover, in 
So, if statement 3 is wrong and 1 is correct, only option (b) can be the answer.
 The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species (also known as the
IUCN Red List or Red Data List), founded in 1964, is the world's most
comprehensive inventory of the global conservation status of biological species. The International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN) is the world's main authority on the conservation status of species
Major species assessors include BirdLife International, the Institute of Zoology (the research division of the Zoological Society of London), the World Conservation Monitoring Centre, and many Specialist Groups within the IUCN Species Survival Commission (SSC). Collectively, assessments by these organizations and groups account for nearly half the species on the Red List.

66 Suez Canal allows ships to travel between
a)  North and South America
b)  Europe and Russia
c)  Europe and South Asia
d)  East Africa to South-East Asia
Answer: C
  It is an artificial sea-level waterway in Egypt, connecting the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea.
It was opened in 1869. It allows ships to travel between Europe and South Asia without navigating around Africa thereby reducing the sea voyage distance between Europe and India by about 7,000 kilometres.
The canal is owned and maintained by the Suez Canal Authority (SCa) of Egypt. Under the Convention of Constantinople, it may be used "in time of war as in time of peace, by every vessel of commerce or of war, without distinction of flag".

67 What describes 'geosynclines'?
a)  A linear break in rocks of the earth's crust along which frequent displacement occurs
b)  A mass of sand and soil that moves slowly under the influence of gravity along a confined course
c)  An area of relatively low atmospheric pressure, which is found mainly in temperate regions
d)  A narrow, shallow, elongated basin with a sinking bottom where rivers
deposited sediments
Answer: D
Option (a) is called 'faults'.
Option (b) does not exist. Option (c) is called an area of depression. Geosyncline is basically a narrow, shallow, elongated basin with a sinking
bottom in which a considerable thickness of sediments was deposited by the rivers coming from Angara and Gondwanaland. So, option (d) is correct.
It can be subsequently compressed, deformed, and uplifted into a mountain range or can become a volcano.

68 Decennial Census exercises in India are conducted and administered under?
a)  Ministry of Planning
b)  Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
c)  Ministry of Home Affairs
d)  Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
Answer: C
  The responsibility of conducting the decennial Census rests with the Office of the Registrar General and Census Commissioner, India under Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India.
The Census Act was enacted in 1948 to provide for the scheme of conducting population census with duties and responsibilities of census officers.
Later, the office was also entrusted with the responsibility of implementation of Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969 in the country.
The Indian Census is the most credible source of information on Demography
(Population characteristics), Economic Activity, Literacy and Education, Housing & Household Amenities, Urbanisation, Fertility and Mortality.

69 Exotic plants of an area refer to
a)  Endemic or indigenous vegetation of that area
b)  Vegetation that is not native and has come from outside
c)  Naturally growing vegetation which has been left undisturbed by humans for a long time
d)  Vegetation that grows in a specific season after a long time
Answer: B
 Option (a) refers to endemic plants, for e.g. Wild mango is endemic to India.
Option (c) refers to Virgin vegetation.
 An introduced, alien, exotic, non-indigenous, or non-native species is a species living outside its native distributional range, which has arrived there by human activity, either deliberate or accidental.
Non-native species can have various effects on the local ecosystem. Introduced species that become established and spread beyond the place of introduction are called invasive species.
Some have a negative effect on a local ecosystem (e.g. affecting the food chain of the area, reducing biodiversity, competing for food and light etc).
Some introduced species may have no negative effect or only minor impact.
Some species have been introduced intentionally to combat pests. They are called biocontrols and may be regarded as beneficial as an alternative to pesticides in agriculture.

70 When on election duty, government officers work under the control of
a)  The concerned District Administration
b)  State Planning Board
c)  Chief Secretary of the State
d)  Election Commission
Answer: D
 They work under the control of the Election Commission of
India (or State Election Commission as the case may be). Hence, option (d)
It is very common for the Election Commission to reprimand the government and administration for their lapses. This is because of the independence vested in the commission and the election officials.
When election officials come to the opinion that polling was not fair in some booths or even an entire constituency, they order a repoll. The ruling parties generally comply with the orders of the ECI.

71 Which of these states have more than 50% of land under forest cover?
1.  Himachal Pradesh
2.  Odisha
3.  Sikkim
4.  Karnataka
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  2, 3 and 4 only
b)  1, 2 and 3 only
c)  1 and 4 only
d)  1 and 3 only
Answer: D
 Refer to this link to know state-wise forest cover. Just see the trends e.g. in North-east.
http://www.iasri.res.in/agridata/08data%5Cchapter1%5Cdb2008tb1_41.pdf

72 Which United Nations Organ is charged with the maintenance of international
peace and security as well as recommending admission of new members to the
United Nations (UN)?
a)  UN Secretariat
b)  UN Trusteeship Council
c)  International Court of Justice
d)  UN Security Council
Answer: D
 Under the Charter, the Security Council has primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security. It has 15 Members, and each Member has one vote. Under the Charter, all Member States are obligated to comply with Council decisions.
The Security Council takes the lead in determining the existence of a threat to the peace or act of aggression.
It calls upon the parties to a dispute to settle it by peaceful means and recommends methods of adjustment or terms of settlement. In some cases, the Security Council can resort to imposing sanctions or even authorize the use of force to maintain or restore international peace and security.
The Security Council also recommends to the General Assembly the appointment of the Secretary-General and the admission of new Members to the United Nations. And, together with the General Assembly, it elects the judges of the International Court of Justice.

73 The term 'Green Tax' refers to
1.  Excise taxes on environmental pollutants
2.  Taxes on goods whose use produces such pollutants
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: C
  Ecotax (short for Ecological taxation or Green taxation) refers to taxes intended to promote environmentally friendly activities via economic incentives.
Recently, in a bid to curb health hazards originating from bursting of firecrackers, the Pune Bench of the National Green Tribunal has directed civic bodies to levy Rs. 3,000 as 'green tax' from sellers.
The corpus collected from the tax will be used to clean solid waste generated from firecrackers at public places.
Part of the money will be used exclusively for environmental activities such as planting trees and constructing toilets for women.
http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/City/Pune/Plea-in-National-Green-Tribuna l-seeks-ban-on-firecrackers/articleshow/44796735.cms

74 How does 'relief' play a role in determining the climate of a place?
1.  By blocking or allowing wind streams
2.  By increasing continentality
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: A
  Continentality refers to the impact on land climate as the distance from sea increases. The farther a place is from sea, more likelier is it to experience harsher and extreme climate conditions. It is not related to relief of a place. Statement 2 is incorrect.
High mountains act as barriers for cold or hot winds; they may also cause precipitation if they are high enough and lie in the path of rain-bearing winds. The leeward side of mountains remains dry.

75 Which of the following is NOT a greenhouse gas?
a)  Nitrogen
b)  Ozone
c)  Methane
d)  Water vapour
Answer: A
 Nitrous oxides are greenhouse gases, not nitrogen itself. Similarly, other major atmospheric constituents, like oxygen and argon (Ar), are not greenhouse gases. Option (a) is correct.
The most abundant greenhouse gases in Earth's atmosphere are: Water vapor , Carbon dioxide, Methane, Nitrous oxide, Ozone, Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs).
The contribution of each gas to the greenhouse effect is affected by the characteristics of that gas, its abundance, and any indirect effects it may cause.
For e.g., the direct radiative effect of a mass of methane is about 72 times stronger than the same mass of carbon dioxide over a 20-year time frame but it is present in much smaller concentrations so that its total direct radiative effect is smaller, in part due to its shorter atmospheric lifetime.
On the other hand, in addition to its direct radiative impact, methane has a large, indirect radiative effect because it contributes to ozone formation.

76 Westerly cyclonic disturbances affect the climate in
a)  Southern India
b)  North and north-eastern India
c)  Eastern India
d)  South-eastern India
Answer: B
  The western cyclonic disturbances are weather phenomena of the winter months brought in by the westerly flow from the
Mediterranean region.
They usually influence the weather of the north and north-western regions of India. Tropical cyclones occur during the monsoon as well as in October - November, and are part of the easterly flow. These disturbances affect the coastal regions of the country.

77 UDAY' scheme launched recently by the Union Cabinet relates to
a)  Consolidation and revamping of Prime Minister's Fifteen Point Programme
b)  Financial restructuring of debt of power distribution companies
c)  Generating employment in left-wing extremism affected areas
d)  Making all government offices energy efficient
Answer: B
 Ujwal DISCOM Assurance Yojna (UDAY) for financial restructuring of debt of power distribution companies.
The Scheme aims for financial turnaround and revival of Power Distribution companies (DISCOMs) and also ensures a sustainable permanent solution to the problem.
It allows power DISCOMs in selected states to convert their debt into state bonds as well as roll out number of measures to improve efficiency at power plants.
It seeks to ensure that struggling DISCOMs can shake off years of losses and start on a path to profitability.
Assures the rise of vibrant and efficient DISCOMs: through four initiatives (i) Improve operational efficiencies of DISCOMs (ii) Reduce of cost of power (iii) Reduce interest cost of DISCOMs (iv) Enforce financial discipline on DISCOMs through alignment with State finances.
It shifts 75 per cent of power DISCOMs debt burden to states' balance sheets. This step would result in interest cost savings to the tune of 3-5 per cent.
http://pmindia.gov.in/en/news_updates/uday-ujwal-discom-assurance-yojana- for-financial-turnaround-of-power-distribution-companies/

78 Inter Tropical Convergence Zone is
a)  A zone from where all tropical cyclones originate
b)  A Zone from where trade winds emerge and travel towards poles
c)  A broad trough of low pressure in equatorial latitudes
d)  A zone of high pressure where tropical cold currents meet
Answer: C
 The Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ,) is a broad trough of low pressure in equatorial latitudes.
This is where the northeast and the southeast trade winds converge.
This convergence zone lies more or less parallel to the equator but moves north or south with the apparent movement of the sun.

79 Consider the following statements.
1.  It rises in Tibet.
2.  It enters India in Ladakh.
3.  Shyok, Nubra and Hunza are amongst its tributaries.
The above may refer to which river system?
a)  Indus
b)  Brahmaputra
c)  Luni
d)  Gandak
Answer: A
  The major Himalayan rivers are the Indus, the
Ganga and the Brahmaputra.
The river Indus rises in Tibet, near Lake Mansarowar. Flowing west, it enters India in the Ladakh district of Jammu and Kashmir. It forms a picturesque gorge in this part. Several tributaries, the Zaskar, the Nubra, the Shyok and
the Hunza, join it in the Kashmir region.
The Indus flows through Baltistan and Gilgit and emerges from the mountains at Attock. The Satluj, the Beas, the Ravi, the Chenab and the Jhelum join together to enter the Indus near Mithankot in Pakistan.

80 In a water vessel, total pressure exerted at the bottom of a container depends on
1.  Height at which the container is placed above Mean Sea Level (MSL)
2.  Height of water column
3.  Width of water column
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1 only
d)  2 only
Answer: A
  The pressure at a given depth in a static liquid is a result the weight of the liquid acting on a unit area at that depth plus any pressure acting on the surface of the liquid.
P= Patm (atmospheric pressure)+ dgh (pressure due to water)
D- Density of water; G- Acceleration due to gravity; H- height of water column
As altitude increases, the atmospheric pressure decreases, and the total pressure as a result also falls.
Also, the pressure due to the liquid alone (not total) at a given depth depends only upon the density of the liquid    and the distance below the surface of the liquid h.
The pressure at a given depth is independent of direction - it is the same in all directions. Hence, it does not depend on the width of the water vessel.

81 Disguised unemployment occurs
a)  when the number of unemployed labour exceeds employed labour in an industry
b)  due to the paradox of simultaneous existence of high unemployment and skilled labour
c)  when additional labour do not contribute to the output
d)  when there are job vacancies in an industry despite producing full output
Answer: C
In case of disguised unemployment people appear to be employed. If a work requiring at most 5 people employs 8 people, then the extra 3 do not add to the output and are essentially unemployed in disguise, i.e. under utilization of the extra labour. So, option (c) is correct.
Option (d) is a case of more efficient utilization of existing labour. So, wrong. Option (b) is a general phenomenon seen in developing countries like India
where skill sets do not match with available job demand.
 In India, this is more common in agriculture and low productivity sectors like small households establishments. For e.g. 90% of industrial units in India face the issue of disguised unemployment.
Factors that contribute to it are: a) large unemployment: b) low skill base of labour; c) less efficient technology and capital utilization; d) sub-optimal production management etc.

82 Which of the following roles/functions are performed by the High Court in India?
1.  Determining the Constitutional validity of any legislation or action of the executive in the country
2.  Giving judgments and directives to protect public interest and human rights throughout India
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: C
  The Supreme Court and the High Courts have the power to interpret the Constitution of the country. They can declare invalid any law of the legislature or the actions of the executive, whether at the
Union level or at the state level, if they find such a law or action is against the
Constitution. This is known as the judicial review. So, statement 1 is correct.
The powers and the independence of the Indian judiciary allow it to act as the guardian of the Fundamental Rights. In recent years the Courts have given several judgments and directives to protect public interest and human rights. Anyone can approach the courts if public interest is hurt by the actions of government. This is called public interest litigation. The courts intervene to prevent the misuse of the government's power to make decisions. They check malpractices on the part of public officials. So, statement 2 is also correct.

83 The 'Model Code of Conduct (MCC)' has been issued by the
a)  Supreme Court of India
b)  Election Commission of India
c)  President of India
d)  Parliament
Answer: B
  MCC is not a legally binding document. Hence, SC cannot issue or enforce it. Option (a) is wrong.
What is it?
It is a set of guidelines laid down by the Election Commission to govern the conduct of political parties and candidates in the run-up to an election.
What is the need for such a code of conduct?
It is intended to provide a level playing field for all political parties, to keep the campaign fair and healthy, avoid clashes and conflicts
between parties, and ensure peace and order. Its main aim is to ensure that the ruling party, either at the Centre or in the states, does not misuse its official position to gain an unfair advantage in an election. The Model Code of Conduct comes into force the moment an election is announced and remains in force till the results are declared.
For e.g. one provision of the MCC says, "No party or candidate shall include in any activity which may aggravate existing differences or create mutual hatred or cause tension between different castes and communities, religious or linguistic"

84 Which of the following countries is/are NOT a part of G-20 (Major economies)?
1.  South Africa
2.  Morocco
3.  Mexico
4.  Saudi Arabia
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  3 and 4 only
b)  4 only
c)  2 only
d)  1 only
Answer: C
 G20 is an international forum for the governments and central bank governors from 20 major economies.
The members include 19 individual countries—Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, France, Germany, India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, South Korea, Mexico, Russia, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Turkey, the United Kingdom
and the United States—along with the European Union (EU).
http://www.mea.gov.in/regional-organisations.htm
Please make sure you have a general idea about all major organizations mentioned here.

85 To become a law, all bills passed by the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha must be approved by
1.  Speaker, Lok Sabha
2.  Joint Parliamentary Committee
3.  Vice-President
4.  President
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 3 only
b)  2 only
c)  4 only
d)  3 and 4 only
Answer: C
Speaker of Lok Sabha only has to endorse certain money bills when they are sent to the President. He need not give assent to a bill to get it passed. Statement 1 is wrong. Same is true for Vice-President, Chairman of Rajya Sabha, thus statement 3 is also wrong.
A bill is referred to a Joint Parliamentary Committee for examining controversial provisions in the bill or to give insights on the bill to make it better. Its recommendations are not binding. Statement 2 is wrong.
The Parliament consists of two Houses and President of India. The two Houses are known as the Council of States (Rajya Sabha) and the House of the People (Lok Sabha).
The President of India is a part of the Parliament, although she is not a member of either House. That is why all laws made in the Houses come into force only after they receive the assent of the President.

86 Which of the following force(s) is/are both attractive and repulsive?
1.  Gravitation Force
2.  Electromagnetic force
3.  Strong interaction force
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  3 only
Answer: B
 There are 4 fundamental forces that have been identified. In our present Universe they have rather different properties.
Properties of the Fundamental Forces
The strong interaction is very strong, but very short-ranged. It acts only over ranges of order 10-13 cm and is responsible for holding the nuclei of atoms together. It is basically attractive, but can be effectively repulsive in some circumstances.
The electromagnetic force causes electric and magnetic effects such as the repulsion between like electrical charges or the interaction of bar magnets. It is long-ranged, but much weaker than the strong force. It can be attractive or repulsive, and acts only between pieces of matter carrying electrical charge.
The weak force is responsible for radioactive decay and neutrino interactions. It has a very short range and, as its name indicates, it is very weak.
The gravitational force is weak, but very long ranged. Furthermore, it is always attractive, and acts between any two pieces of matter in the Universe since mass is its source.

87 The Terai region is a
a)  plain swampy landscape south of Shiwaliks
b)  highland east of Tibet Plateau
c)  riverine island supporting high biodiversity
d)  hilly region in North-eastern India
Answer: A
It was in news due to Nepalese constitution issues.
The Northern plains can be divided into four regions – two are discussed here. The rivers, after descending from the mountains deposit pebbles in a narrow belt of about 8 to 16 km in width lying parallel to the slopes of the Shiwaliks. It is known as bhabar.
All the streams disappear in this bhabar belt. South of this belt, the streams and rivers re-emerge and create a wet, swampy and marshy region known as terai. This was a thickly forested region full of wildlife. The forests have been cleared to create agricultural land and to settle migrants from Pakistan after partition.

88 Extratropical storms are different from Tropical storms in which way?
a)  Moisture is carried in lower atmosphere in case of tropical storms, whereas it is carried in upper atmosphere in extratropical storm
b)  tropical storms bring rain, while extratropical storms do not
c)  Extratropical storms are caused due to easterly trade winds, whereas tropical storms are caused without any trade winds
d)  None of the above
Answer: A
  Both storms bring rain. So, option (b) is incorrect.
Extratropical storms are caused due to jet streams, and not due to lower atmospheric circulations. So, option (c) is incorrect.
About option (d) - This has been explained in another question too.
Jet streams are an important component of upper air circulation which is dominated by westerly flow. These jet streams blow south of Himalayas, all through the year except in summer affecting India's climate and weather.
The western cyclonic disturbances experienced in the north and north-western parts of the country are brought in by this westerly flow which affects rainfall in Northern and north-western India.
Extratropical storms are a global, rather than a localized, phenomena with moisture usually carried in the upper atmosphere (unlike tropical storms where it is carried in the lower atmosphere). In the case of the subcontinent,
moisture is sometimes shed as rain when the storm system encounters the
Himalayas.

89 China-Pakistan economic corridor (CPEC) project seeks to connect
a)  Chah bahar port in Pakistan to the Tibetan region occupied by China
b)  Lahore in Pakistan to Beijing in China
c)  Gwadar port in Pakistan to the Xinjiang region in China
d)  Bunker facilities in Islamabad, Pakistan to shipping mouths near East
China Sea
Answer: C
Chah bahar port is being constructed with the support of India in Iran. Option (a) can be easily eliminated.
CPEC seeks to connect the Gwadar port in Pakistan to the Xinjiang region in China by means of highways, airways and railways and also deploy pipeline to transport oil and gas.
The corridor will also act as a trade route for Chinese goods and commodities meant for the Middle East and Africa.
India has already objected to the China Pakistan Economic Corridor as it passes through the Pakistan occupied Kashmir (PoK).
However, China has defended the project saying it is a commercial venture aimed at improving livelihoods of local people in Pakistan and strengthening the infrastructure in this region.
corridor/articleshow/49767693.cms

90 Antyodaya Anna Yojana (AAY) is a
a)  Food for works programme
b)  subsidized food entitlements scheme for Below Poverty Line (BPL) citizens
c)  food security financial support programme for undernourished villages in India
d)  None of the above
Answer: B
 AAY was launched in December 2000.
Under the scheme one crore of the poorest among the BPL families covered under the targeted public distribution system were identified.
Poor families were identified by the respective state rural development departments through a Below Poverty Line (BPL) survey.
Twenty five kilograms of food grains were made available to each eligible family at a highly subsidised+ rate of Rs 2 per kg for wheat and Rs 3 per kg for rice.
This quantity has been enhanced from 25 to 35 kgs with effect from April
2002. The scheme has been further expanded twice by additional 50 lakh BPL families in June 2003 and in August 2004. With this increase, 2 crore families have been covered under the AAY.

91 Which of the following can be a low-cost technique(s) to separate healthy seeds from damaged seeds?
a)  Treating the seeds with starch
b)  Floating seeds on water
c)  Checking whether the seed has sharp ends
d)  All of the above
Answer: B
Starch is a carbohydrate consisting of a large number of glucose units. It is not useful is checking quality of seeds. Option (a) is wrong.
Damaged seeds become hollow and are thus lighter. Therefore, they float on water. This is a good method for separating good, healthy seeds from the damaged ones. Option (b) is correct.
Even healthy seeds of peculiar type may have sharp ends. They cannot be separated this way. Option (c) is wrong.

92 IMPRINT' India initiative recently launched by the President of India relates to
a)  Boosting research in the country
b)  Imparting skills to young graduates
c)  Promoting vernacular literature in urban centres
d)  Reviving traditional book presses in financial crisis
Answer: A
 The initiative is joint venture of Indian Institutes of Technology
(IITs) and Indian Institute of Science (IISC).
IMPRINT India initiative seeks to develop a roadmap for research in order to solve major engineering and technology challenges in 10 identified technology domains.
These 10 domains are: Health Care, Computer Science and ICT, Advance Materials, Water Resources and River systems, Sustainable Urban Design, Defence, Nano-technology Hardware, Environmental Science and Climate Change and Energy Security.

93 Thal, bhor and the pal ghats passes relate to
a)  Vindhya mountain ranges
b)  Eastern Ghats
c)  Western Ghats
d)  Rajmahal Hills
Answer: C
 The Western Ghats and the Eastern Ghats mark the western and the eastern edges of the Deccan Plateau respectively.
Western ghats lie parallel to the western coast. They are continuous (unlike eastern ghats which are discontinuous) and can be crossed through passes
only – like the Thal, Bhor and the Pal Ghats.
The Western Ghats are higher than the Eastern Ghats. Their average elevation is 900–1600 metres as against 600 metres of the Eastern Ghats.

94 A constitution serves which of following purposes?
1.  It is the supreme law which determines the relationship among citizens living in a territory.
2.  It limits the powers of government.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: C
  The constitution of a country is a set of written rules that are accepted by all people living together in a country. Constitution is the
supreme law that determines the relationship among people living in a territory (called citizens) and also the relationship between the people and government. A constitution does many things:
First, it generates a degree of trust and coordination that is necessary for different kind of people to live together;
Second, it specifies how the government will be constituted, who will have power to take which decisions;
Third, it lays down limits on the powers of the government and tells us what the rights of the citizens are; and
Fourth, it expresses the aspirations of the people about creating a good society.

95 Consider the following about the Asian Infrastructure Investment bank (AIIB).
1.  It admits only Asian member countries.
2.  It is led by China.
3.  All members have equal voting rights in AIIB.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 only
c)  2 and 3 only
d)  1 and 3 only
Answer: B
 Even non-regional (Asian countries) can be its members. However, their vote share will be lesser than Asian members. So, statements
1 and 3 are incorrect.
It is a multilateral development bank (MDB)
Asia has a massive infrastructure funding gap around $8 trillion. ADB ($160 billion) and World Bank ($223 billion) even together cannot fill the funding gap. Hence, the need for AIIB.
Both the ADB (formed in 1966) and AIIB (formed in 2015) are responses by Asia's leading economic power. Motivation lies in improving global economic governance structures e.g. IMF, World Bank etc.
http://zeenews.india.com/business/news/international/china-ratifies-aiib-agree ment_1818247.html

96 Mangroves do NOT occur in which state(s) in India?
1.  Andhra Pradesh
2.  Goa
3.  Odisha
4.  Meghalaya
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  2 only
b)  1 and 3 only
c)  2 and 4 only
d)  4 only
Answer: D
  The mangrove tidal forests are found in the areas of coasts influenced by tides. Dense mangroves are the common varieties with roots of the plants submerged under water. The deltas of the Ganga, the Mahanadi, the Krishna, the Godavari and the Kaveri are covered by such vegetation.
Experiences have proved that the presence of mangrove ecosystems on coastline save lives and property during natural hazards such as cyclones, storm surges and erosion. These ecosystems are also well known for their economic importance.
They are breeding, feeding and nursery grounds for many estuarine and marine organisms. Hence, these areas are used for captive and culture fisheries
Refer to the link to know state, UT wise cover and other information about
Mangroves.
http://agritech.tnau.ac.in/forestry/forest_mangrove_index.html#mangroves

97 Which of the following phenomenon can be described with the help of electromagnetism?
1.  Friction
2.  Rainbows
3.  Lightning
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  3 only
d)  All of the above
Answer: D
  All three are caused due to electromagnetism, a fundamental force in nature.
Friction:
Electromagnetic force is the force which holds the atoms together and keeps the electrons from flying off somewhere away from the atoms nucleus and also holds the atoms together to form molecules. Certain molecules are going to attract to each other increasing frictional forces and some molecules repel reducing frictional forces.
For e.g. Teflon or PTFE is a very slippery material (having less friction). It is a long string of carbon atoms joined together with two fluorine atoms attached to each carbon atom. Fluorine, when attached to a molecule doesn't like any other molecule around it. It repels any other molecule even other molecules with fluorine atoms, hence its low coefficient of friction or slipperiness.
Hence, statement 1 is correct.
Rainbows:
Rainbow is caused by reflection, refraction and dispersion of light in water droplets resulting in a spectrum of light (electromagnetic) appearing in the sky. So, statement 2 is also correct.
Lightning: It is an electrostatic discharge that travels between two charged regions. So, statement 3 is correct.

98 Consider the following with reference to 'Over-the-top services' in India.
1.  It is provided directly by the Internet Service Providers (ISPs).
2.  They are presently regulated by the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: D
OTT refers to a service that is provided on top of the internet service. For e.g. you may use the Whatsapp calling feather on a internet network provided by Airtel. But, Airtel as an ISP, is NOT concerned
presently with how you use its internet. So, statement 1 is wrong.
There are proposals to regulate OTTs after the telecom companies lobbied. TRAI also released a consultation paper in March 2015 on OTT regulatory framework. But, no consensus has come on the regulation. So, statement 2 is also wrong.
Moreover, you should understand that the Ministry of I&B will not regulate telecom services. It is in the domain of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI).
The controversy over OTTs is because companies like Whatsapp and Skype use the networks of the ISPs to expand their business, even while the ISPs suffer loss of revenue due to shift of consumers from telecom services to OTTs like Whatsapp messaging or calling.
The Internet Service provider (ISP) may be aware of the contents of the Internet Protocol packets but is not responsible for, nor able to control, the viewing abilities, copyrights, and/or other redistribution of the content.
Consumers can access OTT content through any internet-connected devices such as desktop and laptop computers, gaming consoles (such as the PlayStation), set-top boxes etc.

99 Deen Dayal Upadhyay Grameen Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY) does NOT focus on
a)  Providing electricity to all villages in India
b)  Separating feeder lines for rural industrial and other uses
c)  Reduction of transmission and distribution losses
d)  Bridging revenue loss by effective monitoring of electricity usage
Answer: B
DDUGJY does NOT separate feeder lines for industrial and other uses. It separates the power of rural farmer households from Main supply to ensure efficient power supply to farmers. So, option (b) is wrong.
Option (d) is correct as DDUGJY intends to cover revenue losses through metering.
The new scheme of Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana
(DDUGJY), recently approved by the Union Government draws its
inspiration from the similar pioneering scheme implemented by the
Government of Gujarat.
This scheme will enable to initiate much awaited reforms in the rural areas.
It focuses on feeder separation (rural households & agricultural) and strengthening of sub-transmission & distribution infrastructure including metering at all levels in rural areas.
This will help in providing round the clock power to rural households and adequate power to agricultural consumers .
The earlier scheme for rural electrification viz. Rajiv Gandhi Grameen
Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY) has been subsumed in the new scheme as its rural electrification component

100 The implementation of the 'Smart Cities Mission' at the City level will be done by a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV). Which of the following statements is INCORRECT about SPVs?
a)  It will be a limited company incorporated under the Companies Act.
b)  SPVs will not include any private sector participation in ownership.
c)  Government of India will provide funds to the SPVs to implement the project.
d)  Both the State government and Urban Local Body will control the
SPVs.
Answer: B
The private sector or financial institutions could be considered for taking equity stake in the SPV, provided the shareholding pattern of 50:50 of the State/UT and the ULB is maintained and the State/UT and the ULB together have majority shareholding and control of the SPV. So, option (b) is incorrect, and (d) is correct.
The SPV will plan, appraise, approve, release funds, implement, manage, operate, monitor and evaluate the Smart City development projects.
Each smart city will have a SPV which will be headed by a full time CEO and have nominees of Central Government, State Government and ULB on its Board
The States/ULBs shall ensure that,
a)  a dedicated and substantial revenue stream is made available to the SPV so as to make it self-sustainable and could evolve its own credit worthiness for raising additional resources from the market and
b)  Government contribution for Smart City is used only to create
infrastructure that has public benefit outcomes.
The execution of projects may be done through joint ventures, subsidiaries, public-private partnership (PPP), turnkey contracts, etc suitably dovetailed with revenue streams.
