

1 Ministry of Textiles is examining the possibilities of developing and promoting naturally colour cotton varieties as a supplement to traditional cotton. Why coloured cotton is
finding it difficult to replace traditional white cotton?
1.  The seed cotton yield of the colour-cotton is much lower than white cotton.
2.  Lower fibre strength of coloured cotton makes it difficult to be spun on machine
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: B
 Statement 1: The seed cotton yield of the colour-cotton is reportedly more or less at par with the traditional varieties of white cotton in India. Though the fibre is shorter and weaker, it has great softer feel and is used for producing textiles for specific markets
Statement 2: There are major deficiencies in the colour cotton varieties viz. Short Staple length, Lower fibre Strength resulting into poor machine spinnability, colour shades presently restricted to Brown and Green only.
As such Colour-Cotton cannot be spun/weaved on machine. This restricts the development of Naturally Coloured Cotton.
Therefore, the development of Naturally Coloured Cotton entirely depends on development of colour cotton varieties of better fibre properties.
 At present the coloured Cotton fabrics are made largely blended with white Cotton fibre due to its weaker fibre properties and as such pure colour cotton fabrics are fewer in use.
There appears a need for development of new varieties/hybrids suiting the industrial demand for long stapled naturally coloured cotton besides creating new colour mosaic of existing Naturally Coloured Cotton.
Currently, Naturally Coloured Cotton is cultivatedin a smaller scale in Dharwad region of Karnataka, Coimbatore region of Tamil Nadu, Vidharbha region of Maharashtra and Guntur region of Andhra Pradesh under the patronage of Research Institution in the areas.
http://www.ministryoftextiles.gov.in/sites/default/files/Note%20on%20Cotton.pdf

2 Supreme Court is also a 'Court of Record'. What does it imply?
a)  Its judgments are recognised as legal precedents and legal references
b)  Its records all the judgments made by all subordinate courts in India
c)  Proceedings in Supreme Court are always recorded by way of writing or digital media.
d)  All courts in India are subordinate to the Supreme Court
Answer: A
 The Supreme Court has which of the following two powers as a Court of
Record:
The judgements, proceedings and acts of the Supreme Court are recorded for perpetual memory and 
It has power to punish for contempt of court. In 1991, the Supreme Court has ruled that it has power to punish for contempt not only of itself but also of high courts, subordinate courts and tribunals functioning in the entire country.

3 Currency Deposit Ratio (CDR) in India is likely to increase in times of
a)  Festive seasons
b)  Subdued consumption
c)  High monetary policy rates like Bank rate
d)  None of the above
Answer: A
 The currency deposit ratio (cdr) is the ratio of money held by the public in currency to that they hold in bank deposits.
Cdr = CU/DD.
If a person gets Re 1 she will put Rs 1/(1 + cdr) in her bank account and keep
Rs cdr/(1 + cdr) in cash.
It reflects people's preference for liquidity. It is a purely behavioural parameter which depends, among other things, on the seasonal pattern of expenditure.
For example, cdr increases during the festive season as people convert deposits to cash balance for meeting extra expenditure during such periods.
Option (b) can't be the answer as subdued consumption means people would like to keep money in banks and hold less cash.
Option (c) can't be the answer as high policy rates promote savings, not consumption.

4 Consider the following about Virashaiva movement.
1.  It was initiated by Basavanna
2.  It began in Karnataka in the mid-eighteenth century
3.  It was against Brahmanical ideas about caste and the treatment of women.
4.  It did not support rituals but was inclined towards idol worship as a symbol of the eternal truth.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 3 only
b)  1, 2 and 4 only
c)  2, 3 and 4 only
d)  1, 2, 3 and 4
Answer: A
 Statement 1: It was initiated by Basavanna and his companions like
Allama Prabhu and Akkamahadevi
Statement 2: Being associated with the Bhakti movement, it could not be initiated in
18th century. You could have easily eliminated this option and got the right answer, which can only be (a). It was started in the mid-twelfth century.
Statement 3 and 4: The Virashaivas argued strongly for the equality of all human beings and against Brahmanical ideas about caste and the treatment of women. They were also against all forms of ritual and idol worship.

5 Which of the following statements about Zari handicrafts is correct?
a)  It is made from jute and cotton only.
b)  All clusters of Zari handicrafts in India are located in Southern India.
c)  Zari can be woven into fabrics made of silk
d)  It is the youngest embroidery style of Indian handicrafts.
Answer: C
  It is an even thread traditionally made of fine gold or silver used in traditional Indian, Pakistani and Persian garments and other materials such as curtains, etc. So, option A is wrong.
Option (c) and (d): Zari is woven into fabrics, primarily made of silk, felt or velvet to create intricate patterns. The thread is also used as a raw material for Zardozi embroidery, which is one of the oldest and most beautiful embroidery styles of India.
It is used extensively in clothing and home decoration.
Option (b): Four types of zari are produced in India, namely, real zari, semi real zari, imitation zari and plastic zari.
Main clusters: Surat is the home of zari Industry in India. Other clusters producing zari are Bareilly, Varanasi, Agra, Hyderabad, Lucknow, Vadodara, Lathur, Jaipur, Barmer, etc

6 The farmers mix lime with soil while farming their fields to
a)  Make soil water logged
b)  Reduce the porosity of the soil
c)  Maintain the water content in the soil
d)  Decrease the acidity of the soil
Answer: D
 Acidic soils create production problems by limiting the availability of some essential plant nutrients and increasing that of the soil solution's toxic elements, such as aluminum and manganese, the major cause of poor crop performance and failure in acidic soils.
Soil acidity can be corrected easily by liming the soil, or adding basic materials to neutralize the acid present.
The most commonly used liming material is agricultural limestone, the most economical and relatively easy to manage source.
The limestone is not very water-soluble, making it easy to handle.
As lime dissolves in the soil, calcium (Ca) moves to the surface of soil particles, replacing the acidity.
The acidity reacts with the carbonate (CO3) to form carbon dioxide (CO2)
and water (H2O). The result is a soil that is less acidic (has a higher pH).

7 Cloud Burst is a localized weather phenomenon representing highly concentrated rainfall over a small area in a short duration of time Consider the following statements about a Cloud Burst.
1.  Cloud Burst occurs only in hilly areas.
2.  Cumulonimbus clouds are associated with the phenomenon.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: B
 Statement 1: Hilly areas are more prone, but such cloudbursts can happen in other favourable areas (e.g. coasts with mountains on the side) where a large amount of moisture is available
The topographical conditions like steep hills favour the formation of these clouds. Statement 2: Various researches suggest that they are manifestations of intense
vortices on small scale that generate strong convection currents, which lift the
moisture laden air with sufficient rapidity to form cumulonimbus clouds shedding water load with great strength and ferocity.
 There is no satisfactory technique for anticipating the occurrence of cloud bursts because of their small scale.
A network of radars is required to be able to detect the likelihood of a cloud burst but this would be prohibitively expensive.
Only the areas likely to receive heavy rainfall can be identified on a short range scale.

8 A high 'demographic gap' will result in
a)  Very low sex ratio
b)  Majority of adult population in the region
c)  Population explosion
d)  All of the above
Answer: C
  Demographic transition passes through three phases.
The second phase related to decline in death rates, but not a proportionate decrease in birth rates
A consequence of the decline in mortality in Stage two is an increasingly rapid rise in population growth (a "population explosion") as the gap between deaths and births grows wider.
This change in population occurred in north-western Europe during the 19th century due to the Industrial Revolution.

9 Consider the following statements about Second generation bio-fuels in India.
1.  Second generation bio-fuels can be made from non-food crops unlike First
Generation Bio-fuels that are derived from food crops
2.  Commercially second generation bio-fuel is rapidly expanding in India with an aim to replace traditional fuels.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: A
 Statement 1: The experiment with first generation biofuels has opened the debate of fuel versus food, because first generation biofuels are made from sugars derived from food crops, such as such as sugar cane, corn, wheat, and sugar beet. Thus, food security could be jeopardized in search of energy security using such fuels
Second generation biofuels are made from food crop residues or industrial wastes as well as from non-food crops, which do not compete with food or fodder.
The Department of Biotechnology ' keeping the above in mind ' has drawn up the Bioenergy Road Map: Vision 2020.
Statement 2: The vision statement says: 'No commercially viable second generation biofuel technology is currently available. The national need demands a paradigm shift from reactive to proactive technologies.'
So, Targets 2020 are:

20 per cent blending of fossil fuel by 2020
Commercially viable lignocellulosic ethanol produced from agricultural and forestry waste
An economically cost efficient system for algal biofuel production
Next generation biofuels from different biomass feedstock

10 Changthang plateau of Ladakh region is known for the production of
a)  Thinnest cotton in the world
b)  Cross-breed Moonga
c)  Pashmina Wool
d)  Golden Silk
Answer: C
 India produces the finest Pashmina (Cashmere) wool in the world, coming from the Changthang plateau of Ladakh region of J&K State.
The Changthang is a high altitude plateau, home to Changpa tribes (question asked in CSP 2013, see more here https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Changpa) Pashmina wool is produced by Changra (Pashmina) goat in Ladakh and Chegu breed of goat in the eastern parts of Himalayas.
There many local type of Non-Pashmina goat breeds which come from the same larger genetic pool but contribute little to the total Pashmina production of the region
http://www.ministryoftextiles.gov.in/sites/default/files/PWD_guidelines_so_wool.p df

11 Which of the following concerning Queen Victoria's Proclamation 1858 is
INCORRECT?
a)  It announced the end of Company's rule in India and the Queen's assumption of the Government of India
b)  It assured the Indian people equal and impartial protection of law and freedom of religion and social practices.
c)  The Proclamation of Queen Victoria gave a practical shape to the Act of 1858
d)  It announced that Britain and other European powers would not trade or invest any further with India without the permission of the natives
Answer: D
  In November 1858 the Proclamation of Queen Victoria was announced by Lord Canning at Allahabad
This royal Proclamation was translated into Indian languages and publicly read in many important places.
It announced the end of Company's rule in India and the Queen's assumption of the Government of India. It endorsed the treaty made by the Company with Indian princes and promised to respect their rights, dignity and honour.
It assured the Indian people equal and impartial protection of law and freedom of religion and social practices. The Proclamation of Queen Victoria significantly influenced the Act of 1858 whereby the crown was given the authority over India,
rather than the company.
It did not deal with the issue of banning trade and investments, which continued later too. So, option (d) is wrong.

12 Consider the following matches of rivers with their origin locations.
1.  Pennar : Coorg
2.  Cauvery: Kolar
3.  Krishna: Mahabaleshwar
4.  Godavari: Nashik
Which of the above is/are correct matches?
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  3 and 4 only
c)  1 and 4 only
d)  2 and 3 only
Answer: B
 The image below is a comprehensive source of information.

13 Suppose a sealed bottle was 50% filled with water and rest with air at atmospheric pressure of earth's surface. If suddenly the pressure outside the bottle reduces drastically and the bottle is opened, there are chances that
a)  Water in the bottle will immediately freeze
b)  Water in the bottle may start boiling
c)  Water will suddenly decompose in oxygen and hydrogen
d)  Nothing will happen to the water irrespective of pressure conditions
Answer: B
 A liquid boils at a temperature at which its vapor pressure is equal to the pressure of the gas above it. The lower the pressure of a gas above a liquid, the lower the temperature at which the liquid will boil.
The normal boiling point of a liquid is the temperature at which its vapor pressure is equal to one atmosphere
If the pressure above water reduces, it is possible that its vapour pressure will exceed the pressure of air above it, so it may start boiling.

14 Consider the following about droughts in India
1.  More than 50% of the country is prone to drought in varying degrees
2.  Department of Land Resources is the nodal agency for managing drought conditions in India.
3.  Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) is the designated agency for providing drought early warning and forecasting
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  1, 2 and 3
Answer: C
 Statement 1: About 68% of the country suffers from drought. 35%
which receives rainfall between 750 mm and 1125 mm is considered drought prone while 33% receiving less than 750 mm is chronically drought prone
Droughts are classified into meteorological droughts, hydrological droughts and agricultural droughts.
Statement 2: Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare is the nodal agency.

15 Which of the following is/are the difference(s) between the writs of 'prohibition' and
'certiorari'?
1.  While 'prohibition' is available during the pendency of proceedings, 'certiorari' is applicable only after the order has been passed.
2.  While 'prohibition' is available against judicial authorities only, 'certiorari' is applicable to administrative authorities only
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: A
  For certiorari to apply, the order should have been already passed by the inferior court, which can later be quashed by the SC/HC. It applies to decisions of officers/tribunals having legal authority. Both the writs are issued against legal bodies.
So, 2 is wrong.
Several condition are necessary for the issue of writ of certiorari:
There should be court, tribunal or an officer having legal authonty to determine the question with a duty to act judicially.
Such a court, tribunal or officer must have passed an order acting without jurisdiction or in excess of the judicial authority vested by law in such court, tribunal or officer.
The order could also be against the principles of natural justice or the order could contain an error of judgment in appreciating the facts of the case.
Prohibition
The Writ of prohibition means to forbid or to stop and it is popularly known as Stay Order.
This is issued when a lower court or a body tries to transgress the limits or powers vested in it
The writ of prohibition is issued by any High Court or the SC to any inferior court, or quasi judicial body prohibiting the latter from continuing the proceedings in a particular case, where it has no jurisdiction to try.

16 Consider the following statements.
1.  Economic growth will always lead to inflation
2.  Economic growth will always lead to a fall in poverty and increase in per capita income.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: D
 Statement 1: If high growth results in an imbalance of supply and demand (greater than supply), then inflation is likely.
On the other hand, if supply outstrips demand due to high growth, prices will be depressed.
Statement 2: High growths are necessary for reducing poverty, but high growths may not always reduce poverty.
The benefits of high growth may be restricted to the top earners of the population and little or no benefit may accrue to the BPL.
Also, whether Economic growth results in increase in per capita income depends on whether the population of the country has grown or not. If population growth has outpaced economic growth rate, then per capita income will reduce.

17 How will the Consumer Care Guidance Centers (Grahak Suvidha Kendra) initiative of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs be helpful to the consumers?
1.  It will operate as a 'single window' mechanism offering consumers information and advice.
2.  It will allow consumers to file complaints against misleading advertisements
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: C
 Statement 1: Grahak Suvidha Kendras, can help Indian citizens faced with every day practical consumer problems by offering them information and professional advice, thus promoting consumer education and awareness and in the process empowering consumers.
Statement 2: For e.g. if an advertisement claims that a particular medicine will help in increasing the height of a person, and is dubious, then a complaint may be registered with GSKs.
Read more at:
http://www.oneindia.com/india/govt-unveils-portal-lodge-complaints-against-mislea ding-ads-1687897.html
Many other functions can be seen at the Q Source.

18 The Ganga basin consists of a wide variety of soils. Which of the following soil types found in the Ganga Basin covers the largest area of the basin?
a)  Mountain soils
b)  Alluvial Soils
c)  Red & Yellow Soils
d)  Deep Black Soil
Answer: A
 Contrary to common understanding, the answer is (a).
The text discusses the soil types, their erodibility and availability in Ganga basin. While soils of the high Himalayas in the north are subject to continuous erosion, the
Gangetic plain provides a huge receptacle into which thousands of meters of thick layers of sediments have been deposited to form a wide valley plain.
The Deccan plateau on the south has a mantle of residual soils of varying thickness arising out of weathering of ancient rocks of the peninsular shield. Some of the soils are highly susceptible to erosion.
Mountain soils, submontane soils and alluvial soils, covering 58% of the basin area, have very high erodibility; red soils covering 12% of the basin area have high erodibility, red & yellow soils and mixed red and black soils covering an area of 8% have moderate erodibility, and deep black soils and medium black soils covering an area of 14% have low erodibility.
Shallow black soils and lateritic soils covering an area of 6% have very low erodibility.
The soils in Haryana, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand and West Bengal, through which the main stem of Ganga and all its tributaries flow, have very high erodibility.

19 The Jal Kranti Abhiyan launched by the Union Government aims at
a)  Turning one water scared village in each district of the country into water surplus village
b)  Inter-linking major rivers to fulfil water demands of arid areas
c)  Reducing seepage and evaporation loss of water by covering the canals and open reservoirs
d)  Connecting all villages to a Central water system for supplying tapped water
Answer: C
 It was in Jaipur, Rajasthan
Under the nationwide campaign a village with acute water scarcity on a pilot project will be selected as Jal Gram.
Jal Kranti Abhiyan aims at turning one water scared village in each district of
the country into water surplus village water through a holistic and integrated
approach by adopting conservation and management techniques.
In this identified village a comprehensive integrated development plan will be framed and several water conservation activities will be launched.
Activities proposed under the campaign include rain water harvesting, recycling of waste water, micro irrigation for using water efficiently and mass awareness program.
Along with it, a cadre of local water professional Jal Mitra will be created and they will be given training to create mass awareness.
As pilot project, activities under this nation campaign will be run in one water stressed village in each 672 districts in the country.

20 The Welby Commission was setup by the British Government to
a)  Enquire into the unnecessary expenditures by the British Indian government
b)  Report on the atrocities under the 1857 Mutiny.
c)  Investigate the charges made against Indian soldiers serving abroad
d)  Bring educational reforms in Indian Universities
Answer: A
 Dadabhai Naoroji in his famous book Poverty and UnBritish Rule in
India wrote his Drain Theory
He showed how India's wealth was going away to England in the form of: (a) salaries,(b)savings, (c) pensions, (d) payments to British troops in India and (e) profits of the British companies.
The British Government was forced to appoint the Welby Commission, with
Dadabhai as the first Indian as its member, to enquire into the Matter.
The Welby Commission's report, published in 1900, showed a number of cases where excessive or unjust payments had been made by the Indian government.

21 The Project Monitoring Group (PMG) is an institutional mechanism for resolving a variety of issues including fast tracking the approvals for setting up and expeditious commissioning of large Public and PPP projects. It is presently housed under
a)  Ministry of Finance
b)  Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion
c)  Cabinet Secretariat
d)  Prime Minister's Office (PMO)
Answer: D
 It was set up in 2013 under Cabinet Secretariat as PMG
PMG is now functioning under Prime Minister's Office (PMO) since 14th
September 2015.
A Project Proponent, in the process of setting up a project with an anticipated investment of Rs. 1000 crore in case of domestic investments and Rs. 500 crore in case of FDI projects and facing bottlenecks or apprehending delays in obtaining approvals from the public authorities, can upload any issue including a policy intervention required, in the PMG's e-suvidha portal.
The projects considered by PMG mainly pertain to sectors such as: National Highways and Railways
Civil Aviation and Shipping
Petroleum & Natural Gas Chemicals & Fertilisers Coal, Power and Mines
Cement, Construction and Steel

22 Cann indica, lemon grass and para grass are plants helpful in
a)  Wastewater treatment
b)  Generating flame retardants
c)  'Fracking' of Shale gas from shallow reservoirs
d)  Active genetic coding of plants
Answer: A
 The European Union and Government of India co-funded a project for water-use efficiency
It has shown remarkable success in reducing water scarcity and making safe the reuse of wastewater in agriculture By constructing wetlands with plant species such as Cann indica, lemon grass (Cymbopogon), napier (Pennisetum perpureum X Pennisetum americarnum), para grass (Urochloa mutica), typha (Typha latifolia), water hyacinth (Eichhornia crassipes), water lettuce (Pistia stratiotes) and a weed species Agaratum Conyzoides the chemical oxygen demand in wastewaters have been reduced by 30-92%.
Moreover, yield evaluations have shown increased crop yields (14 to 40%) of crops like okra, brinjal and chilly irrigated with treated wastewater as compared to fresh water.
http://www.dbtindia.nic.in/indo-eu-%E2%80%98water4crops%E2%80%99-progra mme-a-boon-to-water-scarce-agricultural-sector/

23 Nanotechnology can be helpful in
1.  Designing of targeted drug delivery vehicles and enhancing the efficacy of existing drugs
2.  Food fortification and in designing more robust nano-materials in food packaging
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: C
 Some of the priority areas of nano-technology, of Department of
Biotechnology includes:
Designing of new therapeutics and targeted drug delivery vehicles for cancer, arthritis, neurological and other important diseases.
Novel formulations to enhance the efficacy of existing drugs and expand their therapeutic spectrum
Diagnostics for early diseases detection and imaging
Design and development of smart nano-material for bio separation, tissue engineering and other medical applications
Sensors for detection of chemicals and pathogens in food and crops
Nano carriers system for pesticides, pheromones, nutrients /fertilizers Nanoparticles-mediated gene or DNA transfer in plants for development of pest-resistant varieties
Improving the nutritional qualities (fortification) of food and smart packaging system etc. It explains statement 2.

24 Which of the following has/have a bearing on the production of silk in India?
1.  Availability and quality of water
2.  Level of cocoon prices in the market
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: C
 Statement 1: The water used in silk reeling plays an important role. It is estimated that to produce one kg. Of silk from charka, the volume of water required is about 100 liters.
If the quality of water is poor, the impurities suspended in the water will adhere to the silk thereby the colour, and lustre of silk would be influenced. The water used for cooking cocoons should be colour less, odour less and transparent.
The recent reduction in crossbreed raw silk production is due to severe drought condition and drastic depletion in ground water in sericulture belts in the major silk producing states.
Statement 2: Please see this first
http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/Silk-farmers-burn-mulberry-crops-as-cocoo n-prices-crash/articleshow/48295681.cms
The mulberry area expansion was severely affected in many states due to crash in mulberry cocoon prices during planting season for mulberry.
The price crash and the drought conditions prevailed during 2015-16 also resulted in uprootment of mulberry leading to decline in mulberry area.

25 Sectors with 100% Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) cap is/are
1.  Agriculture
2.  Print Media
3.  Food Product Retail Trading
4.  Banking
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 3 only
b)  2 and 4 only
c)  1 and 4 only
d)  2 and 3 only
Answer: A
 Please see the following updated lists as per revised FDI policy (2016)
http://dipp.nic.in/English/Policies/Sectors_Where_Government_Approval_Is_Requi red.pdf
Banking (public sector) FDI is capped at 20%, whereas that in private banking it is
74%.
For Print media, it is 26%.
http://dipp.nic.in/English/Policies/Sectors_Under_Automatic_Route_With_Conditio ns.pdf

26 Consider the following about World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), headquartered in Geneva and Switzerland.
1.  It is a specialized agency of the United Nations
2.  It was founded along with the World Trade Organization (WTO) as a part of it.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: A
 Statement 2: WIPO was established by the WIPO Convention in 1967 with a mandate from its Member States to promote the protection of IP throughout the world through cooperation among states and in collaboration with other international organizations
WTO was established in 1995, so statement 2 is wrong.
 As a specialized agency of the UN, it is dedicated to developing a balanced and accessible international intellectual property (IP) system.
WIPO has established WIPOnet, a global information network. The project seeks to link over 300 intellectual property offices (IP offices) in all WIPO Member States.
In addition to providing a means of secure communication among all connected parties, WIPOnet is the foundation for WIPO's intellectual property services.

27 Which of the following resulted in the creation of the European Union?
a)  Treaty of Portsmouth
b)  Paris Declaration
c)  Rome Declaration
d)  Maastricht treaty
Answer: D
 Upon its entry into force in 1993, it created the European Union and led to the creation of the single European currency, the euro.
One of the obligations of the treaty for the members was to keep "sound fiscal policies, with debt limited to 60% of GDP and annual deficits no greater than 3% of GDP".
The treaty also created what was commonly referred to as the pillar structure of the European Union.
The treaty established the three pillars of the European Union'one
supranational pillar created from three European Communities (which included the European Community (EC), the European Coal and Steel Community and the European Atomic Energy Community), the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP) pillar, and the Justice and Home Affairs (JHa) pillar.
The Maastricht Treaty has been amended by the treaties of Amsterdam, Nice and Lisbon.

28 Which of the following has NOT been one of the objectives of Land reforms in India post-Independence?
a)  Consolidation of land holdings
b)  Abolition of intermediaries
c)  Tenant security
d)  Land acquisition
Answer: D
 Until Independence, a large part of agricultural land was held by the intermediaries under the zamindari, mahalwari and ryotwari systems. Consequently, the tenants were burdened with high rents, unproductive cultivation and other forms of exploitation.
Objectives were (in 1950-60s):
Abolish intermediaries (zamindars)
Ceiling on holdings and redistribute surplus land in excess of ceiling Regulate tenancy, amount of rent, ownership rights, rights of sharecroppers etc.
Consolidate small land holdings
Now, major objectives are focussed on
Forest Rights Act
PESA
Computerize land records to deal with encroachment - The Digital India Land Records Modernization Programme (DILRMP) has 3 major components - (a) Computerization of land record (b) Survey/re-survey (c) Computerization of Registration. The District has been taken as the unit of implementation, where
all programme activities are to converge. I
Improve agricultural productivity and conservation of land

29 The National Mission on Bio-Diesel intends to bring unutilzed wasteland in to productive use by promotion of Jatropha and Pongamia to produce bio-diesel and reduce import dependence of India. Which of the following statements about Jatropha is INCORRECT?
a)  It is resistant to a high degree of aridity, allowing it to be grown in sandy soils.
b)  The seeds can be processed to obtain high-quality biodiesel fuel that can be used in a standard diesel engine.
c)  The plant and its seed in raw form are used as an eatable medicine.
d)  None of the above
Answer: C
 Option (a): Jatropha curcas grows in tropical and subtropical regions. The plant can grow in wastelands and grows on almost any terrain, even on gravelly, sandy and saline soils.
Option (b): When jatropha seeds are crushed, the resulting jatropha oil can be processed to produce a high-quality biofuel or biodiesel that can be used in a standard diesel car or further processed into jet fuel. The oil is largely made up of oleic and linoleic acids.
The residue (press cake) can also be used as biomass feedstock to power electricity plants, used as fertilizer (it contains nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium), or as animal fodder. The cake can also be used as feed in digesters and gasifiers to produce biogas.
Option (c): J. curcas is a poisonous, semi-evergreen shrub or small tree. The seeds are also a source of the highly poisonous toxalbumin curcin or jatrophin.
 Jatropha curcas has limited natural vegetative propagation and is usually propagated by seed. Propagation through seed (sexual propagation) leads to a lot of genetic variability in terms of growth, biomass, seed yield and oil content.
Low seed viability and the recalcitrant nature of oil seeds also limit seed
propagation.
However, clonal techniques can help in overcoming these problems that hinder mass propagation of this tree-borne oilseed species.

30 The idea of a National Court of Appeal was mooted by
a)  Supreme Court
b)  Ministry of Law and Justice
c)  Union Public Service Commission
d)  Central Administrative Tribunal
Answer: A
 The Supreme Court is saddled with civil and criminal appeals that arise out of everyday and even mundane disputes
As a result of entertaining these appeals, the Supreme Court's real mandate ' that of a Constitutional Court, the ultimate arbiter on disputes concerning any interpretation of the Constitution ' is not fulfilled.
By taking up the Supreme Court's appeals jurisdiction, the NCA will give the former more time for its primal functions.
The National Court Appeal with regional benches in Chennai, Mumbai and Kolkata is meant to act as final court of justice in dealing with appeals from the decisions of the High Courts and tribunals within their region in civil, criminal, labour and revenue matters.
In such a scenario, a much-relieved Supreme Court of India situated in Delhi would only hear matters of constitutional law and public law.
The Supreme Court itself, as early as in 1986, had recommended establishment of an
NCA.
However, the Centre in 2014 rejected the idea of a NCA.
Recently,the SC has formed a constitutional bench to discuss the case of a NCA. See in the Q source
http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/constitution-bench-to-hear-plea-for-nationa
l-court-of-appeal/article8845710.ece

31 Which of the following clearly bring(s) out the importance of South China Sea?
1.  Strategically located it is a major international shipping route as a large number of ships pass through it.
2.  The sea is rich in energy, mineral and fishing resources
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: C
 Statement 1: Almost 50% of world's merchant ships pass through it.
Statement 2: Reserves of natural resources around the sea including petroleum has been clearly found in South China Sea. India is already exploring a few blocks in association with Vietnam.
 The Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCa) in Hague has recently rejected China's claims to economic rights across large swathes of South China Sea.
It says, there was no legal basis for China to claim historic rights to resources within the South China Sea areas falling within the 'nine-dash line.
http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/13/world/asia/south-china-sea-hague-ruling-philip pines.html

32 Kerala Government has recently proposed a 'Fat Tax' on
a)  Companies producing saturated fatty acids and oil
b)  Fast food items
c)  All restaurants operational within Kerala
d)  Liquor outlets
Answer: B
 It is proposed to be imposed on fast food items like burgers, pizzas, donuts and pasta etc. served in branded restaurants in a bid to discourage the junk food culture.
It was announced in the maiden budget of the new Government in Kerala. The revised state budget for 2016-17 expects the Fat tax will add an additional Rs.10 crore to the state coffers.
The fat tax's major concern is with issues related to public health more than revenue generation.
Kerala isn't the first state to impose so-called Fat tax. In January 2016, Bihar
government decided to impose a 13.5% value-added tax (VAT) on items such as salted peanuts, samosas, sweets and a few branded snacks.

33 The 'eThekwani Declaration' is associated with
a)  SAARC covering free trade in essential commodities
b)  IBSA covering defence equipment import related problems
c)  IMF covering balance of payments of member countries
d)  BRICS covering drug-related issues
Answer: D
 Under the 'eThekwani Declaration' BRICS countries had decided to explore economic issues and various new areas of cooperation among the member States including drug-related issues
The second anti-drug working group meeting of heads of anti-narcotics agencies of BRICS countries began in New Delhi to discuss issues related to narco-terrorism and money laundering.
It has been organised by India in accordance with the 'eThekwani Declaration' adopted during the BRICS summit in 2013 at Durban. India has taken over the BRICS Chairmanship for the year 2016 for the second time after 2012.
http://indianexpress.com/article/world/world-news/rajnath-singh-to-inaugurate-brics
-second-anti-drug-meeting-2900748/

34 As per a recent government initiative, the names of the Madras High Court and Bombay
High Court are to altered by
a)  A Presidential order
b)  Legislation in Parliament
c)  A constitutional amendment only
d)  The High Court concerned with an order
Answer: B
 The Union Cabinet has given its approval to The High Courts (Alteration of Names) Bill, 2016 to change names of the High Courts based on the
nomenclature cities they are located.
The Bill facilitates changing of the names of 'Madras High Court as Chennai High Court' and 'Bombay High Court as Mumbai High Court' respectively. There was no Union Law before under which the proposal for change of names of these High Courts could be addressed. This Bill has addressed this requirement.
Earlier, the government had planned to vest the President with powers to rename a high court in consultation with the governor, the chief minister and the chief justice of that state. But the idea has been shelved.
http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/Centre-changes-names-of-high-courts/articl eshow/53063508.cms

35 The Great Depression of 1929 is known in the context of
a)  Huge slump in production and employment in the West
b)  Decline in beneficial climatic events near poles
c)  Ozone holes that surfaced for the first time above the equator
d)  Collapse of agricultural markets in Asia in view of decolonization
Answer: A
 The Great Depression of 1929 and the subsequent years saw the output and employment levels in the countries of Europe and North America fall by huge amounts
It affected other countries of the world as well. Demand for goods in the market was low, many factories were lying idle, workers were thrown out of jobs.
In USA, from 1929 to 1933, unemployment rate rose from 3 per cent to 25
per cent (unemployment rate may be defined as the number of people who are not working and are looking for jobs divided by the total number of people who are working or looking for jobs).
Over the same period aggregate output in USA fell by about 33 per cent. These events made economists think about the functioning of the economy in
a new way, which led to the Keynes stating government intervention in the
economy.

36 In the technique of drip irrigation
a)  Water is applied to the crops using a sprinkler
b)  Plants are watered by narrow tubings which deliver water directly at the base of the plant
c)  Canal water is directly supplied to crops
d)  Plants are dipped in high water for long
Answer: B
 Drip irrigation is a form of irrigation that saves water and fertilizer by allowing water to drip slowly to the roots of many different plants, either onto the soil surface or directly onto the root zone, through a network of valves, pipes, tubing, and emitters.
It is done through narrow tubes that deliver water directly to the base of the plant.
Water is applied close to plants so that only part of the soil in which the roots grow is wetted unlike surface and sprinkler irrigation, which involves wetting the whole soil profile.
With drip irrigation water, applications are more frequent (usually every 1-3 days) than with other methods and this provides a very favourable high moisture level in the soil in which plants can flourish.
Drip irrigation is most suitable for row crops (vegetables, soft fruit), tree and vine crops where one or more emitters can be provided for each plant. Generally only high value crops are considered because of the high capital costs of installing a drip system.

37 Consider the following about Radio-frequency identification (RFID) technology.
1.  It uses electromagnetic fields to automatically identify and track tags attached to objects.
2.  An advantage of the technology is that the RFID device does not need to be in line
of sight to the scanner.

3.  RFID devices can work upto hundreds of metres of range.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  1 only
Answer: A
 Statement 1: RFID refers to small electronic devices that consist of a small chip and an antenna. The RFID device serves the same purpose as a bar code or a magnetic strip on the back of a credit card or ATM card; it provides a unique identifier for that object.
And, just as a bar code or magnetic strip must be scanned to get the information, the
RFID device must be scanned to retrieve the identifying information.
Statement 2: A significant advantage of RFID devices over the others mentioned above is that the RFID device does not need to be positioned precisely relative to the scanner. Store checkout clerks sometimes have difficulty in making sure that a barcode can be read due it not being in line of sight.
Statement 3: RFID devices will work within a few feet (up to 20 feet for high- frequency devices) of the scanner. For example, you could just put all of your groceries or purchases in a bag, and set the bag on the scanner. It would be able to query all of the RFID devices and total your purchase immediately.
RFID technology has been available for more than fifty years. It has only been recently that the ability to manufacture the RFID devices has fallen to the point where they can be used as a "throwaway" inventory or control device.

38 World's best fishing grounds are formed where
a)  Coastal areas adjoin high density of warm currents
b)  Warm and cold currents meet
c)  There is a severe lack of phytoplankton
d)  Deep marine trenches are found
Answer: B
The following conditions are good for fisheries production & catch:
Coastal upwelling of nutrient rich colder water
Abundance of phytoplankton
Meeting of warm and cold currents
Shallow continental shelves in cold regions
It is exemplified by the fact that one of the world's richest fishing grounds situated around the coast of Iceland.

39 Why a very large thickness of sedimentary rocks is found in Fold Mountains?
a)  Due to the folding of sediments into niber folds
b)  Due to the folding of plains into mountains
c)  Due to accumulation of sediments in a geo-syncline
d)  Sediments have been deposited in the valley for millions of years
Answer: C
 Formation of Fold Mountains: Rivers deposit huge quantities of sediments in depressions called geosynclines.
Over millions of years the sediments are compressed into sedimentary rocks such as sandstone and limestone.
The plates move together (a compressional plate boundary) forcing the sedimentary rocks upwards into a series of folds by the movement of tectonic plates. This causes the thickness of the rocks in fold mountains.

40 Why the leap year system was designed for every four years?
a)  Earth revolves around the Sun at different velocities in different years.
b)  The apparent insolation from the Sun reduces every four years.
c)  Earth completes one complete revolution around the Sun in slightly more
than 365 days.
d)  It is based on the prime meridian convention.
Answer: C
 A common year has 365 days and a leap year 366 days, with the extra, or intercalary, day designated as February 29.
A leap year occurs every four years to help synchronize the calendar year with the solar year, or the length of time it takes the earth to complete its orbit about the sun, which is about 365' days.
The length of the solar year, however, is slightly less than 365' days-by about 11 minutes. To compensate for this discrepancy, the leap year is omitted three times every four hundred years.

41 Which of the following is/are essential/desirable characteristics of drinking water dealt as per Indian standards (IS)?
1.  Total hardness
2.  Amount of Total Dissolved Solids
3.  Alkalinity
4.  pH value
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1 and 4 only
d)  1, 2, 3 and 4
Answer: D
 The Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) has specified drinking water quality standards in India to provide safe drinking water to the people.
Broadly speaking water is defined as unfit for drinking as per Bureau of Indian
Standards, IS-10500-2012, if it is bacteriologically contaminated (e.g. E-coli,
viruses etc.) or if chemical contamination exceeds maximum permissible limits (e.g. excess fluoride), Total Dissolved Solids (TDS) exceed a certain limit or minerals
like iron, manganese, arsenic, nitrates etc.
You can see the revised IS: 10500: 2012 herehttp://cgwb.gov.in/Documents/WQ-standards.pdf

42 Which of the following is/are NOT biofertilizer?
1.  Azospirillum
2.  Azolla
3.  Nirbac
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  3 only
c)  2 only
d)  1 and 3 only
Answer: B
Statement 1: These are primary inhabitants of soil, the rhizosphere and intercellular spaces of root cortex of graminaceous plants. They perform the associative symbiotic relation with the graminaceous plants.
The bacteria of Genus Azospirillum are N2 fixing organisms isolated from the root and above ground parts of a variety of crop plants. They are Gram negative,
Statement 2: Azolla is a free-floating water fern that floats in water and fixes atmospheric nitrogen in association with nitrogen fixing blue green alga Anabaena azollae.

43 The change in the approach to social protection and development in the 21st Century can best be termed as
a)  Material-centric approach to b)  Government-centric approach to c)  Output-based approach to d)  Rights-based approach to Answer: D
The main rationale for a human rights-based approach is that such an approach directly affects the individual and is consistent with the dignity of an individual.
Earlier the schemes were rolled out as doles or entitlements, but the present trend has been to design schemes that for e.g. assign right to work (MGNREGa), right to food (Food Security Act) etc.
This is a paradigm shift in the approach of development.

44 India as a "Knowledge Economy" implies
a)  Only education can result in our economic growth.
b)  India has become a large export destination for published materials.
c)  Physical infrastructure must be given for expanding knowledge-based education in Universities.
d)  India is advancing in the use of knowledge-intensive sectors like Information
Technology.
Answer: D
 A knowledge economy relies more on consumption and production on intellectual capital rather than only physical goods and services.
For e.g. the Indian software industry has been showing an impressive record over the past decade.
Entrepreneurs, bureaucrats and politicians are now advancing views about how India can transform itself into a knowledge-based economy by using information technology (IT).
There have been some instances of villagers using e-mail which are cited as examples of such transformation. Likewise, e-governance is being projected as the way of the future.
The value of IT depends greatly on the existing level of economic development.

45 Which one of the following is a strong smelling agent added to LPG cylinders to help in the detection of gas leakages?
a)  Methanol
b)  Ethanethiol or Ethyl Mercaptan
c)  Ethane
d)  Chloroform
Answer: B
IUPAC (International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry) name for the chemical is Ethanethiol. Alternate name for the substance is Ethyl Mercaptan.
It is a colorless gas or clear liquid with a distinct odor.
Ethanethiol is toxic. It occurs naturally as a minor component of petroleum, and may be added to otherwise odorless gaseous products such as liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) to help warn of gas leaks.
At these concentrations, ethanethiol is not harmful.

46 If the elliptical orbit of earth around the Sun changes to a circular orbit, which one among the following may result in that situation?
a)  It would not make any difference to earth, its atmosphere and temperature.
b)  The Earth will suddenly become very cold and uninhabitable.
c)  All gases on earth will escape.
d)  The difference between seasons may be changed.
Answer: D
 The seasons are caused as the Earth, tilted on its axis, travels in a loop around the Sun each year. Summer happens in the hemisphere tilted towards the Sun, and winter happens in the hemisphere tilted away from the Sun.
If earth starts orbiting in a circular loop, the distance between various nodes where seasons start changing will most probably reduce.
This however, depends on the size of the circular orbit and many other
considerations, but the most appropriate response here would be (d), as all other options are absurd.

47 Which one among the following statements regarding the social and religious reform ideas of Raja Rammohan Roy is NOT correct?
a)  He formed the Brahmo Samaj in the 19th Century.
b)  He exclusively focussed on the problems of the higher social class of India.
c)  He did not discriminate between religions and considered them as
embodiments of universal theism.
d)  Exposure to Christian Unitarianism strengthened his views on his Vedantic monism.
Answer: B
Option (b): He dealt with women issues and those of underprivileged sections of the society.
Option (d):
Unitarianism is historically a Christian theological movement named for the affirmation that God is one entity, in direct contrast to Trinitarianism, which defines God as three persons in one being.
Vedantic monism also talks about one being or one God departing from concepts of duality (dwaita).
Establishment of the 'Calcutta Unitarian Committee' by Rammohan Roy exemplifies this that his views on Vedantic monism were strengthened.

48 Inventories are likely to be accumulated in the economy due to
a)  Excess consumption by the consumers
b)  Firms overproducing in anticipation of higher prices in the future
c)  High depreciation of capital goods
d)  Degradation of physical infrastructure in the economy
Answer: B
 Inventories are unsold stock. Firms will accumulate inventories when either present raw material prices are high or they anticipate high product prices, or if they think raw material prices will sharply increase in the near future.
It can also be caused if consumers do not spend too much or consume less, and the present stock is left unsold.
So, inventories accumulate due to both supply side and demand side reasons.

49 The early history of the 'far south' is the history of the three tribal principalities which are mentioned in Ashoka's inscriptions of the third century BC, in some brief Tamil inscriptions of the second century BC and in Kharavela's inscription of the first century BC. These tribal principalities are
a)  Cholas, Pandyas and Cheras
b)  Rashtrakutas, Pallavas and Veras
c)  Mundakas, Niralayas and Senas
d)  Pachyatanas, Nibhikas and Rualias
Answer: A
About this period in South India: The chronicles of Sri Lanka contain many references to the fights between the kings of Sri Lanka and the kings of southern India.
Sangam literature was named after the 'academies' (sangam) of Madural and its environs where poets worked under the patronage of the Pandya kings. The famous Tarnil grammar, Tolkappivam, is considered to belong to the beginning of this whole period and the great Tamil epic poem. Shilappatikaram, to its very end, perhaps even to the fifth or sixth centuries AD.
The Chera kingdom of the southwest coast (Kerala) must have been such a large-scale family enterprise gaining legitimacy from tribal loyalties and the network of their respective clan.

50 Which of the following is NOT a groundwater contaminant in India?
a)  Fluoride
b)  Nitrate
c)  Uranium
d)  Iron
Answer: C
 85 % of rural population of the country uses ground water for drinking and domestic purposes.
Nitrate is a very common constituent in the ground water, especially in shallow aquifers.
Ground water contaminated by iron has been reported from the states of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, J& K, Jharkhand Karnataka Kerala.
High concentration of fluoride in ground water beyond the permissible limit of 1.5 mg/l poses the health problem.
State wise details of distribution of flouride in Ground Water above permissible limit -State wise details of distribution of flouride in Ground Water above permissible limit -
Another groundwater contaminant is Arsenic found in WB, UP, Assam, Bihar etc.

51 Global Biodiversity Outlook (GBO) is periodically published under the auspices of the
a)  Convention on Biological Diversity
b)  Warsaw Convention
c)  UNESCO Biodiversity Division
d)  International Union For Conservation of Nature (IUCN)
Answer: A
The second meeting of the Conference of the Parties (of the CBD) called for the preparation of a periodic report on biological diversity: the Global
Biodiversity Outlook (GBO).
It suggested that the GBO should provide a summary of the status of biological diversity and an analysis of the steps being taken by the global community to ensure that biodiversity is conserved and used sustainably, and that benefits arising from
the use of genetic resources are shared equitably.
As per the Global Biodiversity Outlook 4 : International efforts to meet targets to stem the loss of wildlife and habitats are failing miserably, according to a UN report.

52 Why is the lower course of a river in many cases filled with sediments?
1.  The velocity of a river is low in its river course.
2.  Bed erosion dominates in the lower course of the river.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: A
 Statement 1: The sediment carried is dumped only when the river velocity is low enough for suspended particles to settle down and erosion activity considerably reduces.
This happens in the lower course of the river.
Statement 2: Bed erosion dominates in the upper course when river velocity is sufficiently high. This increases the sediment load of the river which reaching the lower course is dumped by the river.

53 Consider the following matches of tribes with the state they are found predominantly in.
1.  Reang : Uttarakhand
2.  Dimasa : Assam
3.  Konyak : Nagaland
4.  Mishmi : Meghalaya
Select the correct matches using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  1, 3 and 4 only
c)  3 only
d)  2 and 3 only
Answer: D
Statement 1: Reang are one of the 21 scheduled tribes of the Indian state of Tripura.
The correct nomenclature for this ethnic group is actually Bru.
The Bru can be found mainly in the North Tripura, Dhalai and the South
Tripura districts of Tripura state in India.
However, they may also be found in Mizoram, Assam, Manipur and Bangladesh. They speak the Reang dialect of Kokborok language which is of Tibeto-Burmese origin and is locally referred to as Kau Bru.
Statement 2: The Dimasa Kacharis : The Kacharis are the most widely spread tribe in northeast India. They are said to be the earliest inhabitants of the Brahmaputra Valley.
The Kacharis belong to the Indo-Mongoloid (Kirata) group which include the
Bodos and their allied tribes.
They have prominent Mongoloid features with high cheek bones, slit eyes and a slight growth of hair in the body and scant beard.
They call themselves Bodo or Bodo-fisa in the Brahmaputra valley and Dimasa or Dima-fisa or 'sons of the great river' in the North Cachar Hills & Karbi- Anglong district.
Statement 3: The Konyak are a Naga people, and are recognised among other Naga by their tattoos, which they have all over their face and hands; facial tattoos were earned for taking an enemy's head. They are called the land of Angh's. They have the largest population among the Nagas.
Statement 4: The Mishmi or Deng people of Tibet and Arunachal Pradesh are an ethnic group comprising mainly three tribes: Idu Mishmi (Idu Lhoba); Digaro tribe (Taraon, Darang Deng), and Miju Mishmi (Kaman Deng). The Mishmis occupy the northeastern tip of the central Arunachal Pradesh in Upper and Lower Dibang Valley, Lohit and Anjaw Districts/Medog County.

54 Which of the following water bodies has the highest salinity concentration?
a)  Red Sea
b)  Baltic Sea
c)  Arctic Sea
d)  All have equal salinity concentrations.
Answer: A
The Red Sea is one of the saltiest bodies of water in the world, owing to high evaporation.
Salinity ranges from between ~36 ? in the southern part because of the effect of the Gulf of Aden water and reaches 41 ? in the northern part, owing mainly to the Gulf of Suez water and the high evaporation.
The Baltic Sea's salinity is much lower than that of ocean water (which averages
3.5%), as a result of abundant freshwater runoff from the surrounding land, combined with the shallowness of the sea itself.
The ocean around Antarctica has a low salinity of just below 34ppt, and around the
Arctic it is down to 30ppt in some places. Thawing icebergs add freshwater -
icebergs that have broken off ice sheets formed over land do not contain salt, and the freezing of seawater into ice floes removes more salt.

55 Black spots are road locations that have
a)  Been in controversy due to corruption and malpractices
b)  Not been built using eco-friendly material
c)  A record of large numbers of crashes
d)  No street light facility
Answer: C
 These record of large numbers of crashes due to a variety of reasons, such as a sharp drop or corner in a straight road, so oncoming traffic is concealed, a
hidden junction on a fast road, poor or concealed warning signs at a cross-roads.
A circular issued to all the highway owning agencies including NHAI and state public works departments (PWDs) says that a team of engineers should inspect the identified spots or stretches to find whether there are engineering deficiencies, which may be the cause of repeated crashes and fatalities.
Source: http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/Roads-ministry-identifies-22-deadli est-spots-on-NHs/articleshow/50212341.cms

56 What do you understand by the term "Evergreening of patents"?
a)  Eco-friendly innovations that are patented
b)  Patents that have a long life
c)  Patents that enjoy a lifetime validity and royalty to the owner
d)  Patents that are renewed on the basis of marginal process improvements
Answer: D
 Evergreening is achieved by seeking extra patents on variations of the original drug - new forms of release, new dosages, new combinations or variations, new forms or new process of making.
Pharmaceutical companies refer to this as "lifecycle management".
But, marginal process improvements cannot be called as actual patents, since it is a move to monopolize the market without any clear benefit to the consumer from the product.
Read about a recent case here
http://www.ipatent.co.il/the-novartis-decision-evergreening-and-the-future-of-generi cs/

57 Mahmud Gawan served as the Prime Minister of three Bahamni Sultans from 1458 to
1481 A.D. Which of the following reform measures was/were introduced by him?
1.  He reduced the powers of the governors of the Provinces and strengthened that of the Central government.
2.  He introduced lands measurement and fixation of land taxes on that basis.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: A
Statement 1: The existing four provinces were divided into two each and created eight 'Tarafs'.
In each of these eight 'Tarafs' some areas were kept reserve for the control of the Central Government and for their administrative control, officials were appointed by the Centre.
Orders were issued by him for placing one fort in each province under the charge of the governor and others under the control of military commanders appointed by the Sultan.
He put a check on the powers of the nobles. Nobles were paid salaries and were asked to maintain contingents of horses
Statement 2: No such reform was introduced by him.
He used gunpowder in the war against the Vijayanagar kings in Belgaum. He is considered the architect of medieval Deccan who invited Persian chemists to
teach his soldiers the preparation and use of gunpowder.

58 Why should the cultivation of Jute be encouraged even further to replace synthetic fibres?
1.  Jute is biodegradable and an eco-friendly product.
2.  Jute plant can be used to produce domestic fuel as well as light building material.
3.  It has a very high carbon dioxide assimilation ability as generally compared to trees.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1 and 2 only
d)  1, 2 and 3
Answer: D
Statement 1: Jute, which is also called the golden fibre, meets all the standards for safe packaging in view of being a natural, renewable, biodegradable and eco-friendly product.
Statement 2: Though jute plant is known principally for its versatile fibre, every part of the plant has its use. The tender leaves are cooked and consumed as vegetables.
The leaves which fall off the plant enrich the soil, about 1 MT of dry matter is put back into the soil and about 3 MT of roots remain per acre of land.
The stick which remains after jute fibre is extracted is used as a domestic fuel and also as a cheap building material.
Statement 3: The plant itself has a very high carbon dioxide assimilation ability; in the 120 days of its growing period, an acre of jute absorbs about 6 MT of carbon dioxide form atmosphere and releases 4.4 MT of oxygen; several times higher than trees.
Apart from the versatility of the jute plant, the plant compares very favourably in terms of its ecological footprint when compared with synthetic packaging materials.
The principal varieties of jute in India are tossa (Corchorus Olitorious) and white jute (Corchorus Capsularis).

1.pdf

59 The Preamble is used by the Courts in constitutional interpretation because
1.  It contains the objective and philosophy of the Constitution makers.
2.  It is the source of all constitutional powers and limitations on authority of the government.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: A
Statement 1: The Preamble of the Constitution like the preamble of any statute furnish the key to open the mind of the makers of the Constitution more so because the Constituent Assembly toiled hard in formulating it so that it may reflect the essential features and basic objectives of the Constitution.
Statement 2: The Preamble does not grant any power but it gives direction and purpose to the Constitution .It outlines the objective of the whole Constitution. The Preamble contains the fundamental of constitution. It serves several important purposes like
It contains the enacting clause which brings the Constitution into force.
It declares the basic type of government and polity which is sought to be established in the country.
It declares the great rights and freedom which the people of India intended to secure to its entire citizen.
It throws light on the source of the Constitution, viz., the People of India.

60 What was a Kutagarashala with reference to the cultural Developments of the period (c.
600 BCE - 600 CE)?
a)  A place where intellectual debates among Buddhist mendicants took place
b)  A place housing artefacts of high value
c)  An open place where royal religious processions took place
d)  A subsidized public homestay for travellers around the kingdom
Answer: A
There were many sects or schools of thought in that period (especially
Buddhist period).
Lively discussions and debates took place between the teachers of these schools of thought.
Teachers like Buddha and Mahavira travelled from place to place, trying to convince one another as well as laypersons, about the validity of their
philosophy or the way they understood the world.
Debates took place in the kutagarashala (a hut with a pointed roof) and in groves where travelling mendicants halted.
If a philosopher succeeded in convincing one of his rivals, the followers of the latter also became his disciples. So support for any particular sect could grow and shrink over time.

61 What made the British suppress the Indian language newspapers suppressed by bringing the Vernacular Press Act of 1878?
a)  Frequent Criticism of British official's lifestyles in local newspapers
b)  The sense of independence in the newspapers
c)  Revenue collection mechanisms of British were termed exploitative by the newspapers.
d)  Criticism of approach of English officials towards the victims of the famine
of 1876-77
Answer: D
 The policies of Lord Lytton intensified discontent against British rule.
He removed the import duty on British goods, which ruined the textile industry of India. He made India pay for the cost of the war against Afghanistan.
In 1877, when India was suffering from a famine, an Imperial Durbar was held at Delhi in which a large amount of money was wasted, instead of spending on the food security of the victims.
The Indian language newspapers severely criticized this, and in response the
British enacted the Vernacular press act.
At the time the Vernacular Press Act was passed, there were thirty five vernacular papers in Bengal.
The act was later repealed by Lord Ripon, who followed Lord Lytton.

62 The Vindhyan system of rocks is one of the important rock systems of India. It is known for the production of
a)  Uranium and thorium
b)  Iron ore, coal and manganese
c)  Precious stones and building materials
d)  Bauxite and mica
Answer: C
The Vindhyan Mountains form a dividing line between the Ganges plain and Deccan Plateau.
This system rocks are extensively distributed in India from Chittorgarh in Rajasthan to Sasaram in Bihar.
The well known Panna and Golconda diamonds are found in this formation. The important series of this system are Bhander series, Bijwar series and Kaimur series. All are rich sources of Building material.
The rock systems of India (dharwar, archean, cuddapah, vindhyan, tertiary) are very important. You should read their major features from a credible source.

63 Why do rain clouds appear black in colour despite having the Sun overhead?
a)  It is due to the dust accumulated on the clouds.
b)  It is due to the absorption of sunlight by the clouds.
c)  Clouds scatter light received by them.
d)  Rain-bearing clouds reflect all the sunlight received by them back in space.
Answer: C
The colour of any object depends on its ability to reflect selected wavelengths of light.
Consequently, if the object does not reflect any colour, it appears black. The tiny droplets of water in rain clouds scatter the white light of the sun.
Red is scattered first, and violet the last. This happens at such a high altitude that no rays of the sun reach the bottom of the cloud. Thus, we do not see the rays of the
sun, and this results in a dark effect. As normal clouds have no water, the light is not
scattered and thus look white.

64 The variability among living organisms from all sources including terrestrial, marine and other ecosystems and the ecological complexes of which they are part which includes diversity within species, between species of ecosystems refers to
a)  Genetic diversity
b)  Biological diversity
c)  Geographical diversity
d)  Zoological diversity
Answer: B
 This is the exact definition given by the Convention on Biological diversity.
Seehttps://www.cbd.int/convention/articles/default.shtml?a=cbd-02
"Ecosystem" means a dynamic complex of plant, animal and micro-organism communities and their non-living environment interacting as a functional unit.
"Sustainable use" means the use of components of biological diversity in a way and at a rate that does not lead to the long-term decline of biological diversity, thereby maintaining its potential to meet the needs and aspirations of present and future generations.

65 Consider the following about Maritime India Summit 2016 (MIS 2016), a maiden flagship initiative of Ministry of Shipping, Government of India.
1.  It provides a global platform for investors to explore potential business opportunities in the Indian Maritime Sector.
2.  Republic of Korea was the partner country for MIS 2016.
3.  It was organized at an island archipelago in the Indian Ocean.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  3 only
d)  1, 2 and 3
Answer: A
Statement 1: The conference aims to foster interaction between stakeholders through B2B and G2B meetings; and will have special sessions on investment opportunities in Maritime Sector with focus on ship building, ship repair etc.
It also focussed on ship recycling, dredger/barge manufacturing, setting up of new ports and capacity augmentation of existing ports, development of inland waterways for cargo and passenger transportation etc.
Statement 2: The conference will also highlight investment opportunities in the Indian Maritime States and Union Territories. Republic of Korea is the partner country for MIS 2016.
Statement 3: MIS 2016 was organized from April 14-16, 2016 at Bombay
Convention and Exhibition Centre, Goregaon, Mumbai, India.

66 The Right to Information does NOT include
a)  Inspection of government documents on request
b)  Taking out files from a government office to any place desired by the applicant
c)  Taking a photograph of files and obtaining information in tapes
d)  It does not include any of the above.
Answer: B
  A citizen has a right to seek such information from a public authority which is held by the public authority or which is held under its control.
This right includes inspection of work, documents and records; taking notes, extracts or certified copied of documents or records; taking certified samples of material held by the public authority or held under the control of the public authority. So, (a) is correct.
The public authority under the RIT Act is not supposed to create information;
or to interpret information; or to solve the problems raised by the applicants;
or to furnish replies to hypothetical questions. Only such information can be had under the Act which already exists with the public authority.
A citizen has a right to obtain information in the form of diskettes, floppies, tapes, video cassettes or in any other electronic mode or through print-out provided information is already stored in a computer or in any other device from which the information may be transferred to diskettes. So, (c) is correct. The information to the applicant shall ordinarily be provided in the form in which it is sought. However, if the supply of information sought in a particular form would disproportionately divert the resources of the public authority or may cause harm to the safety or preservation of the records, supply of information in that form may be denied.
The Act gives the right to information only to the citizens of India. It does not make provision for giving information to Corporations, Associations, Companies etc. which are legal entities/persons, but not citizens.

67 Which of the following is correct with reference to Gandhiji's view towards Swarajist leaders?
1.  He was opposed to the council-entry program of Swarajists.
2.  He never considered them patriots and avoided any personal relations with
Swarajists.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: A
 The following was a statements made by Gandhiji, "Nor is the difference between them and myself one of mere detail. There is fundamental difference.
I retain the opinion that Council-entry is inconsistent with Non-co-operation, as I conceive it. Nor is this difference a mere matter of interpretation of the word "Non- co-operation," but relates to the essential mental attitude resulting in different treatment of vital points."
He further says, "It is with reference to such mental attitude that the success or the failure of the Triple Boycott is to be judged, and not merely by a reference to the actual results attained. It is from advantages to the country than to be in them. I have, however, failed to convince my Swarajist friends but I recognise that so long as they are otherwise, their place is undoubtedly in the Councils. It is the best for us all."
This clearly tells us that he was opposed to the council entry programme of Swarajists (statement 1 will be correct), and that Swrajists and Gandhi were not in enemy camps, so 2 will be incorrect.
andhi%27s+attitude+towards+Swarajist+leaders&source=bl&ots=m6VMJT76Aj&s
ig=U1TgqPKFHtwEo25yYPClXwpWD3k&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjnqfTTz- vNAhUJQI8KHbqyAKoQ6AEIKTAC - v=onepage&q=Gandhi's%20attitude%20towards%20Swarajist%20leaders&f=false

68 Surface water resources are highest in
a)  Southern India
b)  Indus Plains
c)  North-Eastern India
d)  Ganges Plains
Answer: C
The NE region has an abundance of natural resources, especially water.
It has 34% of total surface water in India.
It gets high rain falls around 250 cm on an average.
One of the major rivers of Asia, Brahmputra flows through the region.
However, the region faces a contradictory situation as monsoon months often see devastating floods.
But during non-rainy season many areas face water scarcity.
Many areas have hilly terrains where there isn't much water retention. Rain water runoff is quick and many of springs and streams dry off in non-rainy season.
The region needs proper management of its rich water resources and also
development of required infrastructure.

69 Consider the following about the Indian Premier League (IPL), a professional Twenty20 cricket league.
1.  The league is governed by the International Cricket Council (ICC).
2.  There cannot be more than four foreign players in the playing eleven of a team.
3.  A minimum number of young players must be picked up from domestic Indian cricket.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1 only
d)  1 and 3 only
Answer: B
Statement 1: There is a separate body for IPL governance, the IPL Governing Council.
Some of the team composition rules are as follows:
A minimum squad strength of 16 players, one physiotherapist and a coach.
No more than 10 foreign players on the squad and a maximum of four foreign players in the playing XI.
A minimum of 14 Indian players must be included in each squad.
A minimum of six players from the BCCI under-22 pool must be included in each squad.

70 India is the country to grow all four species of cultivated "X" - Gossypium arboreum and herbaceum (Asian "X"), G.barbadense (Egyptian "X") and G. hirsutum (American Upland "X"). "X" here stands for?
a)  Millet
b)  Jute
c)  Cotton
d)  Silk
Answer: C
 Gossypium is the cotton genus. India is the country to grow all four species of this cultivated cotton. India produces large number of cotton hybrids and varieties.
Gossypium hirsutum represents 88% of the hybrid cotton production in India and all the current Bt cotton hybrids are G.hirsutuim.
Most of the country's cotton production comes from ten cotton growing States, which can be grouped into three regions viz., Northern Zone comprising Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan, Central zone comprising of Gujarat, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh & Orissa and Southern Zone comprising of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu.
About economic contribution of cotton industry: The textile industry, which consumes the cotton, as its principal raw material, contributes about 4% to the GDP and is the major exchange earner for the country. Hence, growth and development of cotton and cotton based textile industry has a vital bearing on the overall development of the Indian economy.
on.pdf

71 Consider the following statements.
1.  It is the only sea on Earth which has no coastline.
2.  It is named for a genus of free-floating seaweed.
The above refers to?
a)  Sargasso Sea
b)  Aral Sea
c)  North Sea
d)  Greenland Sea
Answer: A
 The Sargasso Sea is a region in the gyre in the middle of the North
Atlantic Ocean.
It is bounded on the west by the Gulf Stream; on the north, by the North Atlantic Current; on the east, by the Canary Current; and on the south, by the North Atlantic Equatorial Current.
Bermuda is near the western fringes of the sea.
The ocean water in the Sargasso Sea is distinctive for its deep blue color and exceptional clarity, with underwater visibility of up to 200 ft despite deposition of marine plants.
The Sargasso Sea is a vast patch of ocean named for a genus of free-floating seaweed called Sargassum.
While there are many different types of algae found floating in the ocean all around world, the Sargasso Sea is unique in that it harbors species of sargassum that are 'holopelagi' - this means that the algae not only freely
floats around the ocean, but it reproduces vegetatively on the high seas. Other seaweeds reproduce and begin life on the floor of the ocean.

72 Which among the following statements regarding the Gupta dynasty is/are correct?
1.  The Kumaramatyas were appointed directly by the King in the home provinces.
2.  Whenever the royal army passed through the countryside, the local people had to give food to the army.
3.  Civil and criminal laws were clearly demarcated in the Gupta period.
4.  The village headmen lost importance and the land transaction began to be effected without their consent.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  3 and 4 only
b)  1, 2 and 3 only
c)  1 and 4 only
d)  1, 2, 3 and 4
Answer: B
 & Statement 1: The Gupta bureaucracy was not as elaborate as that of the Mauryas. The most important officers in the Gupta empire were the kumaramatyas.
They were appointed by the king in the home provinces and possibly paid in cash.
As the Guptas were possibly vaishyas, recruitment was not confined to the upper varnas only, but several offices were combined in the hands of the same person, and posts became hereditary.
This naturally weakened royal control.
Statement 2: During the Gupta period land taxes increased in number, and those on trade and commerce decreased.
Probably the king collected taxes varying from one-fourth to one-sixth of the produce.
In addition, whenever the royal army passed through the countryside, the local people had to feed it.
The peasants had also to supply animals, food grains, furniture, etc., for the maintenance of royal officers on duty in rural areas.
In central and western India, the villagers were also subjected to forced labour called vishti by the royal army and officials.
Statement 3: The judicial system was far more developed under the Guptas than in earlier times.
Several law-books were compiled during this period, and for the first time civil and criminal laws were clearly demarcated.
Theft and adultery fell under criminal law, disputes regarding various types of property under civil law.
Statement 4: The empire was divided into divisions called bhukth, and each bhukti was placed under the charge of an uparika.
The bhuktis were divided into districts (vishayas), which were placed under the charge of a vishayapati.
In eastern India, the vishayas were divided into vithis, which again were subdivided into villages.
The village headman gained in importance in Gupta times, managing village affairs with the assistance of elders.
With the administration of a village or a small town, leading local elements were associated. No land transactions could be effected without their consent.
http://www.historydiscussion.net/history-of-india/system-of-administration-during-g upta-age/2243

73 Consider the following with reference to Modern Indian History.
1.  The Doctrine of Lapse
2.  The Subsidiary Alliance
3.  The Treaty of Lahore
4.  The Pitt's India Act
The correct sequence of the following events of Indian history (starting with the earliest) is?
a)  3214
b)  1234
c)  2143
d)  4231
Answer: D
 Elimination can easily yield the right answer. There is only option where Doctrine of lapse (Dalhousie 1848-1856) is shown to have happened after enactment of Pitt's India Act 1784. The clear answer is (d).
The doctrine of subsidiary alliance was introduced by Lord Wellesley, British
Governor-General in India from 1798 to 1805.
After the defeat of the Sikhs at the Battle of Sobraon the British were able to march into Lahore without any further battles. The Treaty of Lahore was signed in 1846 after the First Sikh War.

74 Which of the following prescribes that all proceedings in the Supreme Court of India shall be in English language?
a)  In-house rules made by the Supreme Court
b)  A Legislation made by the Parliament
c)  A constitutional provision
d)  An executive order
Answer: C
 Article 348 of the Constitution of India says that until Parliament by law otherwise provides
all proceedings in the Supreme Court and in every High Court, the authoritative texts
of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto to be moved in either House of Parliament or in the House or either House of the Legislature of a State,
of all Acts passed by Parliament or the Legislature of a State and of all Ordinances promulgated by the President or the Governor of a State, and
of all orders, rules, regulations and bye laws issued under this Constitution or under any law made by Parliament or the Legislature of a State, shall be in the English language.
 Article 145 of the Constitution of India prescribes that subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament the Supreme Court may from time to time, with the approval of the President, make rules for regulating generally the practice and procedure of the Court.

75 Which of the following is NOT a planned/operational Industrial corridor in India?
a)  Delhi Mumbai Industrial Corridor (DMIC)
b)  Bengaluru-Mumbai Economic Corridor (BMEC) Project
c)  Chennai-Bengaluru Industrial corridor
d)  Vizag-Kolkata Industrial corridor
Answer: D
 Option (d) should be VIZAG-CHENNAI INDUSTRIAL CORRIDOR
Asian Development Bank (ADB), consultant of VCIC has since submitted the final report on Conceptual Development Plan (CDP) of VCIC.
CHENNAI-BENGALURU INDUSTRIAL CORRIDOR PROJECT
Master planning of three identified nodes namely Ponneri (Tamil Nadu), Tumkur (Karnataka) and Krishnapatnam (Andhra Pradesh) in CBIC has since been completed. Preliminary Environment Impact Assessment Study for these nodes is under progress.
BENGALURU-MUMBAI ECONOMIC CORRIDOR
Draft Perspective Plan Report of BMEC region has been prepared and discussed with the concerned State Governments, DIPP and DMICDC, nodal Agency recently. Four nodes in the State of Maharashtra and six nodes in the State of Karnataka have been identified under perspective planning,
DELHI-MUMBAI INDUSTRIAL CORRIDOR
The DMIC project was launched in pursuance of an MOU signed between the
Government of India and the Government of Japan in December 2006.
The project spans the states of Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat and Maharashtra along the Western Dedicated Freight Corridor (DFC) of the railways.

76 Kuiper belt, often heard amongst astronomers, is a region of
a)  Massive auroras that occur on earth
b)  Hospitable climate on any planet
c)  The solar system beyond the planets
d)  Comets near the Sun
Answer: C
 It is a region of the solar system beyond the planets, extending from the orbit of Neptune.
It consist mainly small bodies or remnants from the solar system's formation. It is similar to the asteroid belt, although it is far larger ' 20 times as wide and
200 times as massive.
The Kuiper belt objects (KBO) are composed largely of frozen volatiles
(termed 'ices') such as methane, ammonia and water.
Kuiper belt is home to at least three dwarf planets ' Pluto, Haumea and
Makemake. Pluto, discovered in 1930, is considered its largest member.
Source: http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-in-school/new-horizons-next-goal
/article8802204.ece

77 As the 'Banker to Banks', the Reserve Bank of India (RBI)
1.  Enables seamless clearing and settlement of inter-bank transactions
2.  Settles all loans of Public Sector Banks (PSBs) taken from the government on behalf of them
3.  Acts as a lender of last resort
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  3 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  1, 2 and 3
Answer: C
 Statement 1: In order to facilitate a smooth inter-bank transfer of funds, or to make payments and to receive funds on their behalf, banks need a common banker
By providing the facility of opening accounts for banks, the Reserve Bank becomes this common banker, known as 'Banker to Banks' function.
Statement 2: PSBs settle loan themselves. It instead enables banks to maintain their accounts with the Reserve Bank for statutory reserve requirements.
Statement 3: It can come to the rescue of a bank that is solvent but faces temporary liquidity problems by supplying it with much needed liquidity when no one else is willing to extend credit to that bank.
The Reserve Bank extends this facility to protect the interest of the depositors of the bank and to prevent possible failure of the bank, which in turn may also affect other banks and institutions and can have an adverse impact on financial stability and thus on the economy.

78 The Atlantic Ocean coastline provides ideal location for natural harbours and ports due to being
a)  Located close to freshwater resources
b)  Irregular and indented
c)  Shallow and curved in shape
d)  A small continental margin
Answer: B
 It is the second largest Ocean in the world. It is 'S' shaped. It is flanked by the North and South Americas on the western side, and Europe and Africa on the eastern side.
The coastline of Atlantic Ocean is highly indented. This irregular and indented coastline provides ideal location for natural harbours and ports.
From the point of view of commerce, it is one of the busiest Oceans.

79 Which of the following from the Constitution of India is/are specially relevant to Social
Justice and Empowerment?
1.  Preamble
2.  First Schedule
3.  Third Schedule
4.  Fundamental Rights
5.  Directive Principles of State Policy
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 5 only
b)  2, 3 and 4 only
c)  1, 4 and 5 only
d)  1, 2 and 5 only
Answer: C
 Statement 1: The words 'JUSTICE, social, economic and political; EQUALITY of status and of opportunity; and to promote among them all FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of the individual and the unity and integrity of the Nation'.
Statement 2: It talks about Indian states and Indian territory.
Statement 3: It contains forms of Oaths and affirmations for office holders. Statement 4: A 23. Prohibition of traffic in human beings and forced labour
A 24. Prohibition of employment of children in factories, etc.
Statement 5: A38. State to secure a social order for the promotion of welfare of the people
A39 (only first part) - The State shall, in particular, direct its policy towards securing ' (a) that the citizens, men and women equally, have the right to an adequate means of livelihood.
Many more can be found at Q Source.

80 Which of the following is correct about Bio-gas?
1.  Bio-gas is an excellent fuel as it contains large amounts of methane
2.  It is a renewable source of energy.
3.  Bio-gas normally burns without smoke and has a high heating capacity.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 only
b)  1 and 3 only
c)  2 and 3 only
d)  1, 2 and 3
Answer: D
 Bio-gas contains up to 75% methane.
It burns without smoke, leaves no residue like ash in wood, charcoal and coal burning. Its heating capacity is high. Bio-gas is also used for lighting.
The large-scale utilisation of bio-waste and sewage material provides a safe and efficient method of waste-disposal besides supplying energy and manure.

81 Consider the following statements.
1.  Wetlands in India occupy more area than the net sown area
2.  A greater area is under Inland wetlands than coastal wetlands
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: B
 Statement 1: - India's total geographical area is 329 million hectares. Out of this, 195 million hectare is gross cropped area and 141 million hectare is net sown area.
On the other hand, wetlands in India account for 4.7% of the total geographical area of the country (around 15-16 mHa only).
Statement 2: Out of this, area under inland wetlands accounts for 69%, coastal wetlands 27%, and other wetlands (smaller than 2.25 ha) 4% (SAC, 2011).
In terms of average area under each type of wetland, natural coastal wetlands have the largest area.
These wetlands provide numerous ecosystem goods and services, but are under stress.
Reasons for wetlands loss in India are urbanization, land use changes and pollution.

82 Why the eastern and western boundaries of the Pacific Ocean experience frequent earthquakes?
a)  Due to these margins coinciding with the plate margins.
b)  Due to presence of high mountain stretches along the continental belts
c)  Due to continuous wave and current action
d)  Due to the presence of deep ocean trenches along these margins
Answer: A
 The region in question is the Ring of Fire.
The Ring of Fire is a direct result of plate tectonics/ movement and collisions of lithospheric plates.
Since the margins coincide with the plate margins, the continous tectonic movements cause earthquakes.
This region is also prone to high volcanism.

83 The total length of highways network is highest in which of the following states?
a)  Uttar Pradesh
b)  Andhra Pradesh
c)  Maharashtra
d)  Assam
Answer: A
 Other states that have a large length of highways network are AP, Rajasthan, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, MP, Gujarat and Bihar.
Total road network length in UP is more than 8,000 Km.
 In 2010, the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways officially published a new numbering system for the national highway network.
It is a systematic numbering scheme based on the orientation and the geographic location of the highway.
As per the new numbering system:
All north-south oriented highways will have even numbers increasing from the east to the west
All east-west oriented highways will have odd numbers increasing from the north to the south
All major Highways will be single digit or double digit in number

84 Which of the following is NOT an Individual Privilege accorded to a Member of
Parliament?
a)  They cannot be arrested as a serving MP and charges can be initiated only after they cede the office of MP.
b)  No member is liable to any proceedings in any court for anything said or any vote given by him in Parliament or its committees
c)  They can refuse to give evidence and appear as a witness in a case pending in a court when Parliament is in session.
d)  All the above privileges are enjoyed by the MPs.
Answer: A
 They cannot be arrested during the session of Parliament and 40 days before the beginning and 40 days after the end of a session. This privilege is available only in civil cases and not in criminal cases or preventive detention cases. So, clearly (a) is incorrect
They have freedom of speech in Parliament as under option (b). This freedom is subject to the provisions of the Constitution and to the rules and standing orders regulating the procedure of Parliament.
They are exempted from jury service as under option (c).

85 Net primary production is the rate at which new biomass is generated, mainly due to photosynthesis. Multiplied by total area, it yields total biomass production in a year. Which
of the following ecosystems generate highest total biomass annually?
a)  Oceans
b)  Rainforests
c)  Cultivated Lands
d)  Coral Reefs
Answer: A
 The image encapsulates the statistics.
However, there is a much more significant difference in standing stocks of biomass.
While accounting for almost half of total annual production, oceanic autotrophs account for only about 0.2% of the total biomass. This is because they are consumed very rapidly, as compared to the land biomass.
 Apart from bacteria, the total global biomass has been estimated at about
560 billion tonnes C.
Most of this biomass is found on land, with only 5 to 10 billion tonnes C
found in the oceans.
On land, there is about 1,000 times more plant biomass (phytomass) than animal biomass (zoomass).
However, in the ocean, the animal biomass is nearly 30 times larger than the plant biomass.

86 The Major Objective of the National Monsoon Mission is to
a)  Improve monsoon forecasting in India
b)  Incorporate better water harvesting structures for saving Monsoon water
c)  Reduce the variability of Monsoons in India
d)  Seed the oceans with nutrients to increase Monsoon rainfall
Answer: A
 The objectives of the Mission are:
To setup a state of the art dynamical modeling frame work; to setup the infrastructure and manpower required to improve the prediction skill at all time scales (Long, seasonal, extended, medium and short range) over Indian region.
It also involves building a working partnership between the Academic I Research & Development Organizations and the Operational Agency to achieve the same.

87 The Swadesh Darshan scheme launched by the Ministry of Tourism focuses on
a)  Generating awareness about India's cultural heritage
b)  Liberalising e-tourist visas in India
c)  Development of tourism physical infrastructure in the country
d)  Facilitating visits of foreign tourists in India
Answer: C
 The Swadesh Darshan scheme looks at the integrated Development of
Theme-Based Tourist Circuits
Under the scheme, thirteen thematic circuits have been identified for development, namely North-East India Circuit, Buddhist Circuit, Himalayan Circuit, Coastal Circuit, Krishna Circuit, Desert Circuit, Tribal Circuit, Eco Circuit, Wildlife Circuit,
Rural Circuit, Spiritual Circuit, Ramayana Circuit and Heritage Circuit.
Under Buddhist Circuit theme, Ministry has sanctioned the project 'Construction of
Cultural Centre at Bodhgaya, Bihar'.
Q SourceMinistry of Tourism Website

88 Despite preying on arctic birds and fish, polar bears are never found predating Penguins under natural conditions. Why?
a)  Penguins cannot be digested by polar bears
b)  Polar bears and penguins never coexist under natural conditions
c)  In cold conditions, polar bears and penguins cooperate to stay warm and frost-free.
d)  Penguins form groups which make them impossible to be predated
Answer: B
 Polar bears do not consume penguins because both penguins and
polar bears live on opposite poles and never encounter one another. Penguins live in
Antarctica, while polar bears live in the Arctic
People often see illustrations of penguins and polar bears together, but this could never happen in the wild.
In fact, the word Arctic comes from the Greek word for bear, and Antarctic comes from the Greek meaning the "opposite of the Arctic" or "opposite of the (great) bear."

89 Consider the following statements.
1.  According to Jaina tradition, Mahavira was the unprecedented teacher and the first tirthankara.
2.  The basic philosophy of the Jainas was already in existence in North India before the birth of Vardhamana Mahavira due to the economic conditions prevailing then.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: D
 Statement 1: Their basic philosophy was already present due to the teachings of the earlier Tirthanakaras
Statement 2: Mahavira was the 23rd Tirthanakara. A Tirthanakara is the one who helps guide humans across the sea of interminable births and deaths by teaching the righteous path.
 The most important idea in Jainism is that the entire world is animated:
even stones, rocks and water have life.

90 Aichi Targets are related to
a)  Biodiversity conservation
b)  Reducing poverty
c)  Increasing agricultural productivity
d)  Cutting down subsidies in a phased manner
Answer: A
 The Biodiversity Indicators Partnership (BIP) brings together a host of international organizations working on indicator development.
Central to the renewed Partnership will be its revitalized relationship with the
Convention on Biological Diversity.
In 2010, at the 10th Conference of the Parties to the CBD held in Nagoya, Japan the BIP was referenced eight times in the official adopted decisions. These references demonstrated a clear will for the Partnership to continue supporting the CBD with implementation of the new Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020.
The Strategic Plan consists of 20 new biodiversity targets for 2020, termed the 'Aichi Biodiversity Targets'.

91 Why do we feel cool sitting under a tree rather than beneath a concrete shed on a sunny day?
a)  Due to the greenness of the tree
b)  The process of Photosynthesis cools places beneath the tree.
c)  Water given out by the leaves vaporizes absorbing some heat as latent heat
d)  Roots of the tree soak in heat from outside.
Answer: C
 Evaporation of water into vapour absorbs heat from outside. Hence, the temperature beneath trees is a tad lower than outside.
The same phenomenon is responsible for cooling our body when we sweat or when we sit under a fan.

92 Consider the following statements.
1.  It is solar system's most massive planet.
2.  It is known for its Great Red Spot because of a storm that has been raging for hundreds of years.
3.  Recently, NASA's Juno spacecraft successfully entered into the orbit.
The above refers to which planet?
a) Saturn
b) Uranus
c) Jupiter
d)  Mars
Answer: C
 Jupiter is fifth from the sun after Mercury, Venus, Earth and Mars. The storm raging on Jupiter is bigger than size of Earth.
Juno will sample Jupiter's charged particles and magnetic fields for the first time to study its composition beneath the sky.
Juno is not the first spacecraft to orbit Jupiter.
It is second spacecraft to orbit Jupiter, after Galileo probe which had orbited the planet from 1995-2003. Galileo probe in its mission had found evidence of subsurface saltwater on Jupiter's moons Europa, Ganymede and Callisto.
http://www.nasa.gov/feature/jpl/nasa-s-juno-spacecraft-sends-first-in-orbit-view/

93 Annual investment in an economy
a)  is akin to the stock of all goods in the economy.
b)  is the flow and addition to the productive stock of the economy.
c)  is the total amount of intermediate goods and consumer durables produced in the economy
d)  is the total amount of physical money in circulation
Answer: B
 The part of final output that comprises of capital goods constitutes gross investment of an economy.
These may be machines, tools and implements; buildings, office spaces, storehouses or infrastructure like roads, bridges, airports or jetties. But all the capital goods produced in a year do not constitute an addition to the capital stock already existing.
A significant part of current output of capital goods goes in maintaining or replacing part of the existing stock of capital goods due to depreciation.
So, clearly (a)and (c) are wrong, because not all goods are part of capital stock, and moreover, investment in the Q is made on an annual basis.

94 What was/were the salient features of the Mountbatten Plan?
1.  It provided for the partition of India.
2.  It provided that separate electorates would be reinvigorated in the constituent assembly.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: A
 Upon his arrival, Lord Mountbatten immediately began the procedure to transfer the power.
He put forth the partition plan, known as the Mountbatten Plan. The plan was accepted by the Congress and Muslim League.
The British Government accorded formal approval to the Mountbatten Plan by enacting the Indian Independence Act in 1947.
The salient features of the Act were:
The partition of the country into India and Pakistan would come into effect from 15 August 1947.
A Boundary Commission would demarcate the boundaries of the provinces of the Punjab and Bengal.
The Act provided for the transfer of power to the Constituent Assemblies of the two Dominions, which will have full authority to frame their respective Constitutions.
No provision was made for separate electorates.

95 Which of the following statements is correct with reference to Consumer Price Index
(CPI) and GDP Deflator respectively?
a)  The weights of goods are constant in CPI, but they differ according to production level of each good in GDP deflator.
b)  The weights of goods differ according to their production level in CPI, but they are constant for each good in GDP deflator.
c)  Weights of goods differ according to their production level in both CPI and
GDP deflator.
d)  Weights of goods are constant irrespective of their production level in both
CPI and GDP deflator.
Answer: A
Consumer Price Index (CPI) is the index of prices of a given basket of commodities which are bought by the representative consumer.
The weights are fixed in CPI, for e.g. good X 10% weightage.
GDP deflator measures change in the price level between the base year and the current year. It is the ratio of nominal to real GDP. So, it has to take into account the volume of production of goods. The only correct answer will be (a).

96 Consider the following statements about influence of climatic seasons on rate of evaporation.
1.  Central region of the country display the highest evaporation rates during the summer period.
2.  After the onset of monsoon potential evaporation decreases generally all over the country.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: C
 Statement 1: Evaporation rates closely follow the climatic seasons, and reach their peak in the summer months of April and May and the central areas of the country display the highest evaporation rates during this period.
Statement 2: With the onset of monsoon, there is a marked fall in the rate of evaporation due to reduced temperatures and increased saturation (humidity) of air.
The annual potential evaporation ranges between 150 to 250 cm over most parts of the country. Monthly potential evaporation over the Peninsula increases from 15 cm in December to 40 cm in May.
In the North-East, it varies from 6 cm in December to 20 cm in May. It rises to 40 cm in June in West Rajasthan.

97 Consider the following statements.
1.  There is a constitutional requirement to present the government 'Annual Financial
Statement' before the Parliament.
2.  The budget must distinguish revenue expenditure from other expenditures for a financial year that runs from 1st March to 31st April.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: A
 Statement 1: As per Article 112 of the constitution, there is a constitutional requirement in India to present before the Parliament a statement of estimated receipts and expenditures of the government in respect of every financial year which runs from 1 April to 31 March (not 1 March - 31st April). So, 2 is wrong.
This 'Annual Financial Statement' constitutes the main budget document. Further, the budget must distinguish expenditure on the revenue account from other expenditures.
Therefore, the budget comprises of the (a) Revenue Budget and the (b) Capital
Budget

98 India is a republican polity because
a)  There is Universal Adult Franchise.
b)  There are no hereditary elements in our polity.
c)  The constitution ensures fundamental human rights.
d)  There is an elected Parliament.
Answer: B
 A democratic polity can be classified into two categories-monarchy and republic.
In a monarchy, the head of the state (usually king or queen) enjoys a hereditary position, that is, he comes into office through succession, eg, Britain.
In a republic, on the other hand, the head of the state is always elected directly or indirectly for a fixed period, eg, USA.
Therefore, the term 'republic' in our Preamble indicates that India has an elected head called the president.
He is elected indirectly for a fixed period of five years. A republic also means two more things: one, vesting of political sovereignty in the people and not in a single individual like a king; second, the absence of any privileged class
and hence all public offices being opened to every citizen without any discrimination.

99 Consider the following statements.
1.  Changes in glaciers are one of the clearest indicators of alterations in regional climate.
2.  Glacial retreat reduces the albedo of earth's surface.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: C
 Statement 1: The Cryosphere is the second largest component of the climate system, after the ocean, that stores about 75% of the world's freshwater. In terms of the ice mass and its heat capacity, therefore, it plays a significant role in the global climate. Changes in glaciers are one of the clearest indicators of alterations in regional climate, since they are governed by changes in accumulation (from snowfall) and ablation (by melting of ice).
The difference between accumulation and ablation or the mass balance is crucial to the health of a glacier.
Statement 2: Cooling tends to increase ice cover and hence the albedo, reducing the amount of solar energy absorbed and leading to more cooling. Conversely, warming
tends to decrease ice cover and hence the albedo, increasing the amount of solar energy absorbed, leading to more warming

100 While ascending towards the water surface, there is a danger of bursting of lungs in
Scuba divers.Why?
a)  Change in water pressure due to upward movement of scuba divers
b)  Buoyancy force acting on Scuba divers
c)  Equal pressure applied by water on all objects inside water at different depths
d)  Diffusion of water particles across the surface
Answer: A
 As per Boyle's law "At constant temperature, pressure and volume are inversely proportional."
Thus, the pressure of water decreases on ascending and hence volume of air inside the lungs increases which is likely to cause lung injuries.
Option (c) is incorrect as water pressure is different at different depths.
