

1 Commercially practical cellulosic ethanol derived from lignocelluloses is widely viewed as a next level of development for the bio-fuel industry. Which of the following can be an appropriate reason for the same?
a)  It emits retardants that stabilize climate change.
b)  The ethanol derived from it has a much higher calorific value than any other fuel presently used.
c)  Lignocellulosic biomass is abundantly available.
d)  It is not made from food crops or food products.
Answer: C
Cellulosic ethanol is derived from lignocellulose which is a structural material comprising much of the mass of plants.
Since plants have a huge biomass on earth, Lignocellulosic biomass (plant dry matter) becomes the most abundantly available raw material on the Earth for the production of bio-fuels.s
Moreover, it is made from cellulose, which is the non-eatable part of food crops such as sugarcane. So, it has many clear advantages over traditional bio-fuels.
This said, option (d) is thus wrong. Other options are wrong, as this bio- ethanol has more or less similar calorific value as compared to other types of ethanol.
Many crops are of interest for their ability to provide high yields of biomass and can be harvested multiple times each year. These include poplar trees and Miscanthus giganteus. The premier energy crop is sugarcane, which is a source of the readily fermentable sucrose and the lignocellulosic by-product bagasse.
The Department of Bio-technology has been supporting a number of projects on Cellulosic Bioethanol which includes developing technology for pre- treatment of substrates, enzyme development for breakdown of different substrates, fermentation of sugars to ethanol, ligocellulosic conversion from lab to pilot scale.
You can get a lot of information on it herehttp://www.biofuelstp.eu/cellulosic-ethanol.html
Source: http://www.dbtindia.nic.in/programmes/bioresources-environment-and-bioe nergy/bioenergy-programme/biofuel-technologies/

2 Consider the following with reference to Gandhian views on Indian polity and economy.Assertion (a): Gandhi argued that mere political Swaraj would mean 'English rule without the Englishmen.Reason (R): As per him, our real enemy was not British political domination, but the whole of modern industrial civilization.In the context of the above, which of these is correct?
a)  A is correct, and R is an appropriate explanation of A.
b)  A is correct, but R is not an appropriate explanation of A.
c)  A is correct, but R is incorrect.
d)  Both A and R are incorrect.
Answer: A
Gandhian appeal lay in his social ideals, put forward most unambiguously in Hind Swaraj (1909).
We are quoting important excerpts from Sumit Sarkar, "The basic point made in this pamphlet is that the real enemy was not British political domination, but the whole
of modern industrial civilization.
Taking over and extending the Romantic critique of industrialism developed by mid-nineteenth century English writers like Carlyle and Ruskin, (whose Unto His Last remained a favourite text of his), Gandhi argued that mere political Swaraj would mean 'English rule without the Englishmen', while 'It would be folly to assume that an Indian Rockefeller would be better than the American Rockefeller.
Railways, lawyers and doctors have impoverished the country'- railways have spread plague and produced famines by encouraging the export of foodgrains, lawyers have stimulated disputes in their greed for briefs and helped to maintain British rule by manning the law courts, western medicine is expensive and ruins natural health measures.
The central passage reads: 'India's salvation consists in unlearning what she has learnt during the past 50 years or so. The railways, telegraphs, hospitals, lawyers, doctors and such like have all to go, and the so-called upper class have to learn to live consciously and religiously and deliberately the simple life of a peasant."

3 The "Namami Gange" Programme essentially aims at
a)  Conservation and improvement of the Ganga
b)  Documenting the religious and spiritual importance of the Ganga
c)  Inter-linking of the Ganga River with other water scarce rivers in the basin
d)  Promoting fishing and other livelihoods near the Ganga river
Answer: A
Union Budget 2014-15 has taken cognizance of the substantial amount of money spent in the conservation and improvement of the Ganga, which has a very special place in a collective consciousness of this country.
However, the efforts are not yielded desired results because of the lack of concerted efforts by all the stakeholders.
Accordingly, an Integrated Ganga Conservation Mission called "Namami
Gange" has been proposed to be set up.
Financial allocations have also been made for developments of Ghats and beautification of River Fronts at Kedarnath, Haridwar, Kanpur, Varanasi, Allahabad, Patna and Delhi.
Namami Gange approaches Ganga Rejuvenation by consolidating the existing ongoing efforts and planning for a concrete action plan for future. The interventions at Ghats and River fronts will facilitate better citizen connect and set the tone for river centric urban planning process.

4 Consider the following species.
1.  Crested Porcupine
2.  Flying squirrel
3.  Muntjacs
Which of the above is/are naturally found in India?
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  3 only
d)  1, 2 and 3
Answer: D
Statement 1: The Indian crested porcupine or Indian porcupine
belongs to the Old World porcupine family, Hystricidae. It is native to southern Asia and the Middle East.
Statement 2: The Indian giant flying squirrel alternatively referred to as the large brown flying squirrel or the common giant flying squirrel, is a species of rodent in the Sciuridae family. It is found in China, India, Indonesia, Myanmar, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Vietnam and Thailand.
Statement 3: Muntjacs, also known as barking deer are the oldest known deer. The present-day species are native to South Asia and can be found in India, Sri
Lanka, Myanmar, the Indonesian islands, Taiwan and Southern China. They are also
found in the lower Himalayas (Terai regions of Nepal and Bhutan) and in some areas of Japan.

5 Consider the following about Carbon Initiative for Development (Ci-Dev), an initiative of the World Bank.
1.  It supports international voluntary organizations, community bodies and research organizations by granting "search-funds" to investigate climate change.
2.  It focuses on projects that improve and increase access to clean and technologically efficient energy.
3.  It helps extend the scope of the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) for use by least developed countries (LDCs).
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  3 only
d)  1 and 3 only
Answer: B
Statement 1: The Carbon Initiative for Development (Ci-Dev) supports low-carbon investments in least developed countries, using carbon-linked performance payments.
Statement 2: It was launched in December 2011 to build capacity and develop tools and methodologies to help the world's poorest countries access carbon finance, mainly in the area of energy access. It is set up to use performance payments based
on reduced emissions to support projects that use clean and efficient technologies in low-income countries.
Statement 3: Other objectives of the Ci-Dev are the following:
To demonstrate that performance-based payments for the purchase of certified carbon emission reductions (CERs) can lead to a successful and viable business model that promotes increased private sector participation s To influence future carbon market mechanisms so that low income countries, and especially least developed ones, receive a greater and fairer share of carbon finances
To contribute proposals to further improve and extend the scope of the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) for use by least developed countries (LDCs), in particular for Programmes of Activities (POa).

6 The PRAGATI platform in the Prime Minister's office (PMO) is a
a)  Project monitoring and management mechanism by way of digital technology
b)  Single-window information mechanism for all Central Sector Schemes (CSS)
c)  Wing of NITI Aayog that gives advice to State and Local governments on
socio-economic planning
d)  Server on which all the government data is hosted
Answer: A
The PRAGATI platform uniquely bundles three la
It also offers a unique combination in the direction of cooperative federalism since it brings on one stage the Secretaries of Government of India and the Chief Secretaries of the States.
With this, the Prime Minister is able to discuss the issues with the concerned Central and State officials with full information and la
It is a three-tier system (PMO, Union Government Secretaries, and Chief Secretaries of the States).

7 Urea, though subsidized as a fertilizer, is often diverted to non-agricultural uses and smuggled to neighbouring countries. What is/are such other uses of Urea?
1.  Manufacture of explosives
2.  Reducing air pollution
3.  Adulteration of Milk
4.  Manufacture of plastics
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 4 only
b)  1 and 2 only
c)  2, 3 and 4 only
d)  1, 2 and 3 only
Answer: D
 More than 90% of world industrial production of urea is destined for use as a nitrogen-release fertilizer. Urea has the highest nitrogen content of all solid nitrogenous fertilizers in common use.
Statement 1: Urea can be used to make urea nitrate, a high explosive that is used industrially and as part of some improvised explosive devices.
Statement 2: An increasingly important use of urea is in reducing air pollution from diesel engines in cars, buses and lorries. Diesel engines run at high temperatures and nitrogen and oxygen, from the air, are able to react together under these conditions
to produce high concentrations of nitric oxide. One way to remove this pollutant is to allow it to react with ammonia to form nitrogen.
However it is not possible to use ammonia directly as it is too volatile and is poisonous. Instead a solution of urea in water is injected into the hot gases emerging from the engine in the exhaust. Urea is thermally decomposed to ammonia and carbon dioxide.
Statement 3: Some of the adulterants used are mainly detergent, water, foreign fat, starch, sodium hydroxide (caustic soda), sugar, urea, pond water, salt, maltodextrin, sodium carbonate, formalin, and ammonium sulphate.
Statement 4: Urea is a raw material for the manufacture of two main classes of materials: urea-formaldehyde resins and urea-melamine-formaldehyde used in
marine plywood.

8 If the value of incremental capital output ratio (ICOR) grows for an economy, it implies
a)  The country must be producing more goods than before
b)  The country has become more efficient in use of capital
c)  The country is in a situation of economic depression
d)  Efficiency of investment capital in the economy has gone down
Answer: D
 ICOR is the marginal amount of investment capital necessary for an entity to generate the next unit of production.
Overall, a higher ICOR value is not preferred because it indicates that the entity's production is inefficient.
The measure is used predominantly in determining a country's level of production efficiency.
ICOR is calculated as Annual Investment by Annual Increase in GDP.
For e.g. suppose that Country X has an ICOR of 10. This implies that $10 worth of capital investment is necessary to generate $1 of extra production. Furthermore, if country X's ICOR was 12 last year, this implies that Country X has become more efficient in its use of capital.

9 Under the Sukanya Samridhi Scheme
a)  The parent or legal guardian can open a savings account in the name of a minor girl child
b)  The state government provides grants and maternity reliefs to BPL
households
c)  The Central government directly gives grants to local governments for supporting BPL families in the marriage of female members
d)  The girl child can assert her right of higher education if she has successfully
completed her secondary education
Answer: A
 As per the scheme, a parent or legal guardian can open an account in the name of the girl child until she attains the age of ten years.
As per the government notification on the Scheme, the account can be opened in any post office branch and designated public sector banks.
The rate of interest for the scheme will be revised every year by the government and will be announced at the time of the Union Budget.
The minimum deposit that needs to be made every year is Rs 1,000, and the maximum amount that can be deposited in a year is Rs 1,50,000.
The account will be valid for 21 years from the date of opening, after which it will mature and the money will be paid to the girl child in whose name the account had been opened.

10 The beginnings of social inequality in the Indian sub-continent can be traced from
a)  Late Vedic Period
b)  Stone-copper phase
c)  Gupta Period
d)  Maurya Period
Answer: B
 RS Sharma writes, "In the stone-copper phase we find the beginnings of social inequalities. In the graves at Chandoli and Nevasa in western Maharashtra some children were buried along with copper-bead necklaces around their necks; other children had grave goods consisting only of pots.
At Inamgaon an adult was buried with pottery and some copper.
In one house in Kayatha were found 29 copper bangles and two unique axes. At the same place were found in earthen pots necklaces of semi-precious stones such as steatite and carnelian beads."
It is evident that those who possessed these objects were affluent. This shows option (b) is correct. Other periods in options (a), (b) and (c) came much later
and social inequalities were accentuated in those periods.

11 Consider the following matches of religious places with what they are known for.
1.  Vikramsila: Ancient Centre of Buddhist Learning
2.  Mahabodhi Temple: Associated with the Dalai Lamas
3.  Udayagiri Caves: Boar-headed Varaha rescuing the earth
4.  Namgyal Monastery: Site related to the enlightenment of Buddha
Select the correct matches using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  1 and 3 only
c)  2 and 4 only
d)  2 and 3 only
Answer: B
Statement 1: A number of monasteries grew up during the Pala period in ancient Bengal and Magadha. According to Tibetan sources, five great Mahaviharas stood out: Vikramashila, the premier university of the era; Nalanda, past its prime but still illustrious, Somapura, Odantapura, and Jagaddala.
Statement 2: The Mahabodhi Temple Complex is one of the four holy sites related to the life of the Lord Buddha, and particularly to the attainment of Enlightenment. The first temple was built by Emperor Asoka in the 3rd century B.C., and the present temple dates from the 5th or 6th centuries. It is one of the earliest Buddhist temples built entirely in brick, still standing in India, from the late Gupta period.
Statement 3: The Udayagiri Caves feature some of the oldest Hindu images and cave temples in India. They are located near the city of Vidisha, northeast of Bhopal in
the state of Madhya Pradesh.
One of India's most important archaeological sites from the Gupta period,
they are best known for a series of rock-cut sanctuaries and images excavated into hillside (near River Bes) in the early years of the fifth century CE.
The site is notable for its ancient monumental relief sculpture of Hindu god Vishnu, in his incarnation as the boar-headed Varaha, rescuing the earth symbolically represented by Bhudevi clinging to the boar's tusk as described in Hindu mythology.
Statement 4: The Namgyal Monastery is located in the Dharamshala district of
Himachal Pradesh. Namgyal Monastery is associated with the Dalai Lamas and
offers buddhism in the state. Its is one of the major tourist attraction along with the lakes, Kangra valley and McLeodGanj.

12 The 'Chennai Declaration', sometimes seen in the news, is associated with the issue of
a)  Antibiotic Resistance
b)  Make in India campaign
c)  India-Africa Relations
d)  India-Sri Lanka fishing right disputes
Answer: A
Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is resistance of a microorganism to an antimicrobial medicine to which it was previously sensitive.
Resistant organisms (they include bacteria, viruses and some parasites) are able to withstand attack by antimicrobial medicines, such as antibiotics, antivirals, and antimalarials, so that standard treatments become ineffective and infections persist and may spread to others.
A Roadmap to Tackle the Challenge of Antimicrobial Resistance - A Joint meeting of Medical Societies in India" was organized as a pre-conference symposium of the 2 nd annual conference of the Clinical Infectious Disease Society (CIDSCON 2012) at Chennai on 24th August.
This was the first ever meeting of medical societies in India on issue of tackling resistance, with a plan to formulate a road map to tackle the global challenge of antimicrobial resistance from the Indian perspective.
Source: http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-national/rising-antimicrobial-resi stance-a-serious-threat-to-economic-growth/article8394948.ece

13 Why does India continue to be dependent on oilseeds import to meet domestic demand?
1.  Competition with cheap imported oils in the absence of high import restrictions discourage farmer from growing oilseeds.
2.  Farm yields of oilseeds are much lower than global average as most of the cultivation of oilseed crops continues to be dependent on rainfall.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: C
Despite being one of the largest producers of oilseeds in the world, India's import dependence has doubled over the past few years owing to expanding consumption of edible oils and stagnating production of oilseeds.
The growth in the domestic production of oilseeds has not been able to keep pace with the growth in the demand in the country.
Low and unstable yields of most oilseed crops, and uncertainty in returns to investment, which result from the continuing cultivation of oilseeds in rainfed, high risk production environments, are the factors leading to this situation of wide demand-supply gap.
Also, oilseed yield in India for crops such as groundnut, mustard, soyabean and sunflower are barely 50-70 per cent of global averages.
So, clearly both statements 1 and 2 are correct.
But, this does NOT mean that it is far cheaper to import oilseeds than to cultivate the oilseed crops. Nothing can substitute domestic production of oilseeds.
This article in the 
Source: http://www.thehindubusinessline.com/markets/commodities/a-new-deal-for- oilseeds/article6902484.ece

14 In the Lok Sabha, which of the following matters are dealt under Rule 377, that is also often in news?
a)  Urgent national issues under the Calling Attention Motion
b)  No-confidence motion or other disciplinary proceedings against the Ministers
c)  All money bills that are not ratified by the President
d)  None of the above
Answer: D
 Matters, which are not points of order or which cannot be raised under
the rules relating to Questions, Short Notice Questions, Calling Attention, Motions etc. can be raised under rule 377.
Notice for raising a matter under rule 377 is to be given in writing addressed to the
Secretary-General specifying clearly and precisely the text of the matter to be raised. No matter can be raised unless the Speaker has given her/his consent.
http://164.100.47.192/loksabha/writereaddata/Abstract/matters_under_rule_377.pdf

15 The International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement is a
a)  Left-Wing extremism movement in certain parts of China
b)  Major international humanitarian movement
c)  Biodiversity conservation protocol organization
d)  Group of War drug mercenaries from Syria, Turkey and Libya
Answer: B
It is an international humanitarian movement with millions of volunteers, many members and staff worldwide. It was founded to protect human life and health, to ensure respect for all human beings, and to prevent and alleviate human suffering.
The movement consists of several distinct organizations that are legally independent from each other, but are united within the movement through common basic principles, objectives, symbols, statutes and governing organisations. The movement's parts are:
The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) is a private humanitarian institution founded in 1863 in Geneva, Switzerland
The International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC)
was founded in 1919.
On an international level, the Federation leads and organizes, in close cooperation with the National Societies, relief assistance missions responding to large-scale emergencies.
National Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies exist in nearly every country in the world. For instance it has operations in East Africa through its own offices.
National Societies can take on additional humanitarian tasks that are not
directly defined by international humanitarian law or the mandates of the international Movement.
In many countries, they are tightly linked to the respective national health care system by providing emergency medical services (e.g. blood donation camps).

16 Which of the following is/are the benefit(s) of Cloud computing?
1.  'Cloud Services' can be accessed only from a particular location thus enhancing user safety.
2.  Cloud hosted data can be simultaneously shared with many users 'live'.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: B
 Cloud computing is a type of computing that relies on sharing computing resources rather than having local servers or personal devices to handle applications.
Statement 1: Cloud computing uses networks of large groups of servers typically running low-cost consumer PC technology with specialized connections to spread data-processing chores across them. This shared IT infrastructure contains large pools of systems that are linked together. There can also be a common server. It can be accessed from anywhere with an internet connection. So, 1 is wrong.
Statement 2: Cloud computing has started to obtain mass appeal in corporate data centers as it enables the data center to operate like the Internet through the process of enabling computing resources to be accessed and shared as virtual resources in a secure and scalable manner.

17 Start-up India is a flagship initiative of the Government of India that will lead to economic growth and generate large scale employment opportunities. For the purpose of
government schemes, how is a start-up defined?
a)  Any firm that has been working in the unorganized sector without registration after its foundation
b)  An entity that is not older than five years and annual turnover is within a certain limit
c)  Divisions of established companies in backward areas
d)  Any Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise (MSME) that has never received a government benefit
Answer: B
 Only for the purpose of Government Schemes, Start-up means an entity, which is registered in India not over five years and the annual turnover not exceeding Rs.25 crore in any financial year.
It is an entity which works towards innovation, development, deployment or commercialization of new products and services driven by technology or intellectual property.
Entity not formed by splitting up/ reconstruction of a business already in existence.
Entity will not be considered a Startup if its turnover in the previous financial years has exceeded INR25 crore or has completed 5 years from the date of formation.
 A Startup will be eligible for tax benefits once it has obtained certificate from the Inter Ministerial Board.
The government has created a compliance regime for start-ups based on self- certification: The idea is to reduce the regulatory burden on startups, so that they can focus on their core business and keep the cost of compliance low. Startup India Hub has been created which is a single point of contact for the entire startup ecosystem to enable the exchange of knowledge and access of funding.

18 Ashgabat agreement is related to
a)  Ceasefire between Israel and Palestine and conflict resolution by peaceful means
b)  Development of hydroelectric dams on rivers between Nepal and India in the
Terai region
c)  An international transport and transit corridor facilitating transportation of goods between Central Asia and the Persian Gulf
d)  Controlling sea piracy in the Red Sea and Western Indian Ocean by the use of
joint military exercises and force deployment
Answer: C
The Union Cabinet recently gave its approval for India to accede to the Ashgabat Agreement, an international transport and transit corridor facilitating transportation of goods between Central Asia and the Persian Gulf.
Ashgabat is the capital and the largest city of Turkmenistan in Central Asia, situated between the Karakum Desert and the Kopet Dag mountain range The Ashgabat Agreement has Oman, Iran, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan as founding members.
Kazakhstan has also joined this arrangement subsequently.
Accession to the Agreement would enable India to utilise this existing transport and transit corridor to facilitate trade and commercial interaction with the Eurasian region.
Further, this would synchronise with our efforts to implement the International North South Transport Corridor (INSTC) for enhanced connectivity.
The Ashgabat Agreement, which aims to develop a shor
2011 and was given additional support in 2014 when a Memorandum of
Understanding was signed.
The Iran-Turkmenistan-Kazakhstan (ITK) railway line will be the major route according to the Ashgabat Agreement, which became operational in
December 2014 and was also included as part of India-funded North-South international transport corridor (NSITC).

19 Which of the following 'endangered' species is known as the "tiger of Indian rivers"?
a)  Golden mahseer
b)  Catfish
c)  Tuna
d)  Gangetic Dolphin
Answer: A
 It has been declared as endangered by IUCN.
It is the longest-living freshwater sigh, and native to mountain and sub- mountain regions.
The Pong Dam reservoir, not very far from Shimla supports an ample population of the golden mahseer.
It migrates upstream for spawning during the southwest floods. After spawning, it returns to the original feeding grounds. It is purely carnivorous. The range of these fish is from Malaysia, Indonesia, across southern Asia including the Indian Peninsula and Pakistan.
They are commercially important game fish, as well as highly esteemed food
fish. Mahseer fetches a high market price.
Source: http://www.thehindu.com/features/magazine/save-the-mighty-mahseer/articl e7286230.ece
http://www.wwfindia.org/about_wwf/priority_species/threatened_species/golden_m ahseer/

20 The issue of sports doping has often been in news. Which of the following categories of drugs is/are banned by the World Anti-doping agency?
1.  Stimulants
2.  Hormones
3.  Steroids
4.  Cannabinoids
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 4 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1, 2 and 3 only
d)  1, 2, 3 and 4
Answer: D
Many types of drugs are banned in sport because of the damage they can cause to an athlete's health and disturb a level-playing field between them.
Every year a new list of banned drugs is prepared by the World Anti-Doping
Agency. These drugs fall within the following categories:
Stimulants may increase concentration and reduce tiredness, but they can also damage the heart;
Steroids can increase muscle and strength, but they harm the heart, liver and reproductive system and can cause sudden death;
Hormones can have a variety of useful medical purposes, but they can be harmful when you are young and still growing;
Diuretics may help with weight loss but they cover up the use of other banned drugs and can cause dehydration and fatigue;
Narcotics can relieve pain but this could lead to a lasting injury;
Cannabinoids (hashish, marijuana) can act as relaxants, but may also lead to a loss of coordination and concentration.
Recently, Meldonium was in news. Its use aids the circulation of oxygen through increased blood flow. The drug was added to the Prohibited List by the World Anti-Doping Agency.
Source: http://www.thehindu.com/sport/other-sports/all-you-need-to-know-about-do ping-in-sports/article8905639.ece

21 Consider the following statements about Swadeshi and Boycott movement.Assertion (a): It did not achieve any success and was a fruitless exercise.Reason (R): The movement never followed 'Moderate' methods and did not receive the support of intelligentsia.In the context of the above, which of these is correct?
a)  A is correct, and R is an appropriate explanation of A.
b)  A is correct, but R is not an appropriate explanation of A.
c)  A is correct, but R is incorrect.
d)  Both A and R are incorrect.
Answer: D
Down to July 1905, the partition plan had been opposed through an intensive use of the conventional 'Moderate' methods of press campaigns, numerous meetings and petitions.
The evident and total failure of such techniques led to a search for new forms-boycott of British goods as accepted by the established leaders like Surendranath Banerji.
The history of boycott and Swadeshi in Bengal vividly illustrate the limits of an intelligentsia movement with broadly bourgeois aspirations but without as yet real bourgeois support. So, this statement by Sumit Sarkar tells that R is wrong as the movement did receive the support of intelligentsia.
Boycott did achieve some initial success. A 22% fall in the quantity of imported cotton piecegoods, 44% in cotton twist and yarn, 11% in salt, 55% in cigarettes and 68% in boots and shoes in the previous month was noted . The Swadeshi mood did bring about a significant revival in handloom, silk- weaving, and some other traditional artisan crafts-a point emphasized by two official industrial surveys in 1908.
The Swadeshi mood did bring about a significant revival in handloom, silk- weaving, and some other traditional artisan crafts-a point emphasized by two official industrial surveys in 1908.
So, clearly both A and R are wrong.

22 Common Services Centres (CSCs) are a strategic cornerstone of the Digital India programme. Consider the following about them.
1.  They are the access points for delivery of various electronic services in rural areas.
2.  They implement all the panchayat digital modernization projects in rural areas.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: A
Common Services Centre (CSC) programme is an initiative of the Department of Electronics & IT (DeitY), Ministry of Communications and IT, Government of India.
Statement 1: The CSCs would provide high quality and cost-effective video, voice and data content and services, in the areas of e-governance, education, health, telemedicine, entertainment as well as other private services.
A highlight of the CSCs is that it will offer web-enabled e-governance services in rural areas, including application forms, certificates, and utility payments such as electricity, telephone and water bills.
Statement 2: The schemes are implemented by the local functionaries under the overall supervision of the District Collector or the State government.

23 The thermal equator is a belt encircling the Earth, defined by the set of locations having the highest mean annual temperature at each longitude around the globe. It is usually found slightly north of equator because
1.  Solar insolation is comparatively much higher in the Northern hemisphere than in the Southern Hemisphere.
2.  Northern hemisphere is dominated by land unlike the Southern Hemisphere which is dominated by ocean waters.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: B
 Statement 1: The location of the thermal equator is not identical to that of the geographic Equator. But, this is not due to the Level of insolation received in both hemispheres.
They are virtually equal. What creates the difference is the distribution of land and water that causes changes in the way heat is distributed and transported across the planets.
Statement 2: Land dominated areas will tend to have a large variation in temperature and a higher average temperature under the same conditions (as compared to a water dominated area).

24 Dead Sea is sandwiched between
a)  Turkey and Lebanon
b)  Israel and Syria
c)  Jordan and Israel
d)  Jordan and Turkey
Answer: C
 The Dead Sea also called the Salt Sea, is a salt lake bordered by Jordan to the east and Israel and Palestine to the west.
The Dead Sea is the deepest hypersaline lake in the world.
It is 9.6 times as salty as the ocean, and one of the world's saltiest bodies of water.
This salinity makes for a harsh environment in which plants and animals cannot flourish, hence its name.
It lies in the Jordan Rift Valley and its main tributary is the Jordan River.
The Dead Sea has attracted visitors from around the Mediterranean basin for thousands of years.
It has been the supplier of a wide variety of products, from asphalt for Egyptian mummification to potash for fertilizers. People also use the salt and the minerals from the Dead Sea to create cosmetics and herbal sachets.
The Dead Sea water has a density of 1.24 kg/litre, which makes swimming
similar to floating.

25 If RBI hikes the repo rate, it may
a)  Result in banks surrendering all their deposits and vault cash to RBI
b)  Accelerate GDP growth by inducing capital formation on a sustainable basis
c)  Discourage banks from borrowing from RBI and lending additional money to public
d)  Increase the lending by the banks by a large amount
Answer: C
Repo or repurchase option is a means of short-term borrowing, wherein banks sell approved government securities to RBI and get funds in exchange.
In other words, in a repo transaction, RBI repurchases government securities from banks, depending on the level of money supply it decides to maintain in the country's monetary system.
Repo rate is the discount rate at which banks borrow from RBI. Reduction in repo rate will help banks to get money at a cheaper rate, while increase in repo rate will make bank borrowings from RBI more expensive.
If RBI wants to make it more expensive for the banks to borrow money, it increases the repo rate. Similarly, if it wants to make it cheaper for banks to borrow money, it reduces the repo rate. So, clearly the reverse case makes option (c) correct, as costlier funds for banks will discourage additional lending.
Reverse repo is the exact opposite of repo. In a reverse repo transaction, banks purchase government securities form RBI and lend money to the banking regulator, thus earning interest. Reverse repo rate is the rate at which RBI borrows money from banks. Banks are always happy to lend money to RBI since their money is in safe hands with a good interest.
Thus, repo rate is always higher than the reverse repo rate.

26 Consider the following matches of protected areas with states.
1.  Kanger Ghati National Park : Chhattisgarh
2.  Nagarhole National Park : Kerala
3.  Kugti Wildlife Sanctuary : Himachal Pradesh
4.  Sultanpur Bird Sanctuary : Haryana
The code showing the correct match is?
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  3 and 4 only
c)  1, 3 and 4 only
d)  1, 2 and 3 only
Answer: C
 Statement 1: Kanger Ghati National Park was declared a national park in 1982 by the Government of India. Among the various protected areas in the country, the Kanger Valley National Park near Jagdalpur, in the Bastar region in Chattisgarh.
Statement 2: Nagarhole National Park is located in Kodagu district and Mysore district in Karnataka state in South India. This park was declared the thirty seventh Project Tiger tiger reserve in 1999. It is part of the Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve.
Statement 3: Kugti Sanctuary is the second largest sanctuary in the state of
Himachal Pradesh.
High altitude Himalayan fauna species have made this sanctuary their home,
including the endangered Himalayan tahr.
There are plenty of water resources here and many of them originate from the glaciers. Kugti Wildlife Sanctuary also houses the famous Manimahesh Temple that is annually visited by thousands of pilgrims.
Statement 4: It is situated in Gurgaon district of Haryana on Gurgaon-Farrukh Nagar road.
Sultanpur National Park is a bird paradise for bird watchers. Park is famous for its migratory as well as resident birds.
Migratory species reach here after covering incredible distance, since there home land in Europe, Siberia and Central Asia becomes inhabitable due to cold temperature, snow covered ground and frozen lakes.

27 Throughout 1928 and 1929, the period before the launch of the Civil Disobedience Movement, Gandhi acted as a brake on mounting pressure for another round of all-India mass struggle. Consider the following statements in this context.
1.  Gandhiji encouraged Pandit Nehru after he passed the Independence resolution in his absence at the Madras Congress.
2.  Gandhiji was never in favour of a dominion status for India.
3.  Pandit Nehru opposed Gandhiji's 'trusteeship' solution to zamindar-peasant conflicts.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  3 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  1, 2 and 3
Answer: A
 Excerpts from Sumit Sarkar clarify all question statements:
He (Gandhiji) had strongly disapproved of Jawaharlal's snap Independence resolution passed in his absence at the Madras Congress (1927).
At Calcutta next year he was able to push through a compromise formula which accepted the Nehru Report's dominion status objective provided the British granted it by the end of 1929, failing which the Congress would be free to go in for Civil Disobedience and Purna Swaraj.
Gandhi tried to confine Congress activities during 1929 to constructive work
in villages, prohibition, and boycott of British goods, plus redress, along
Bardoli lines, of 'specific grievances'.
He encouraged public bonfires of foreign cloth (for which he was arrested in Calcutta in March, and awarded a token fine), and toured the country collecting funds for khadi, but repeatedly rejected pressures for any all-out struggle.
Jawaharlal graced the Lahore Congress (December 1929) with the first of his stirring Presidential addresses, boldly sketching out a new internationalist and socially-radical perspective for the freedom movement-a perspective so far confined to small Leftist sects.
He said - 'I must frankly confess that I am a socialist and a republican, and am no believer in kings and princes, or in the order which produces the modern kings of industry"?..He attacked Gandhi's pet 'trusteeship' solution for zamindar-peasant and capital-labour conflicts:
"Many Englishmen honestly consider themselves the trustees for India, and yet to what a condition they have reduced our country!" was the view Nehru held which made him reject the trusteeship thesis of Gandhiji.

28 Which of the following is NOT followed in the System of Rice Intensification (SRI)?
a)  Reduced plant density
b)  Improved soil conditions through enrichment with organic matter
c)  Submerged paddy fields
d)  Transplanting seedlings of rice plants
Answer: C
 SRI supports reduced and controlled water application as one of its principles.
Other principles are early, quick and healthy plant establishment (transplantation); reduced plant density and improved soil conditions through enrichment with organic matter.
Based on these principles, farmers can adapt recommended SRI practices to respond to their agroecological and socioeconomic conditions. S
RI principles and practices have been adapted for rainfed rice as well as for other crops (such as wheat, sugarcane and tef, among others), with yield increases and
associated economic benefits.
http://www.agritech.tnau.ac.in/agriculture/agri_cropproduction_rice_sri.html

29 Consider the following statements.Assertion (a): No evidence of the practice of pottery can be found in the Harappan civilization.Reason (R): Potter's wheel was not discovered until late Iron age.In the context of the above, which of these is correct?
a)  A is correct, and R is an appropriate explanation of A.
b)  A is correct, but R is not an appropriate explanation of A.
c)  A is correct, but R is incorrect.
d)  Both A and R are incorrect.
Answer: D
 Seal-making and teracotta manufacture were important crafts.
The Harappans were also experts in beads making.
The potter's wheel was in full use, and the Harappans produced their own characteristic pottery, which was made glossy and shining pottery. So, clearly both A and R are wrong.
The Harappans also practised boat-making.
They practised navigation on the coast of the Arabian Sea. They knew the use of wheel, and carts with solid wheels were in use in Harappa.
The goldsmiths made jewellery of silver, gold and precious stones; the first two may have been obtained from Afghanistan and the last from south India.

30 The capacity of air to hold moisture in the form of water vapour is likely to be greater in
a)  Coastal regions
b)  Tropical rainforests
c)  Hot sub-tropical deserts
d)  Cold Tundra regions
Answer: C
 Water vapour capacity increases with temperature increase.
At low temperatures, such as in Tundra regions, the air will hold very less moisture as it becomes more compact. So, (d) is wrong.
Coastal regions generally have moderate temperatures and the air is already has a lot of moisture. So, (a) can't be the answer. The case of option (b) is also similar due to high rainfall and not so high temperatures.
In, hot sub-tropical deserts, you will notice that evaporation is very fast, as the air can contain a lot of water vapour due to the aridity and high temperature. So, (a) is the answer.

31 Consider the following about Conservation International (CI).
1.  It is an inter-governmental organization of the Conference of Parties (COP) based in
Hague.
2.  Its work focuses on science, policy, and partnership with businesses and communities with regard to climate change and environment.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: B
 Statement 1: It is an American non-profit environmental organization headquartered in Arlington, Virginia. Its goal is to protect nature as a source of food, fresh water, livelihoods and a stable climate. It publishes the Ocean Health Index (OHI).
It was founded in 1987 with the aim of analyzing the problems most dangerous or harmful to nature and building a foundation dedicated to solving these issues on a global scale.
Statement 2: It is working in more than 30 countries. It has helped establish 1,200 protected areas across 78 countries and protected more than 730 million hectares of land, marine and coastal areas.

32 'Europa' often seen in news is the
a)  European Space Agency's la
b)  Informal name of the European Union and Eurozone
c)  Moon of Jupiter which is seen to hold possibility of life
d)  Transport corridor being constructed between Europe and Central Asia bypassing Russia
Answer: C
Galileo was an American unmanned spacecraft that studied the planet
Jupiter and its moons
As per the observations made, Jupiter's moon Europa might be able to
support life even if there's little or no volcanic activity under the satellite's icy shell.
A salty ocean of liquid water is believed to lie beneath Europa's icy exterior. Scientists think this ocean could be habitable, if it harbors the required chemical building blocks and the right proportion of elements to provide energy for biological systems - the right ratio of oxygen to hydrogen, for example.
Recently NASA sent Juno to study Jupiter from its orbit.

33 Consider the following:
1.  Aravali Range
2.  Satmala Hills
3.  Javadi Hills
4.  Annamalai hills
5.  Girnar hills
What is the correct sequence of the above from the north to the south?
a)  12345
b)  15234
c)  21345
d)  31524
Answer: B
Girnar Hills, situated in the Junagadh District of Gujarat, are older than Himalayas.
Girnar, the mountain and its range are considered sacred and it is an important pilgrimage site for both Jains and Hindus, who gather here during the Girnar Parikrama festival.
You can see the order North - South in the map here

34 Which of the following is INCORRECT about the National Disaster Management
Authority (NDMa) of India?
a)  It is an agency of the Ministry of Home Affairs.
b)  It was established by an executive order under the extraordinary gazette of
India.
c)  Its primary purpose is to coordinate crisis response and build capacity in disaster resilience.
d)  The Prime Minister is the ex-officio chairperson of NDMA.
Answer: B
  NDMA was established through the Disaster Management Act enacted by the Government of India in December 2005. So, (b) is incorrect.
Its primary purpose is to coordinate response to natural or manmade disasters and for capacity-building in disaster resiliency and crisis response.
The Prime Minister is the ex-officio chairperson of NDMA.
The agency is responsible for framing policies, laying down guidelines and best practices and coordinating with the State Disaster Management Authorities (SDMAs) to ensure a holistic and distributed approach to disaster management.
The Act also establishes District Disaster Management Authorities.

35 The Servants of India Society was established by Gokhale in 1905. Which of the following was NOT one of its ideals?
a)  Self-Rule and stopping drain of wealth from India
b)  Maintaining Moral purity and self-sacrifice
c)  Commitment to full-time national work
d)  All of the above
Answer: A
 He launched his Servants of India Society, combining strictly Moderate goals (i.e. option (a) is incorrect) with an insistence on self-sacrifice, moral purity, and full-time national work on a very low salary.
The Society had managed to recruit no more than 20 members, however, by
1909.
Sumit Sarkar writes, "For the rest the Congress remained what it had been previously; persuading it to adopt Extremist resolutions would mean good publicity and added prestige, but not much more.
Gokhale's Presidential address at Bernare Congress (1905) and a separate resolution condemned Partition and repressive measures in Bengal but the only reference to boycott described it in noticeably half-hearted language."

36 Which of the geological phenomena can cause earthquakes?
1.  Development of a fault and movement along it
2.  Impact produced by a volcanic eruption
3.  Folding of rocks
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  1, 2 and 3
Answer: D
 Statement 1: Deformation of the rock concentrates along the
fractures. Slip along faults frequently occurs through sudden ruptures (earthquakes).
Statement 3: When the layers of rock in the Earth's crust fold, the land's surface is pushed up as hills or mountains. But if the folds rise more quickly they form high, jagged peaks.
The horizontal as well as vertical movements of rocks create folds and faults. Both are related to plate boundaries.

37 GPS Aided GEO Augmented Navigation (GAGAN) provides services for better
a)  Air traffic management
b)  Economic growth management
c)  Climate change mitigation and adaption
d)  Border management by armed forces
Answer: A
This is a Satellite Based Augmentation System (SBAS) implemented jointly with Airport Authority of India (AAI).
The main objectives of GAGAN are to provide Satellite-based Navigation services with accuracy and integrity required for civil aviation applications and to provide better Air Traffic Management over Indian Airspace.
The system will be interoperable with other international SBAS systems and
provide seamless navigation across regional boundaries.
The GAGAN Signal-In-Space (SIS) is available through GSAT-8 and
GSAT-10.

38 The immediate cause for the rise of extremism in India is said to be the reactionary rule of Lord Curzon. Which of the following is associated with him?
1.  The Sedition Act and the Official Secrets Act
2.  Partition of Bengal
3.  Rowlatt Act
4.  Educational reforms
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1, 3 and 4 only
b)  3 and 4 only
c)  1, 2 and 4 only
d)  1, 2 and 3 only
Answer: C
Statement 1: The Sedition Act and the Official Secrets Act reduced the freedoms of all people.
Statement 2: Though Curzon justified his action of Bengal partition on
administrative lines, partition divided the Hindus and Muslims in Bengal. This led to the anti-partition agitation all over the country. This also intensified the National Movement.
Statement 3: This came much later than Curzon who was in India from 1899 to
1905.
Statement 4: Curzon took a serious view of the fall in the standard of education and discipline in the educational institutions.
In his view the universities had degenerated into factories for producing political revolutionaries. To set the educational system in order, he instituted in 1902, a Universities Commission to go into the entire question of university education in the country.
On the basis of the findings and recommendations of the Commission,
Curzon brought in the Indian Universities Act of 1904, which brought all the
universities in India under the control of the government.
He passed the Calcutta Corporation Act, (1899) reducing the Indian control of this local body.

39 A democratic constitution aims at establishing a
a)  Rules-based society
b)  Strong bureaucracy
c)  Powerful Rulership
d)  Completely economically equal society
Answer: A
 Constitutional Democracy is the antithesis of arbitrary rule. It is democracy characterized by:
Popular sovereignty: The people are the ultimate source of the authority of the government which derives its right to govern from their consent. Majority rule and minority rights: Although "the majority rules," the fundamental rights of individuals in the minority are protected.
Limited government: The powers of government are limited by law and a written or unwritten constitution which those in power obey.
Institutional and procedural limitations on powers: There are certain institutional and procedural devices which limit the powers of government.

40 Consider the following statements.
1.  The Adaptation Fund (AF) was established to finance concrete adaptation programmes in developing country that are parties to the Kyoto Protocol.
2.  The Special Climate Change Fund (SCCF) and the Least Developed Countries
(LDC) Fund were established under the UNFCCC. Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: C
 Statement 1: It was established in 2001 to finance concrete adaptation projects and programmes in developing country Parties to the Kyoto Protocol that
are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change.
The Adaptation Fund is financed with a share of proceeds from the clean development mechanism (CDM) project activities and other sources of funding. The share of proceeds amounts to 2 per cent of certified emission reductions (CERs) issued for a CDM project activity.
Statement 2: The Special Climate Change Fund (SCCF) was established under the Convention in 2001 to finance projects relating to: adaptation; technology transfer and capacity building; energy, transport, industry, agriculture, forestry and waste management; and economic diversification. This fund should complement other funding mechanisms for the implementation of the Convention
The LDC fund was established for preparation and implementation of national adaptation programmes of action (NAPAs).
The Global Environment Facility (GEF), as an operating entity of the Financial Mechanism of the Convention, has been entrusted to operate the LDC Fund.
http://unfccc.int/cooperation_and_support/financial_mechanism/special_climate_ch ange_fund/items/3657.php

41 Figures of which of the following animals can be found in the state emblem of India?
a)  Elephant, tiger and bull
b)  Deer, elephant and tiger
c)  Bull, peacock and eagle
d)  Horse and bull
Answer: D
 The four animals in the Lion Capital are believed to symbolize different phases in Lord Buddha's life. The Elephant is a representation of Queen Maya's conception of Buddha when she saw a white elephant entering her womb in a dream.
The Bull represents desire during the life of the Buddha as a prince. The Horse
symbolizes Buddha's departure from palatial life. The Lion represents the attainment of Nirvana by Lord Buddha.
There are also non-religious symbolic interpretations of the Lion Capital believing the four lions symbolize Ashoka's rule over the four directions, the wheels as symbols of his enlightened rule and the four animals as symbols of four adjoining territories of India.
The emblem is girded by four smaller animals (other than the Lion)- guardians of the four directions: the lion of the north, the elephant of the east, the horse of the south and the bull of the west.
The abacus rests on a lotus in full bloom, exemplifying the fountainhead of life and creative inspiration.

42 Apart from India and China, which of the following groups of countries border
Myanmar?
a)  Vietnam, Malaysia and Brunei
b)  Cambodia, Laos and Malaysia
c)  Thailand, Bangladesh and Vietnam
d)  Thailand, Laos and Bangladesh
Answer: D
 The map below addresses it.

43 Consider the following statements.
1.  In silk fibres, protein is predominant.
2.  In cotton fibres, nitrogen is the only dominant component.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: A
Statement 1: Silk is a natural protein fiber, some forms of which can
be woven into textiles. The protein fiber of silk is composed mainly of fibroin and is produced by certain insect larvae to form cocoons. The high proportion (50%) of glycine allows tight packing.
Statement 2: Each cotton fiber is composed of concentric layers. The cuticle layer on the fiber itself is separable from the fiber and consists of wax and pectin
materials. The primary wall, the most peripheral layer of the fiber, is composed of cellulosic crystalline fibrils.

44 If the Earth does not tilt on its own axis
1.  There will be no seasonal change.
2.  Tides and waves will not occur.
3.  It will be warm at poles and cold at equator.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1 and 2 only
d)  1 and 3 only
Answer: A
At present Earth is tilted 23.5 degrees on its axis. This is the primary reason for the seasons.
When the Earth is tilted toward the sun the Northern Hemisphere is in the warm season and when the Earth is tilted away from the sun the Northern Hemisphere is in the cool season.
Since the Earth revolves at a predictable and relatively steady rate around the sun the cycle repeats itself every year. In the warm season the sun is higher in the sky and it is warmer and in the cool season the sun is lower in the sky and it is cooler.
If the Earth was not tilted, the plane of the Earth's poles would always be perpendicular to the sun.
The sun would always be just on the horizon 24 hours a day on every day at the poles. Every day would be like what it currently is on the equinox since every location on Earth would have about a 12 hour sunlight days and the noon sun angle would be about the same every day. So, 1 is correct.
There would no longer be season as we know them. The temperature and precipitation pattern would not vary much. It would still be warm at the equator and cold at the poles. So, 3 is incorrect.
The most profound impact on temperatures would be at the poles. Instead and dark and frigid temperatures in the winter and warmer and constant sun in the
summer, the polar areas would have much more uniform temperatures year
round and the sun would always be low on the horizon.

45 The highest criminal court of the district is the Court of District and Sessions Judge. Consider the following about it.
1.  There is no mention of District Courts in the Constitution.
2.  The District Judges are appointed by the Governor in consultation with the High
Court.
3.  A person to be eligible for appointment as a District Judge must be an officer in judicial service of the Union or the State.
4.  A death sentence awarded by the Sessions court needs the approval of the High
Court before it is executed.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 3 only
b)  2 and 4 only
c)  1, 2 and 3 only
d)  1, 2 and 4 only
Answer: B
Statement 1: As per the constitution (A223), appointments of persons to be, and the posting and promotion of, district judges in any State shall be made by the Governor of the State in consultation with the High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to such State.
A person not already in the service of the Union or of the State shall only be eligible to be appointed a district judge if he has been for not less than seven years an advocate or a pleader and is recommended by the High Court for appointment. So, 1 and 3 are incorrect and 2 is correct.
Statement 4: When the Sessions Judge awards death sentence, it must be confirmed by the High Court before it is carried out.

46 Which of the following items are relevant to properly conduct an Environmental Impact
Assessment (EIa) at a locality for an upcoming project?
1.  Landscape, including the details of drainage and natural water structures
2.  Pattern of permanent wind flow in the locality
3.  Availability of eateries in the locality and food habits of people
4.  Position of sanitary fills in the locality
5.  Calorie intake of the population
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1, 4 and 5 only
b)  1, 2 and 3 only
c)  1, 2 and 4 only
d)  2, 3, 4 and 5 only
Answer: C
 Statement 1, 2 and 3: Suppose a thermal power plant is to be setup in the area. The pattern of predominant wind flow would affect the distribution of emissions from the plant in the locality. Also, the wastewater of waste products emitted by the plant should not be very close to local water storage structures. Also, sanitary fills should not be destroyed by the plant as it will affect waste management in the area.
One can take many examples and justify these statements. So, 1, 2 and 3 are correct. Statement 3 and 5: Availability of eateries in the locality and eateries are remote
considerations and trivial matters when it comes to an EIA.

47 Consider the following statements:
1.  The Malwa region plateau is an extension of the Deccan Traps and one of the important producers of opium in the world.
2.  The Chotanagpur region has been formed by continental uplift and drained by the tributaries of Mahanadi and Godavari River.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: A
Statement 1: The Malwa region occupies a plateau in western Madhya
Pradesh and south-eastern Rajasthan with Gujarat in the west.
The plateau generally slopes towards the north. The western part of the region is drained by the Mahi River, while the Chambal River drains the central part, and the Betwa River and the headwaters of the Dhasan and Ken rivers drain the east.
The Shipra River is of historical importance because of the Simhasth mela, held every 12 years. Other notable rivers are Parbati, Gambhir and Choti Kali Sindh
The plateau is an extension of the Deccan Traps, formed between 60 and 68 million years ago at the end of the Cretaceous period.
In this region the main classes of soil are black, brown and bhatori (stony) soil. The region has been one of the important producers of opium in the world. Wheat and soybeans are other important cash crops, and textiles are a major industry.
Statement 2: The Chota Nagpur Plateau is a continental plateau-an extensive area of land thrust above the general land.
The plateau has been formed by continental uplift from forces acting deep inside the earth.
The Gondwana substrates at
The Damodar River flows through Chota Nagpur Plateau (not Mahanadi, so 2 is wrong).
Chota Nagpur plateau is a store house of minerals like mica, bauxite, copper, limestone, iron ore and coal.
The Damodar valley is rich in coal and it is considered as the prime centre of coking coal in the country.
Massive coal deposits are found in the central basin. Important coalfields in the basin are Jharia, Raniganj, West Bokaro, East Bokaro, Ramgarh, South Karanpura and North Karanpura.

48 Which of the following is NOT correct with reference to the Civil Disobedience movement?
a)  Women and teenagers participated in large numbers.
b)  Muslim participation remained low throughout the Civil Disobedience years.
c)  Unlike Non-Cooperation, Civil Disobedience did not coincide with any major
labour upsurge.
d)  Gandhiji at the Lahore Congress gave a call for massive boycott of schools, courts and workplaces to embolden the movement.
Answer: D
 Civil Disobedience marked in fact a major step forward in the emancipation of Indian women due to their large scale participation.
Muslim participation remained low throughout the Civil Disobedience years. In U.P., for instance, where the Congress-Khilafat alliance had been so formidable in 1921-22, very few Civil Disobedience prisoners in Allahabad between 1930 and 1933 were Muslims.
Apart from option (c), yet another contrast lay in the evident decline in the older, more purely intelligentsia forms of pro
Gandhi at the Lahore Congress rejected a call for boycott of schools and courts as unpractical-'I do not see today the atmosphere about us necessary for such boycott.'
A Bihar Congress report of July 1930 admitted that there had been
'practically no response from lawyers and students. So, clearly (d) is wrong. The lag in respect of labour and the urban intelligentsia was counter- balanced, however, by the massive response obtained from business groups and large sections of the peasantry.

49 Consider the following matches of recently included tribes, in the Scheduled Tribes list, with the state they are found in.
1.  Darlong : Tripura
2.  Kurivikkaran : Bihar
3.  Dhanuhar : Chattisgarh
Which of the above is/are correct matches?
a)  1 and 3 only
b)  2 only
c)  2 and 3 only
d)  1 and 2 only
Answer: A
 It was simple to eliminate if you knew a tribe named "Kurivikkaran" should ideally belong to a Southern State. Bihar is an eastern State, so 2 can't be correct, which leaves the only answer as option (a).
It is not important to know the details about the individual tribes.
First list of Scheduled Tribes in relation to a State or Union Territory is to be issued by a notified Order of the President after having consultation with the
State Government concerned.
Any subsequent inclusion in or exclusion from the list of Scheduled Tribes can be effected through an Act of Parliament as envisaged under clause (2) of Article 342.
Tribes of following states are recently included
Assam - Boro, Boro Kachari, Bodo, Bodo Kachar Karbi (Mikir)
Jharkhand - Bhogta, Deshwari, Ganjhu, Dautalbandi (Dwalbandi), Patbandi, Raut, Maajhia, Khairi (Kheri) Puran
Tamil Nadu - Malayali Gounderxi, Narikoravan, Kurivikkaran
Chattisgarh - Bhuinya, Bhuiyan, Bhuyaniv) Dhanuhar / Dhanuwarv) Kisanvi) Saunra, Saonravii) Dhangad
Tripura - Darlong
Pondicherry - Irular (including Villi and Vettaikaran)

50 Consider the following statements about "Lac".
1.  Lac is mainly produced in the dense tropical mountain forests of the North-east in
India.
2.  It is used in the manufacture of pharmaceuticals, cosmetics and paints.
3.  India is the largest producer of "lac" in the world.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  1, 2 and 3 only
Answer: B
 Lac is the scarlet resinous secretion of a number of species of lac insects, of which the most commonly cultivated species is Kerria lacca.
Cultivation begins when a farmer gets a stick (broodlac) that contains eggs ready to hatch and ties it to the tree to be infested.
Thousands of lac insects colonize the branches of the host trees and secrete the resinous pigment. The coated branches of the host trees are cut and harvested as sticklac.
Statement 1: It is mainly grown in deciduous forests. The leading producer of lac is Jharkhand, followed by the Chhattisgarh, West Bengal, and Maharashtra states of India.
Statement 2: The use of lac dye goes back to ancient times. It was used in ancient India and neighbouring areas as wood finish, skin cosmetic and dye for wool and silk.
In China it is a traditional dye for leather goods. Lac for dye has been somewhat replaced by the emergence of synthetic dyes, though it remains in use, and some juices, carbonated drinks, wine, jam, sauce, and candy are colored using it.
It is used in violin and other varnish and is soluble in alcohol. This type of lac was used in the finishing of 18th-century fowling guns in the United States.
Statement 3: India is a major producer and exporter of Lac contributing about 60%
followed by Thailand in world Lac trade.
Lac cultivation is one of the important secondary sources of income for villagers and this is particularly more in the tribal districts. The important Lac producing areas in the state are Kanker, Korba, Rajnandgaon and Bilaspur.
Most of the tribal population who live in or around forests was traditionally practicing Lac culture.
Of late due to displacement of tribal population from forests has led to reduction in production. However those who own trees that are suitable for Lac still take up cultivation of Lac.
Vagaries of weather especially change in temperature and heavy hailstorms during critical stages of insect life cycle effects the crop badly.
This climatic uncertainty acts as a major deterrent for poor farmers to invest
in this enterprise.
Lac production is also found in Bangladesh, Myanmar, Thailand, Laos, Vietnam, parts of China, and Mexico.

51 The use of Pellet Guns for mob control, in recent times, has been quite controversial, especially in light of the recent violence in Jammu and Kashmir. Which of the following used in pellets make them problematic?
a)  Lead
b)  Tungsten
c)  Antimony
d)  Arsenic
Answer: A
 They are a form of non-lethal crowd control methods used by police and military worldwide. The other popular methods are tear gas, water cannon, pepper spray, taser guns etc. Pellet guns are also popular in hunting and pest control.
Pellets guns are intended to injure individuals and cause pain. They are effective over short ranges up to 500 yards but when fired from close quarters
can be lethal, particularly when sensitive parts like eyes are hit.
Over hundred people are being treated for severe eye injuries after security forces fired pellet guns to contain violence triggered after Burhan Wani, a militant, was killed in J&K.
Police claim that it is a "non lethal weapon",but doctors treating pellet victims say it maims a person forever.
Pellets are loaded with lead and once fired they disperse in huge numbers. They don't follow a definite path.
Pellets penetrate the skin's soft tissues, and eye being the delicate structure is the most vulnerable to damage. Once the pellet goes inside an eye it shatters tissues and causes multiple damages to all parts of the eye.
The GoI has recently setup a committee to look into its use as a mob control weapon.
http://indianexpress.com/article/india/india-news-india/kashmir-violence-what-are-p ellet-guns-and-why-are-they-so-lethal-2913917/

52 Strategic Sale of a Public Sector Unit (PSU) implies
a)  The private sector has not been given any role post-disinvestment of the PSU.
b)  The Government maintains majority stake in the PSU concerned
c)  Many public welfare PSUs have been consolidated and merged
d)  The private sector will hold majority stake and decision-making power in the
PSU
Answer: D
 Disinvestment means the dilution of stake of the Government in a public enterprise.
This can be done in two ways. When the Government sells a part of its equity of a public enterprise less than 50 per cent of its total stock, it is called merely disinvestment and in this case control and management of the business enterprise remains in the hands of Government. It is also called "minority sale".
On the other hand, when disinvestment or sale of its equity capital by the Government exceeds 50 per cent so that the majority ownership and therefore control and management of the enterprise is transferred to private enterprise,
it results in privatisation. It is called "strategic sale".
Therefore, in many disinvestment programmes government retains 51 per
cent or more of the total equity capital of the public enterprises so that control and management remains in its hands.
http://www.thehindubusinessline.com/economy/policy/govt-plans-to-take-up-strateg ic-sale-of-at-least-one-psu-this-fiscal/article8784530.ece

53 Consider the following about Amaravati, the new capital of Andhra Pradesh.
1.  It was the capital of Andhra Satavahanas.
2.  Buddhism existed in Amaravati prior to the advent of the Mauryans.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: C
 Statement 1: The city is also known as Punyakshetra or
Amareswaram. The recorded history of Amaravati and nearby Dharanikota is from
2nd century BCE. Satvahanas ruled from 2nd Century BCE to 3rd Century CE here.
Statement 2: According to Vajrayana traditional sources, the Buddha preached at Dharanikota/Dhanyakatakam and conducted Kalachakra ceremony, which would take the antiquity of Amaravati back to 500 BCE.
Numerous excavations done at Amaravati, Dharanikota, Chandavaram and other places have resulted in discovery of many numismatical evidences, dome slabs and other newer evidences to prove that Buddhism existed in Amaravati prior to the advent of the Mauryans.
http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/op-ed/capital-project-the-making-of-amaravati/art icle8770104.ece

54 Consider the following statements about a protected area.
1.  The Tirthan River originates from here
2.  It has a diverse Mammalian population and Blue Sheep can be found here.

3.  The Himalayan Tahr that is endemic to the Western Himalayas can also be found in this park.
The above refers to?
a)  The Great Himalayan National Park
b)  Corbett National Park
c)  Hemis National Park
d)  Neora Valley National Park
Answer: A
 The Park was recently declared as a World Heritage Site.
Statement 1: Tirath, the origin of the Tirthan River is a pilgrimage site for the local community. You can see it in the image below.
Statement 2 and 3: The mammalian fauna of GHNP and its buffer zone is typical of the several ecoregions of the Western Himalaya.
Among these, the Himalayan Musk Deer, and Snow Leopard are endangered species (as per IUCN categorization), while the Himalayan Tahr is endemic to the Western Himalaya.

55 Biodiversity Finance Initiative (BIOFIN) is a global partnership that helps governments cost, plan and pay for action on biodiversity conservation and its sustainable use. The initiative is run by the
a)  United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
b)  World Bank
c)  International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN)
d)  United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
Answer: A
 Available evidence and the decisions adopted by Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) indicate that a significant gap remains in finance for biodiversity management, for countries to drastically scale up their efforts and achieve the 20 Aichi Targets defined in the CBD's Strategic Plan for
2011-2020.
In this context, UNDP in 2012 launched the Biodiversity Finance Initiative  BIOFIN, as a new global partnership seeking to address the biodiversity finance
challenge in a comprehensive manner  building a sound business case for increased investment in the management of ecosystems and biodiversity, with a particular focus on the needs and transformational opportunities at the national level.
BIOFIN is managed by the UNDP Ecosystems and Biodiversity Programme, in partnership with the European Union and the Governments of Germany and Switzerland.
http://envfor.nic.in/sites/default/files/press-releases/Press%20Release_BIOFIN.pdf

56 The World Development Report is annually published by
a)  World Bank
b)  United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
c)  IMF
d)  World Economic Forum (WEF)
Answer: A
 The WB recently published its annual World Development Report
WDR) 2016.
The World Development Report 2016 on Digital Dividends assembles the best available evidence on the Internet potential impact on economic growth, on equity and on the efficiency of public service provision. Read More'
The 2016 WDR issue titled "Digital Dividends," noted that almost 1 billion Indians were offline even though India ranked among the top five nations in terms of the total number of Internet users, along with China, the U.S., Japan and Brazil.

57 Many Indian shipments to China are being stalled by it using non-tariff barriers. Which of the following is/are non-tariff barriers to trade?
1.  Domestic subsidies for infant industry 2.  Import quotas
3.  Phytosanitary standardisation
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1 only
d)  1 and 3 only
Answer: B
 Non-tariff barriers to trade include import quotas, special licenses, unreasonable standards for the quality of goods, bureaucratic delays at customs, export restrictions etc.
It also includes limiting the activities of state trading, export subsidies, countervailing duties, technical barriers to trade, sanitary and phyto-sanitary measures, rules of origin, etc.
Tariff barriers include high import duties, custom duties etc.

58 Which of the following about Lala Lajpat Rai is INCORRECT?
a)  He was a stauch critic of Swami Dayananda Saraswati due to the latter's monastic views.
b)  He founded the Indian Home Rule League of America
c)  He moved the resolution in the Central Legislative Assembly refusing co- operation with the Simon Commission
d)  All the above are correct statements
Answer: A
 Lajpat Rai practised at Hissar and Lahore, where he helped to establish the nationalistic Dayananda Anglo-Vedic School and became a follower of Dayananda Sarasvati, the founder of the reformist Hindu society Arya Samaj. So, option (a) is incorrect.
He was popularly known as Punjab Kesari. He was part of the Lal Bal Pal trio.
He was also associated with activities of Punjab National Bank and Lakshmi
Insurance Company in their early stages.
He sustained serious injuries by the police when leading a non-violent pro

59 Consider the following about the Centre for Science and Environment (CSE) in India.
1.  It is a technical wing of the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change
(MoEF&CC).
2.  It provides grants to Central Universities for research in ecology and zoology.
3.  It publishes "Down to Earth" on a regular basis
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  3 only
d)  1 and 3 only
Answer: C
 Statement 1: Centre for Science and Environment (CSE) is a not-for- profit public interest research and advocacy organisation based in New Delhi
Statement 2: Established in 1980, CSE works as a think tank on environment- development issues in India, poor planning, climate shifts devastating India's Sundarbans and advocates for policy changes and better implementation of the already existing policies.
CSE uses knowledge-based activism to create awareness about problems and propose sustainable solutions.
The activities are carried out through lectures, field trips, publications, exhibitions on the various issues they take up, meetings and workshops.
Statement 3: Down to Earth - a fortnightly environment magazine is a prominent publication of CSE.

60 Home to the Khasi tribal people, the place Mawlynnong is famous for its exceptional cleanliness and often referred as 'God's own garden' winning the acclaim of being the cleanest village in Asia in 2003. It is located in which North-eastern state of India?
a)  Tripura
b)  Meghalaya
c)  Mizoram
d)  Nagaland
Answer: B
 Far removed from the noise and dirt of other big cities, Mawlynnong Village located in the East Khasi Hills of Meghalaya, also referred as 'God's own garden'.
The village known for its cleanliness is located around 90 kms from Shillong and is a community based eco-tourism initiative.
In the tiny hamlet of Mawlynnong in the northeast, plastic is banned and spotless paths are lined with flowers
The village has even been hailed by Prime Minister Narendra Modi in an autumn radio address imploring Indians to erase the poor national image of rubbish-strewn highways and monuments under his Clean India campaign. "I was amazed to know that there is such a village in remote northeast, Meghalaya, which is so passionately carrying the mission of cleanliness for years," he said.
http://economictimes.indiatimes.com/magazines/travel/a-picture-perfect-hamlet-asia s-cleanest-village-mawlynnong/articleshow/52431603.cms

61 Consider the following statements.
1.  The Prime Minister must be a member of the Lower House of the People.
2.  The Chief Minister may be a member of either Legislative Council or Legislative
Assembly.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: B
 Statement 1: PM can be a member of any house of the Parliament.
Even a non-member can be made the PM, with the condition that she must become a
MP within six months of time.
Although the PM can attend the meetings of both houses, she can vote in only that house of which she is a member.
Statement 2: Similar conditions apply to the office of the CM. So, 2 is correct, and 1 is clearly wrong.

62 Merger of two Ministries/departments of the Union Government can be done by
a)  A constitutional amendment only
b)  A statutory provision only
c)  The President of India by an executive order
d)  The Cabinet Secretary without needing authorization from the Prime Minister
Answer: C
 The Govt. of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961 are made by the President of India under Article 77 of the Constitution for the allocation of business of the Govt. of India.
The Ministries/Departments of the Govt. are created (or merged, dissolved) by the
President on the advice of the Prime Minister under these Rules.
The Cabinet Secretariat is under the direct charge of the Prime Minister.
The administrative head of the Secretariat is the Cabinet Secretary who is also the ex-officio Chairman of the Civil Services Board.
The Cabinet Secretariat is responsible for the administration of the Govt. of India
Rules, 1961.

63 Consider the following statements about the sites from India recently included in the
UNESCO World Heritage List.
1.  Nalanda Mahavihara was founded in the Gupta dynasty and was one of the earliest planned universities of the Indian sub-continent
2.  Khangchendzonga National Park covers varying eco-clines from sub-tropical to arctic and also contains many glaciers
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: C
 Statement 1:
Nalanda Mahavihara was founded by Kumargupta I of the Gupta dynasty in
5th century CE. It was patronized by various rulers including King Harshavardhana of Kannauj (7th century CE) and the Pala rulers (8th to 12th century CE) as well as various scholars.
Nalanda was considered as a rare combination of outstanding achievements in institution-building, site-planning, art and architecture.
Presently, it is preserved in number of remains of stupas (temple-like structure), shrines and viharas (residential-cum-scholastic structure) and important art works in stucco, stone and metal.
Nalanda University is the second World Heritage site in Bihar after Bodhgaya's Mahabodhi temple to be accorded UNESCO's World Heritage Site tag.
Statement 2: It is a National Park and a Biosphere reserve located in Sikkim and the first "mixed" heritage site from India. The park gets its name from the mountain Kanchenjunga (alternative spelling Khangchendzonga) which is 8,586 metres tall, the third-highest peak in the world.
There are many glaciers in the park including the Zemu glacier. Animals like musk deer, snow leopard and Himalayan tahr all make their home in this park.
KBR is endowed with one of the highest eco-systems in the world and it covers varying eco-clines from sub-tropical to arctic, vast land of natural forests in different biomes from 1220 m to over 8586 m above sea level.
The vegetation mainly comprises of East Himalayan Sub-tropical Broad-leaf Hill Forest, East Himalayan Moist Temperate Forest, East Himalayan Mixed Coniferous Forest, East Himalayan Sub-Alpine Birch/Fir/Rhododendron
Forest, Moist Alpine Scrub Forest and Alpine Pastures.
KBR includes areas of high religious significance that some of the Mountains/ Peaks, Lakes, Caves, Rocks, Stupas (Shrines) and Hot-Springs are sacred and pilgrimage sites.

64 What can be inferred from Negative Interest Rate Policy (NIRP) followed by Central
Banks?
a)  The economy is passing through a phase of boom
b)  Central Bank is discouraging people from hoarding money to boost aggregate demand
c)  There is zero unemployment in the economy.
d)  There is no coordination between monetary and fiscal policies in the economy.
Answer: B
 NIRP is an unconventional monetary policy tool.
Option (a) is incorrect because during boom people spend more cash and the Central bank usually keeps rates high to curb high inflationary situations. A negative interest rate may further increase economic activity and inflation
Option (d) can be present in all cases
Option (a) is incorrect because during boom people spend more cash and the Central bank usually keeps rates high to curb high inflationary situations. A negative interest rate may further increase economic activity and inflation
Option (d) can be present in all cases  positive, zero or negative interest rates. It has a bearing on the overall macroeconomic situation in the economy. If the government is spending recklessly and the Central bank is following a tight monetary policy,
both may pull the economy in different directions resulting in little growth.
During deflationary periods, people and businesses hoard money instead of spending and investing. The result is a collapse in aggregate demand which leads to prices falling even farther, a slowdown or halt in real production and output, and an increase in unemployment.
A loose or expansionary monetary policy is usually employed to deal with
such economic stagnation.
However, if deflationary forces are strong enough, simply cutting the central bank's interest rate to zero may not be sufficient to stimulate borrowing and lending.
Then the Bank follows a negative interest rate policy.
In the case of Sweden, the central bank has gone below zero on the rate it lends money to the banks, its main policy tool. The aim in the eurozone is to stimulate economic growth and to raise inflation, which is also below zero

65 The Simla Deputation, 1906, to Minto was organized pleading for
a)  Separate electorates and better representation of Muslims
b)  Establishment of a constituent assembly
c)  Disbandment of the Indian National Congress (INC) on grounds of sedition and spreading anti-British sentiments
d)  Reforms in the Imperial Legislative Council
Answer: A
 The All-India Muslim League was established in this year, 1906, and so you can guess the answer as (a), even if you have not heard of this deputation
The deputation pleaded for separate electorates and representation in excess of numerical strength in view of 'the value of the contribution' Muslims were making 'to the defence of the Empire'.
The same group quickly took over the Muslim League, initially floated by
Salimulla at Dacca in 1906.
The Sayyid Ahmed group had been pleading for special Muslim representation by nomination from the 1880s, and as elections became unavoidable, a demand for separate electorates was bound to emerge.

66 Stock markets in India are regulated by
a)  Reserve Bank of India (RBI)
b)  Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MoCa)
c)  Unified Financial Agency (UFa)
d)  Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI)
Answer: D
 The overall responsibility of development,regulation and supervision of the stock market rests with the Securities & Exchange Board of India(SEBI),which was formed in 1992 as an independent authority
Since then, SEBI has consistently tried to lay down market rules in line with the best market practices. It enjoys vast powers of imposing penalties on market participants, in case of a breach.
We have covered on SEBI in previous 

67 The 'tinkathia system' became the major cause of which of the following historic movements?
a)  Champaran movement
b)  Ahmadabad Mill strike
c)  Swadeshi and Boycott movement
d)  Santhali Rebellion
Answer: A
 There had been sporadic resistance in Champaran since the 1860s to the
'tinkathia system by which European planters holding thikadari leases from the big zamindars made peasants cultivate indigo on part of their land at unremunerative prices.
As indigo declined from about 1900 in face of competition from synthetic dyes, the planters tried to pass the burden on the peasants by charging sharahbeshi (rent-enhancement) or tawan (lump-sum compensation) in return for releasing them from the obligation to grow indigo.
Widespread resistance developed in the Motihari-Bettiah region between
1905-08, and even after it continued.
It was as a part of this on-going confrontation that Raj Kumar Shukla, a prosperous peasant cum-petty moneylender, contacted Gandhi at the Lucknow Congress of 1916.
This became the historic Champaran movement.

68 The government had recently constituted a committee under Former Cabinet secretary
T.S.R. Subramanian for the evolution of
a)  A comprehensive national security policy
b)  New nuclear doctrine of India in view of increasing border skirmishes
c)  A national education policy
d)  A new philosophy of Public Sector Management in India
Answer: C
 The T.S.R. Subramanian committee recently submitted the report to the government suggesting some significant measures such as:
An Indian Education Service (IES) should be established as an all India service
The outlay on education should be raised to at least 6% of GDP without further loss of time.
Compulsory licensing or certification for teachers in government and private schools
Pre-school education for children in the age group of 4 to 5 years should be declared as a right
The no detention policy must be continued for young children until completion of class V when the child will be 11 years old. At the upper primary stage, the system of detention shall be restored subject to certain provisions
The mid-day meal (MDM) program should now be extended to cover students of secondary schools.
UGC Act must be allowed to lapse once a separate law is created for the management of higher education. The University Grants Commission (UGC) needs to be made leaner and thinner and given the role of disbursal of scholarships and fellowships.
Top 200 foreign universities should be allowed to open campuses in India
and give the same degree which is acceptable in the home country of the said university.
Also, in August 2014, the NDA Government had set up a high-level committee to
review the six environment laws in India and recommend specific amendments to bring them in line with current requirements. The committee was headed by the former cabinet secretary TSR Subramanian.
http://www.livemint.com/Education/UtNYdM0Ng8EZSFGa5l1cXP/10-recommend ations-of-Subramanian-Committee-on-new-education.html

69 Consider the following statements about some commissions established during the colonial period in India.
1.  Whitley Commission was established to report on the existing conditions of labour and to make recommendations
2.  Hunter Commission was established to recommend police and military reforms in the wake of the 1857 mutiny
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: A
 Statement 1: During World War I, in 1917, John Henry Whitley chaired a committee which produced a report on the 'Relations of Employers and Employees' identifying good industrial relations as a vital need for industrial relations.
Whitely proposed a system of regular formal consultative meetings between workers and employers to address industrial unrests, which evolved as wage negotiating bodies over time. Councils were established from 1919.
Statement 2: Hunter Commission is associated with Jallianwala Bagh inquiry, and an educational reforms commission setup under Ripon.
The Hunter (Ripon) Commission recommended for the expansion and improvement of the elementary education of the masses.

70 Maize can be used to produce/manufacture
1.  Starch
2.  Plastics and fabrics
3.  Bio-fuel
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  3 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  1, 2 and 3
Answer: D
 Statement 1 and 2: Maize kernels are often used in cooking as a starch.
Starch from maize can also be made into plastics, fabrics, adhesives, and many other chemical products.
Statement 3: Maize is increasingly used as a feedstock for the production of ethanol fuel due to its high fibre and starch content.
 The corn steep liquor, a plentiful watery by-product of maize wet milling process, is widely used in the biochemical industry and research as a culture
medium to grow many kinds of microorganisms.
Maize produces a greater quantity of biomass than other cereal plants, which is used for fodder. Digestibility and palatability are higher when ensiled and fermented, rather than dried.

71 Revenue Expenditure is meant
a)  Exclusively for asset creation
b)  For routine government expenditure
c)  Largely for planned expenditure
d)  Only for the armed forces
Answer: B
 Broadly speaking, revenue expenditure consists of all those expenditures of the government which do not result in creation of physical or financial assets.
It relates to those expenses incurred for the normal functioning of the government departments and various services, interest payments on debt incurred by the government, and grants given to state governments and other parties (even though some of the grants may be meant for creation of assets).
Budget documents classify total revenue expenditure into plan and non-plan expenditure. Plan revenue expenditure relates to central Plans (the Five-Year Plans) and central assistance for State and Union Territory Plans.

72 Consider the following about the Dandi March 1930
1.  Gandhi's Dandi March started from Sabarmati
2.  The Dandi March did not receive any publicity beyond local regions as the march was not consciously organized on a large scale
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: A
 Statement 1 and 2: From Sabarmati to the sea through the heartland of Gujarat with 71 asrama members drawn from all parts of India, Gandhi and the movement attracted enormous publicity and attention from the entire country and even on a world scale. So, 2 is clearly incorrect. UPSC keeps lifting statements like this verbatim from Sumit Sarkar, hence such questions.
Wholesale illegal manufacture and auctioning of salt should begin, Gandhi declared, after he had himself violated the law at Dandi; it could be accompanied by boycott
of foreign cloth and liquor, and indeed 'everyone (would have) a free hand', subject to the pledges of non-violence and truth.

73 Which of the following remains memorable as the first major Indian effort to draft a constitutional framework for the country, complete with lists of central and provincial subjects and fundamental rights?
a)  Indian Independence Report
b)  Jinnah's fourteen-point Agenda
c)  Wavell Report
d)  Nehru Report
Answer: D
 The Nehru report even while demanding responsible government both in the Centre and in the provinces, advocated Dominion Status and not complete independence. The excerpts below from Sumit Sarkar are important. Please see it carefully.
"It did raise the demand, however, for universal suffrage for adults of both sexes, something never conceded in any constitution made by the British for India down to 1947.
This is a significant comment on the oft-repeated argument that the Indian nationalists were elitist politicians, while the white rulers were seeking to protect the interests of the masses. The opposite was shown by the Nehru report.
Though the Nehru Report made no recommendation for immediate internal changes in states, it did visualize a complete transfer of Paramountcy to the fundamentally unitary and democratic centre of the future.
The first session of the All India States Peoples' Conference organized by politicians with Congress sympathies, demanded extension of responsible government to princely India. Irwin modified Reading's policy to the extent of setting up a Committee to go into the Paramountcy question under Harcourt Butler in the same month.
The Butler Report (March 1929) reasserted that 'Paramountcy must remain paramount', but explicitly stated that it was not automatically transferable from the Crown to any future self-governing centre enjoying Dominion Status."

74 An anti-lock braking system (ABS) improves vehicle safety because
a)  It prevents the wheels from coming off the vehicle.
b)  It prevents the wheels from skidding by avoiding locking up of tyres
c)  It reduces the friction between the ball bearing and the wheels.
d)  It increases the friction tremendously between the tyres and the road
Answer: B
  Many new cars have this system installed as a safety feature these days.
In the earlier cars, when brakes were applied at high speeds, the wheels used to get locked down causing skidding of the vehicle at high speeds.
The driver lost control over the vehicle as the steering wheel doesn't control the wheels when they are skidding.
To avoid this situation, an ABS uses a system controlled braking system. When the user applies full brakes, the wheel doesn't get locked up, and keeps the wheels rotating (only slightly) so that they don't get locked up. This avoids uncontrollable skidding and reduces potential accidents on the road.

75 How is Ozone useful to human beings?
1.  It is essential for breathing of plants.
2.  It can be used to disinfect water
3.  It absorbs ultraviolet rays.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  2 and 3 only
Answer: D
 Statement 1:Ozone is O3. It is O2, oxygen that is useful for breathing of organisms.
Statement 2: Ozone ruptures the cell membrane of organisms such as mold, mildew, spores, bacteria and fungus, thus killing them. The ozone shock treatment eliminates odors permanently
Statement 3: In the stratosphere, it absorbs harmful UV rays from reaching on earth.

76 It is the only ape to be found in India and is generally to seen in the forests of the North- East India and neighbouring Bangladesh and Burma. They prefer to live in small groups
and for water often live on the dew which forms on the leaves. The species referred to here
is?
a)  Chimpanzees
b)  Gorillas
c)  Orangutans
d)  Hoolock Gibbons
Answer: D
 Unlike Africa, in India, we have only one species of Apes which even though is an ape yet is not one to be classified as one of the Great Apes (Chimpanzees & Gorillas). It does has distinctive build of an ape-arms are longer than the legs and the body is tailless.
Hoolocks live in small groups in the hilly forests and feed on tender leaves, fruits, and insects including spiders.
The forests of north-east India host both the western hoolock gibbon (Hoolock hoolock) and the eastern hoolock gibbon (Hoolock leuconedys). Often confused as one species, both the gibbons inhabit different ranges in India. The western hoolock gibbon has a much wider range, as it is found in all the states of the north-east, restricted between the south of the
Brahmaputra river and east of the Dibang river.

77 A Vermi-composting toilet system uses
a)  Earthworms to decompose faecal matter and kitchen organic waste
b)  Algal biomass to generate fuel from excreta
c)  Fungi and bacteria to degrade the faecal matter in the presence of snlight
d)  Cyanobacteria to achieve greater efficiency in storing excreta on a large scale for producing biogas
Answer: A
 A Vermi-processing toilet has been field 
Earthworms are used to degrade faecal matter.
The operation of the toilet employing the pit is very simple and hygienic as the human excreta will be completely converted to vermicastings.
There is no heating element and the system is not intended to operate above
35 C, to protect the worms. The process depends more on soil organisms and
worms rather than on the thermophilic microorganisms for composting

78 Satvahanas issued a large number of lead coins as
a)  Their kingdom possessed enough lead resources.
b)  Iron ores were not available in the Satvahans kingdom
c)  Punch-marked coins could not be made using silver
d)  All of the above are correct in this context
Answer: A
 The large-scale use of iron made Avanti, with its capital at Ujjain, an important kingdom in the sixth and fifth centuries B.C.
The Satavahanas and the other powers which arose south of the Vindhyas may have utilized the iron ores of Andhra and Karnataka. So, (a) is wrong.
Andhra possesses resources in lead, which explains the large numbers of Lead coins in the kingdom of the Satavahanas, who ruled over Andhra and Maharashtra in the first two centuries of the Christian era.
 India has been rich in iron ores, which are found particularly in south
Bihar, eastern Madhya Pradesh and Karnataka
Once the art of smelting, using bellows (and making steel) was learnt, iron could be used for war, and more usefully, for the clearance of jungles and for deep and regular cultivation. The formation of the first empire in Magadha in the sixth to fourth centuries B C owed much to the availability of iron just south of this region.
The earliest coins, called the punch-marked coins, were made largely of silver, although this metal is rarely found in the country. So, (c) is wrong. However, silver mines existed in early times as mentioned as late as the time of Akbar.
This accounts for the use of the white metal in the earliest punch-marked coins found in Bihar.

79 The Indian Ocean Dipole (IOD) is
a)  An electric dipole formed due to accumulation of charges between the troposphere and stratosphere
b)  An irregular oscillation of sea-surface temperatures in the western Indian
Ocean
c)  A geo-magnetic fluctuation formed at oceanic crusts in the coastal areas of the Indian Ocean
d)  A deep sea wave that affects auroras and corona discharge in the eastern
Indian Ocean
Answer: B
 The Indian Ocean Dipole (IOD), also known as the Indian Nino, is an irregular oscillation of sea-surface temperatures in which the western Indian Ocean becomes alternately warmer and then colder than the eastern part of the ocean.
The IOD also affects the strength of monsoons over the Indian subcontinent. A positive Indian Ocean Dipole is when the western portions of the Indian Ocean are warmer than the east and thereby push rain-bearing clouds over India.
As per the IMD, it is also likely to form during the middle of the monsoon season.

80 Consider the following statements with reference to the Government of India Act 1935.
1.  Universal Adult franchise was implemented in selected provinces
2.  Governors retained 'discretionary powers' with regard to certain bills
3.  Ministers were barred from advising the Governors on issues other than departmental personnel administration
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  2 only
d)  1 and 3 only
Answer: C
 In August 1935, the long and tortuous process started eight years earlier with the appointment of the Simon Commission at last ended with the Government of India Act.
From 1932 onwards, real Indian participation in the making of this
'Constitution' had become negligible.
The only significant steps forward were in the provinces, where dyarchy was replaced by responsible government, theoretically in all departments, and the electorate was increased.
But, Governors retained 'discretionary powers' regarding summoning of legislatures, giving assent to bills, and administering certain special regions (mostly tribal) and on these matters Ministers were not entitled to give advice.
They were also empowered 'to exercise individual judgement' Ministers could give advice 'but their views could be rejected, on matters like minority rights, privileges of civil servants, and prevention of discrimination against British business interests.
The Governor in addition could take over and indefinitely run the administration of a province under the notorious Section 93 clause of the
1935 Act.
In view of the above, only statement 2 can be correct.

81 Vrajapati, also identified as Gramini, in the Rig Vedic Period were
a)  Head of the Village
b)  Manager of the Treasury
c)  Knower of religious law texts
d)  Messengers of the King for the villages
Answer: A
 In the Rid Vedic period, the titles of the officials do not indicate their administration of territory
However, some officers seem to have been attached to territories. They enjoyed positions of authority in the pasture grounds and settled villages.
The officer who enjoyed authority over the pasture ground is called vrajapati.
He led the heads of the families called kulapatis or the heads of the fighting hordes called gramanis to battle.
In the beginning the gramani was just the head of a small tribal fighting unit. But when the unit settled the gramani became the head of the village, and in course of time he became identical with the vrajapati.

82 Consider the following statements about Buddhism and Jainism in their early phases.
1.  The Buddhist and Jaina monks were allowed to possess gold and silver as they were not considered as real wealth as per Sangha rules.
2.  Mahavira stressed on the fact that Kaivalya or Nirvana can never eliminate human misery as it belongs to another-worldly dimension.
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: D
 Both statements are incorrect, as they taught the opposite
Both religions taught simple, puritan and ascetic living. The Buddhist and Jaina monks were asked to forgo the good things of life.
They were not allowed to touch gold and silver.
They were to accept only as much from their patrons as was sufficient to keep body and soul together. So, 1 is wrong.
 We are posting important excerpts from RS Sharma.
The merchants used to make many handsome gifts to Gautama Buddha and his disciples. There were several reasons for it.
First, Jainism and Buddhism in the initial stage did not attach any importance to the existing varna system.
Second, they preached the gospel of non-violence which would put an end to wars
between different kingdoms and consequently promote trade and commerce.
Third, the brahmanical law books, called the Dharmasutras, decried lending money on interest. Therefore the vaisyas, who lent money on account of growing trade and commerce, were not held at high esteem."

83 Which of the following is NOT a feature of "sustainable agriculture"?
a)  Working in harmony with natural processes to conserve resources
b)  Use of synthetically produced fertilizers to suppress biological activity in the soil
c)  Relying on crop rotations and mechanical cultivation to reduce land degradation
d)  Use of bio-control agents to manage plant pests
Answer: B
 A straightforward answer.
Sustainable agriculture is both a philosophy and a system of farming.
It has its roots in a set of values that reflects an awareness of both ecological and social realities.
It involves design and management procedures that work with natural processes to conserve all resources, minimize waste and environmental damage, while maintaining or improving farm profitability.
In practice such systems have tended to avoid the use of synthetically compounded fertilizers, pesticides, growth regulators, and livestock feed additives. v
These substances are rejected on the basis of their dependence on non- renewable resources, disruption potential within the environment, and their potential impacts on wildlife, livestock and human health.
For example, synthetically compounded fertilizers and pesticides generally suppress biological activity in the soil.
Some growth regulators and feed additives are implicated in retarding the decomposition of manure and are potential human health hazards.
Instead, sustainable agriculture systems rely on crop rotations, crop residues, animal manures, legumes, green manures, off-farm organic wastes,
appropriate mechanical cultivation, and mineral bearing rocks to maximize
soil biological activity, and to maintain soil fertility and productivity.
Natural, biological, and cultural controls are used to manage pests, weeds and diseases.

84 Which of the following Mountain Railways of India have been considered under the
UNESCO World Heritage Sites?
1.  Konkan Railways
2.  Darjeeling Himalayan Railways
3.  Nilgiri Mountain Railways
4.  Aravali Maharaja Railways
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 3 only
b)  2 and 4 only
c)  2 and 3 only
d)  1 and 4 only
Answer: C
 This site includes three railways. The Darjeeling Himalayan Railway was the first, and is still the most outstanding, example of a hill passenger railway. Opened in 1881, its design applies bold and ingenious engineering solutions to the problem of establishing an effective rail link across a mountainous terrain of great beauty.
The construction of the Nilgiri Mountain Railway in Tamil Nadu State was first proposed in 1854, but due to the difficulty of the mountainous location the work only was completed in 1908. This railway, scaling an elevation of
326 m to 2,203 m, represented the la
Apart from the above, Kalka Shimla Railway (KSR) was inscribed in 2008. The world's highest multi-arc gallery bridge and the world's longest tunnel (at the time of construction) of KSR were the 

85 The term "Virtual Private Network (VPN)" refers to
a)  Use of digital technologies for snooping on other nations
b)  Attaching a electronic component to the domestic Intelligence wings
c)  Electronic banking transactions that are not recorded by the software filters deployed by intelligence agencies
d)  Remote users secure access to their organization's network
Answer: D
 A remote-access VPN uses a public telecommunication infrastructure like the internet to provide remote users secure access to their organization's network.
This is especially important when employees are using a public Wi-Fi hotspot or other avenues to use the internet and connect into their corporate network.
A VPN client on the remote user's computer or mobile device connects to a VPN
gateway on the organization's network.
The gateway typically requires the device to authenticate its identity.
Then, it creates a network link back to the device that allows it to reach internal network resources -- e.g., file servers, printers and intranets -- as though it was on that network locally.

86 The nations that have an Observer status in the Arctic Council is/are
1.  India
2.  China
3.  Russia
4.  Japan
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1, 2 and 4 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1 and 4 only
d)  3 and 4 only
Answer: A
 Observer status in the Arctic Council is open to:
non-arctic states
inter-governmental and inter-parliamentary organizations, global and regional non-governmental organizations.
Twelve non-arctic countries have been approved as Observers to the Arctic Council:
France; Germany; The Netherlands; Poland; Spain; United Kingdom; People's Republic of China; Italian Republic ; Japan; Republic of Korea; Republic of Singapore; Republic of India.
Member states are Russia, Canada, Finland, Norway, Sweden , USA, Denmark and
Iceland.

87 In Tamilnadu,
c) Rajagopalachari organized a march on the Tanjore coast to break the salt law in the onset of Civil Disobedience Movement. In Malabar, salt marches were organized by
a)  Sardar Patel
b)  Maulana Abdul Kalam Azad
c)  Kelappan
d)  P. Krishna Pillai
Answer: C
 In Malabar, they were organized by Kelappan, a Nair Congress leader who had established contacts with the lower-caste Ezhavas through the Vaikom temple satyagraha of the mid-1920s
The political fame of P. Krishna Pillai, future founder of the Kerala Communist movement, began with his heroic defence of the national flag in the face of police lathis on Calicut beach in 1930.
We picked this name from similar sources that UPSC used to frame this question last year.

88 Amongst the following foodgrains, India produces the most
a)  Wheat
b)  Rice
c)  Pulses
d)  Coarse grains
Answer: B
 The largest area (about 44 mha) as well as the largest production
(about 104 million tonnes) is of rice
It is followed by Wheat  area (30 mha), production (94 mT); maize, sorghum, pulses and oilseeds.
Sugarcane production is around 360 mT in India from only around 5 mha due to high productivity.
You can access the statistics at the Q Source.

89 The Equator Initiative
1.  Was started by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
2.  Develops the capacity of local and indigenous initiatives to scale-up their impact
Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None
Answer: B
 Statement 1: It was started by the UNDP.
Statement 2: It brings together the United Nations, governments, civil society, businesses and grassroots organizations to recognize and advance local sustainable development solutions for people, nature and resilient communities. The Equator Initiative also seeks to:
Recognize the success of local and indigenous initiatives,
Create opportunities and platforms to share knowledge and good practice, Inform policy to foster an enabling environment for local and indigenous community action, and

90 The eastern coast of India produces more rice than the western coast because of
a)  Greater rainfall on the eastern coast as compared to the Western Coasts
b)  Adequate soil and climatic conditions
c)  Lack of any irrigation facilities in the Western region
d)  All of the above
Answer: B
  Western coastal plains is on the windward side of the
Western Ghats so it receives more rain from the rain-bearing winds.
Eastern zone falls on the rainshadow zone and some regions in the South fall parallel to the South-west Monsoon winds. So, less amount of rainfall occurs on the eastern coasts. Clearly (a) is wrong.
The eastern parts of northern plains and coasts are important rice producing regions due to the alluvial, clayey loam soil; hot and moist climate and ideal rainfall.

91 Which one among the following covers the highest percentage of forest area in the world?
a)  Boreal and Temperate forests
b)  Shrub forests
c)  Monsoon forests
d)  Tropical Rain forests
Answer: A
 This image clearly conveys that boreal and temperate forests dominate the scene. Image has been taken from the Q Source

92 The borrowing programme of the Government of India is handled by the
a)  Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance
b)  Prime Minister's Office
c)  Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance
d)  Division of Financial Resources
Answer: C
 The Department of Economic Affairs (DEa) is the nodal agency of the Union Government to formulate and monitor country's economic policies and programmes having a bearing on domestic and international aspects of economic management.
A principal responsibility of this Department is the preparation of the Union Budget annually (excluding the Railway Budget).
Other main functions include:
Formulation and monitoring of macroeconomic policies, including issues relating to fiscal policy and public finance, inflation, public debt management and the functioning of Capital Market including Stock Exchanges.
In this context, it looks at ways and means to raise internal resources through taxation, market borrowings and mobilisation of small savings;
Monitoring and raising of external resources through multilateral and bilateral Official Development Assistance, sovereign borrowings abroad, foreign investments and monitoring foreign exchange resources including balance of payments;
Production of bank notes and coins of various denominations, postal stationery, postal stamps; and Cadre management, career planning and training of the Indian Economic Service (IES).

93 Consider the following about protected areas in India
1.  Agasthyamala Biosphere Reserve falls in the Malabar rainforests and included in the
UNESCO World Biosphere Reserve Network.
2.  Krishna Wildlife Sanctuary is known for hosting pristine mangrove forests
3.  Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Madhya Pradesh have the maximum number of
National Parks among all states/UTs in India
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  1, 2 and 3
Answer: D
 Statement 1: It is a wildlife sanctuary and estuary located in Andhra Pradesh, India. It is one of the rarest eco-regions of the world owing to the fact that it harbors vast tracts of pristine mangrove forests. It is believed among conservationists as one of the last remaining tracts of thick primary mangrove forests of South India, which is rapidly disappearing due to absence of protective measures.
Statement 2: Agasthyamala Biosphere Reserve falls in the Malabar rainforests and is one of the noted hotspot areas because of its position in the Western Ghats.
There are three wildlife sanctuaries within the reserve, Shendurney, Peppara, and Neyyar.
The Kalakkad Mundanthurai Tiger Reserve was recently included as part of the biosphere reserve. Agasthyamala Biosphere Reserve is the tenth one to be included in the prestigious UNESCO World Biosphere Reserve Network.
The others are Nilgiri, Gulf of Mannar, Sunderban, Nanda Devi, Nokrek, Pachmarh, Similipal, AchanakmarAmarkantak and Great Nicobar.
Statement 3: Madhya Pradesh and Andaman and Nicobar Islands have the maximum number of National Parks (9 each) while Andaman and Nicobar Islands has 96 and Maharashtra has 36 Wildlife Sanctuaries (maximum in India).

94 A person sleeping in Ladakh with his head in the open and legs in the shade of a tree is liable to get sunstroke and frostbite at the same time. This is due to the presence of
a)  Rarefied air
b)  High moisture and nearness to the Sun
c)  Dry Air
d)  Low oxygen level and high carbon content on glaciers
Answer: A
 Ladakh lies at altitudes ranging from about 9,000 feet at Kargil to
25,170 feet at Saser Kangri in the Karakoram.
Thus summer temperatures rarely exceed about 27 degree C in the shade, while in winter they may plummet to -20 degree C even in Leh.
Surprisingly, though, the thin air makes the heat of the sun even more intense than at lower altitudes.
It is said that only in Ladakh can a man sitting in the sun with his feet in the shade suffer from sunstroke and frostbite at the same time!

95 In petroleum and natural gas deposits, which of these is generally located at the shallowest depth from earth's surface?
a)  Water
b)  Oil
c)  Gas
d)  Naptha
Answer: C
 It is in the order of density.
Gas is lighter than oil, and oil is lighter than water. So, water is found at the deepest pores, and gas at the shallowest.
The image below is from NCERT.

96 Consider the following statements
1.  "BioCarbon Fund" helps develop projects that sequester or conserve carbon in forest and agro-ecosystems
2.  The "Readiness Fund" helps developed countries fund technologically sophisticated
climate change mitigation projects in developed countries.
3.  "Community Development Carbon Fund" is a public-private initiative designed in cooperation with the UNFCCC
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  2 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  1 and 2 only
Answer: C
Statement 1: Since its creation in 2004, the BioCarbon Fund has allocated resources to projects that transform landscapes and directly benefit poor farmers.
It was the first carbon fund established in the world to focus on land use. Housed within the Carbon Finance Unit of the World Bank, the BioCarbon Fund is a public-private sector initiative mobilizing financing to help develop projects that sequester or conserve carbon in forest and agro-ecosystems.
It has been a pioneer in this sector, developing the infrastructure needed to pilot transactions and paving the way for the growing land-use carbon market established to date.
Statement 2: The Readiness Fund supports tropical and sub-tropical developing countries in preparing themselves to participate in a future, large-scale, system of positive incentives for REDD+.
This includes: adopting national REDD+ strategies; developing reference emission levels (RELs); designing measurement, reporting, and verification (MRV) systems; and setting up REDD+ national management arrangements, including proper environmental and social safeguards.
Statement 3: The CDCF pioneers projects that benefit local communities and that generate emission reductions in some of the poorest areas of the world.
The Fund is a public-private initiative designed in cooperation with the International Emissions Trading Association and the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
The first tranche of the CDCF became operational in March 2003 and is closed to
further subscriptions. It is capitalized at $118 million with nine governments and fifteen private sector companies participating in it.
https://wbcarbonfinance.org/Router.cfm?Page=BioCF&ItemID=9708&FID=9708

97 Gitam, Suladi, Jatisvaram and Varnam are related to
a)  Carnatic form of music
b)  Sattriya dance form
c)  Hindustani Classical Music
d)  Categories of social divisions based on pre-Vedic Varna system
Answer: A
 Gitam is the simplest type of composition. Taught to beginners of music, the gitam is very simple in construction, with an easy and melodious flow of music. The music of this form is a simple melodic extension of the raga in which it is composed. The tempo is uniform. It has no sections dividing one part of the song from the other.
Very much like the gitam in musical structure and arrangement, the Suladis are of a higher standard than the gitam. The Suladi is a talamalika, the sections being in different talas.
This is learnt after a course in gitams. More complicated than the gitas, the Svarajati paves the way for the learning of the Varnams. It consists of three sections, called Pallavi, Anupallavi and Charanam. The theme is either devotional, heroic or amorous.
Very similar to the svarajati in musical structure, this form- Jatisvaram-has no sahitya or words. The piece is sung with solfa syllables only. It is noted for its rhythmical excellence and the jati pattern used in it. This is a musical form belonging to the realm of dance music.
The Varnam is a musical form in Carnatic Music. Whereas musical forms like the Kirtana, Kriti, Javali, Tillana, etc. have their similar counterparts in Hindustani Music, the Varnam does not find a counterpart.

98 Consider the following about Continental shelf.
1.  It is an underwater landmass which extends from a continent resulting in an area of
relatively shallow water known as a shelf sea
2.  TamilNadu state has the broadest continental shelf in India.
3.  Continental shelf can be rich in fossil fuels and minerals.
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 only
b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  1, 2 and 3 only
Answer: C
 Statement 1: A continental shelf is basically the edge of a continent that lies under the ocean.
The geology of continental shelves is often similar to that of the adjacent exposed portion of the continent, and most shelves have a gently rolling topography called ridge and swale. Continental shelves make up about 8 percent of the entire area covered by oceans.
Statement 2: It is Gujarat. Details can be seen here http://tinyurl.com/jll7rvl
Statement 3: Most commercial exploitation from the sea, such as metallic-ore, non- metallic ore, and hydrocarbon extraction, takes place on the continental shelf. Sovereign rights over their continental shelves up to a depth of 200 metres or to a distance where the depth of waters admitted of resource exploitation were claimed by the marine nations that signed the Convention on the Continental Shelf drawn up by the UN's International Law Commission in 1958.

99 When you extract fresh groundwater, its pH reduces slightly on exposure to air above ground. This is because
a)  The oxygen of the groundwater escapes into air
b)  Carbon dioxide from air is dissolved in the groundwater on exposure
c)  Nitrogen from the groundwater quickly disintegrates making it more acidic in nature
d)  All of the above
Answer: B
 The chemical character of groundwater is influenced by the minerals and gases reacting with the water in its relatively slow passage through the rocks and sediments of the Earth's crust.
Many variables cause extensive variation in the quality of groundwater, even in local areas. Generally, groundwater increases in mineral content as it moves along through the pores and fracture openings in rocks.
Upon reaching the surface, the carbon dioxide in the air dissolves in it making it slightly acidic (pH reduces due to formation of carbonic acid).
The following characteristics of groundwater give it certain advantages over surface water.
Groundwater usually contains no suspended matter. Groundwater, very rarely contains pathogenic bacteria;
The temperature of groundwater is relatively constant and is equivalent to, or greater than, the mean air temperature above the land surface.

100 As the world oceans get warmer, they can lead to
1.  Toxic algae blooms
2.  Cholera outbreaks
3.  Sudden earthquakes
Select the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only
b)  1 only
c)  2 and 3 only
d)  None of the above
Answer: A
 Statement 1: Toxic blue-green algae prefer warmer water. Warmer temperatures prevent water from mixing, allowing algae to grow thicker and faster.
Warmer water is easier for small organisms to move through and allows algae to float to the surface faster. Algal blooms absorb sunlight, making water even warmer and promoting more blooms.
So, harmful algae usually bloom during the warm summer season or when water temperatures are warmer than usual.
Statement 2: As the nitrogen and phosphorus levels in the oceans increase, the cholera bacteria that live within zooplankton emerge from their dormant state.
The changing winds and changing ocean currents push the zooplankton toward the coastline, carrying the cholera bacteria, which then contaminate drinking water, causing cholera outbreaks.
As flooding increases there is also in increase in cholera epidemics as the flood waters that are carrying the bacteria are infiltrating the drinking water supply.
