Appendix: 
Incomplete questions in the Online Version 
protection   (inside)   and low protection outside
• Act   as   a   "shock absorber" for the protected areas
Q-Source:

6.  What  is  an  Eco-sensitive  Zone (ESZ) as notified by the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) frequently?
a) It is an ecological hotspot which is internationally recognized as a part of protected areas network
b) It is a zone of high endemism of species
c) It is the "Core zone" inside a protected area where no activities are allowed
d) It is the area around a national park or sanctuary where developmental activities are regulated
Solution: d)
 As per MOEF 2011 guidelines, it is the area around a national park or sanctuary upto 10 kms where developmental activities are regulated (not prohibited) to:
• Minimize   impact   of ecologically harmful developmental activities (e.g. mining) on fragile ecosystem
encompassing the area
• Protects biodiversity by avoiding fragmentation of habitat
•   Act as a transition zone between  areas  of  high
http://envfor.nic.in/content/esz- notifications

9. Recently a lot of concern has been raised over the software "Flasher". Why?
a) It can be used to change the IMEI number of the phone after connecting it to a computer
b) It can block the firewall of public computers.
c) It can steal sensitive data from high end computing devices installed in the research institutes in India.
d) It can suppress the IP address of a computer thus posing a threat to cyber security.
Solution: a)
 It is software which is used to change the IMEI number of the phone  after  connecting  it  to  a computer.
The software provides the option of allotting one IMEI number to multiple phones, a technique that misguides police during investigation.
Q-Source:
http://www.thehindu.com/news/nationa
l/other-states/flasher-software-ties- cops-in-knots/article7649775.ece

11. Consider the following statements.
Assertion     (a):     Parliament cannot    enact    a    law    which    is inconsistent with any          Directive Principle mentioned under Part IV of the constitution.
Reason (R): It is based on the
'Doctrine of excess jurisprudence' as given by        the Supreme Court in the Ramnath Goenka v/s Union of India Case, 1962.
In the context of the above, which of these is correct?
a) A is correct, and R is an appropriate explanation of A.
b) A is correct, but R is not an appropriate explanation of A.
c) A is correct, but R is incorrect. d) Both A and R are incorrect. Solution: d)
   Assertion:   Parliament can enact a law which is inconsistent with   a   DPSP   as   DPSP   is   not justiciable. However, SC may use DPSPs to validate a law enacted by the Parliament which violates the FRs.
Reason:   There   is   no   doctrine   of excess jurisprudence.

13. What can the system of "Proportional representation" mean in the national context?
a) All constituencies in the country will have  their  political  representative  in the Parliament.
b) All candidates fighting elections will be entitled to public office irrespective of the number of votes they have garnered.
c) The seats in a constituency are distributed on the basis of votes polled by a party, and not on individual basis.
d) Any system which is followed for elections to the offices of highest constitutional functionaries
Solution: c)
 There are several kinds of PR  systems. In one of  the  systems, the entire country is treated as one single constituency.
Voters vote for the party, not for the candidates.
Seats are allocated to each party is proportion of its share of votes in the national election.
Another variant of PR, the Single Transferable Vote system (STV), is followed for Rajya Sabha elections. Every State has a specific quota of seats   in   the   Rajya   Sabha.   The
members are elected by the respective State  legislative  assemblies.  The voters are the MLAs in that State.
NCERT: Indian Constitution

89.  Consider the following  about  the
Law Commission of India.
1. It is a statutory body.
2. It acts as the legal representative of the Government in court hearings

3. The Law Secretary to the Union Government is the ex- officio member of the Commission.
Select the correct answer using the codes below:
a) 1 and 3 only b) 2 and 3 only c) 3 only
d) 1 and 2 only
Solution: c)
   Law   commission   of India is neither a constitutional nor a statutory body. Rather, it was established by an executive resolution of the GoI to make recommendations for law reforms. So, 1 would be wrong.
The Commission is established for a fixed  tenure  (generally  three  years) and consists of a Chairperson and four
other   full-time   members.   The   Law Secy. and the Secy Legislative Department are the  ex-officio members of the Commission. So, 3 would be correct.
It   is   the   Attorney   general   or   the Solicitor generals who represent Indian government in court hearings. So, 2 is wrong.
Q-Source: http://indianexpress.com/article/india/in dia-others/law-commission- recommends-abolition-of-death- penalty/
