Corrigendum
Insights Prelims 
Series 2016
Legend:
Document contains three categories.
(i) Errors – Both in the solution  and the explanation.  They  are  marked  in "ORANGE  Bold  font".  Suitable clarification  is  provided  wherever necessary.
(ii) Typos – Explanation is correct and complete in this case. But, the Solution (answer) option is printed incorrectly. Clarification for typos are given in "Regular BLACK font".
(iii)  Clarifications   –  In  the  Discussion pages at the website, several doubts/disputes/ clarifications were asked/raised/requested.  We  tried  to address  nearly  all  queries  in  the Discussion  pages  wherever  it  was possible   or   required.   However,   some doubts remain; they are addressed here in "Regular BLUE Font".
The classification has been made to make the document  more readable so that you quickly address your doubts.

13.  Clarification: Statement 2 should be read as "Saving discourages inflation- causing consumption expenditure".

21.  Clarification: Statement 2 should actually be "Factor Income from Foreign investments", rather than just "Foreign investments".
Foreign investments lead to factor income earned by foreign residents in host territory, for e.g. a Nokia production plant
in India. A foreign resident has deployed
factors in India, and earning income out of it. This is why all our national economic activity is counted in terms of GDP which includes the contribution to production by FDI. To calculate actual national product, we find GNP which is nothing but GDP adjusted for NFIA. So, factor income through Foreign investments is a part of NFIA.
Also, GNP = GDP + NFIA. It was a mix- up, given earlier as GNP = GDP – NFIA.

23.  Clarification: Printing currency should not be seen ideally as a part of monetary policy as the decision to print currency is not taken solely by the Central Bank.
There is a lot of involvement of the government in not just influencing certain decisions, but also approving them in some cases. Actual practice may differ a little as it also depends on the market conditions. Please see
https://www.rbi.org.in/scripts/FS_Overview
.aspx?fn=2753

50. Answer will be D.
Lala Lajpat rai founded the Anglo-Vedic School in collaboration with Mahatma Hans Raj. This makes him a co-founder. So, all statements will be correct. 63. Answer is B, not D, as also clear from the explanation.

91.  Clarification: Government of India issues the coins, i.e. mints them and its
seal is present in the coins. RBI only circulates them. The word "issue" in the RBI link should be read in this context. In
12th NCERT, also the word "issue" has been used in the sense of minting and authorizing coins, and not circulation.
RBI prints currency notes and thus the notes bear RBI's seal and Governor's signature (promise). So, here RBI both issues the currency notes and circulates them in the economy.

47.  Clarification: Bhikaji cama unfurled the flag from International Socialist Conference held in Germany, not Paris.

72.  Clarification: Pedana-made fabric has been recommended for the status of
Indian Handloom Brand tag, and is still in the process of consideration. Correct answer will be Statement 2 only.
4.  Clarification: Indravati National Park is in Chhattisgarh, not Madhya Pradesh.

64. Please remove the word "cannot" and replace it with "can". As clear from the explanation, private members can initiate constitutional amendment bills. Statement
4 would now be correct.

72.  Clarification: 12th NCERT Contemporary World Politics clearly mentions the criterion to be "money contribution to IMF".
But, the IMF official website states that the current quota formula is a weighted average of GDP (weight of 50 percent), openness (30 percent), economic variability (15 percent), and international reserves (5 percent). For this purpose,
GDP is measured through a blend of GDP—based on market exchange rates (weight of 60 percent)—and on PPP exchange rates (40 percent).
So, option B would also be an appropriate answer other than A. Option A (money contribution) is also a consequence of option B (size of GDP).

6.  Clarification: Hemis national park is located in Ladakh, not HP.

17.  Clarification: For additional information, in the explanation we had mentioned that out of all princely states, Travancore had the highest membership of 6. It is actually Mysore, which had 7 members in the Constituent Assembly.

20. Only statements 3 and 4 are correct. As clear from the explanation, statement 2 is incorrect. Accountability to Judiciary is not a major feature of parliamentary government in India.

55. Answer will clearly be A, as also visible from the explanation.

69.  Clarification: Both statements are correct as given in the PDF.
Geographically speaking, cloudbursts happen due to a) Orographic lift, and b) mixing of warm air parcel with cold air parcel, c) collision of heavy clouds with mountains. Mountaineous regions favour these conditions. Also, regions with oceans surrounding from three sides (like Peninsular India) are favourable locations for cloudbursts due to availability of a large quantity of moisture.
However, it is not essential that cloudbursts occur only when a cloud clashes with a solid body like a mountain.
They can also occur when hot water vapor mingles into the cold resulting in sudden condensation.

97. As clear from the explanation, only statement 2 is correct. The capitalist class preferred constitutional forms of struggle rather than mass civil disobedience.

8. Option C should be "2 and 3 only" instead of at present "3 only". Rest remains the same.

53. Missing solution: Answer will be B, as clear from the explanation.

13. Correct answer will be option D.
The Krishonnati Yojana includes all the schemes mentioned in the question.

92.  Clarification: Paints fall into both Orange and Red category. http://pib.nic.in/newsite/PrintRelease.aspx
?relid=137373

36.  Clarification: Supplementary questions cannot follow in unstarred questions.

37.  Clarification: As per recent changes made in the Winter Session of 2014 by Parliament: Zero hour precedes the Question hour in Rajya Sabha. In Lok Sabha order remains the same, first Question hour, then zero hour.
Figure 1 here: http://www.prsindia.org/administrator/uplo ads/general/1425009754_Rajya%20Sabh a%20Primer-%20Final.pdf

40. The question should have asked about CORRECT statements, instead of INCORRECT. It is a typo. Answer will be
b)
59.  Clarification: The Vice-President's salary is charged on CFI in his capacity as the Chairman of Rajya Sabha, and not Vice-President. Reason is that the Chairman needs to be impartial and non- partisan in conducting the proceedings of the house. Article 112 of the Constitution explicitly ignores the term "Vice- President".

71.  Clarification: A better word in place of "shape" could have been "curvature". The curvature changes, and hence the speed
of earth's revolution around the Sun also
changes. The explanation given is correct.

97.  Clarification: "Real Estate Business (other than construction development) or Construction of Farm Houses" is a prohibited sector for FDI. Only construction related activities under real
estate has been relaxed, not the sector as
a whole.

10. Statement 3, as framed presently is wrong, as the salt tax continued to remain in effect after the Gandhi-Irwin pact and was repealed only by the Interim Government in 1946. Only right to manufacture salt was given under the
pact. So, please replace the statement 3 with this -"Manufacture of salt was allowed to Indians".
15.  Clarification: Whether a place is seeing sunrise or sunset will depend on
the kind of flat shape we assume for earth.
If the earth is flat horizontally (like a sheet of paper), then all places would see sunrise at the same time.
If it is vertically flat (keep the sheet of
paper vertically), places on one side would see sunrise, and the other sunset. The other side will see sunrise when the flat earth revolves and changes position in the orbit. So, both options are correct hypothetically.

39. Only statement 1 is correct.
Akash is not a nuclear capable missile, as also clear from the explanation.

49. Correct statements are 1, 2 and 3 only:
The Protection of Human Rights Act,
1993, requires that the NHRC, India submit its annual reports to People's Representatives in Parliament through the Government so that it reaches to them along with the response of the Government to the recommendations and issues raised by the Commission therein. So, it is not submitted by the President to the Parliament.

78.  Clarification: The correct answer will remain as A. Speed of Sound is more in hot air than cold air because of two reasons: a) Hot air is less dense than cold air; and b) Sound travels faster through
hot air as its molecules are excited and
transmission of the sound wave is easier than in cold air.
Also, speed of sound is more in moist air than dry air as moist air is less dense that dry air.

79. The answer should be A. The reason correctly explains assertion.
83.  Clarification: It is mentioned that J&K has lowest sex ratio. It is actually Haryana has the lowest sex ratio among all states. J&K has second lowest sex ratio.

89.  Clarification: Some have argued that option C should also be correct, as continent-continent convergence is also a subduction zone. But, the answer would be maintained as
d) Please see the links below for the explanation.
http://pubs.usgs.gov/gip/dynamic/himalaya
.html
Or 4th paragraph here http://www.livescience.com/43220- subduction-zone-definition.html

56. Answer will be
c) CIC is not eligible for reappointment only for the same office. They can be further employed by the government in other capacities. For e.g. Satyananda Mishra has been appointed Chairman of the Multi- Commodity Exchange of India Ltd(MCX).
http://cic.gov.in/information_commissions. htm#23

57. Answer is D as per the explanation.

96.  Clarification: Statement 2 should mention a "partly elected body" instead of an "elected body", as also clear from the explanation. Rest remains the same.
