
Corrigendum
Insights Prelims 
Series 2016
Legend:
Document contains three categories.
(i) Errors – Both in the solution  and the explanation.  They  are  marked  in "ORANGE  Bold  font".  Suitable clarification  is  provided  wherever necessary.
(ii) Typos – Explanation is correct and complete in this case. But, the Solution (answer) option is printed incorrectly. Clarification for typos are given in "Regular BLACK font".
(iii)  Clarifications   –  In  the  Discussion pages at the website, several doubts/disputes/ clarifications were asked/raised/requested.  We  tried  to address  nearly  all  queries  in  the Discussion  pages  wherever  it  was possible   or   required.   However,   some doubts remain; they are addressed here in "Regular BLUE Font".
The classification has been made to make the document  more readable so that you quickly address your doubts.
Previous 

56. A Dengue vaccine was recently approved in India in 2016 (before the
question was framed). So, presently, all options would be correct.

100. UPSC does not consider Long Coastlines responsible for high salt production in the state of Gujarat. So, we withdraw statement 4 from the question.

25. Most bacteria are decomposers, but some bacteria are producers; they produce organic matter from inorganic matter through photosynthesis and chemosynthesis. They can be found in deep ocean. Please see page 4 here
http://ccrm.vims.edu/publications/wetlands
_technical_reports/91-4-primary- producers.pdf

30. Interest and profits on private foreign (British) capital drained wealth from India. The investment could be recovered and ultimately repatriated back to England. Since the investment was exploitative (e.g. investing to export abroad by using cheap local materials), it further increased the drain of wealth from India.

37. Answer will have both option (c) and (d). The SC said that the regulation which fastens strict liability on the telecom companies for no fault of theirs (e.g. call drops due to consumer's fault) is arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.

59. CFC containing aerosols have been phased out.

63. Motion of Thanks needs to be passed in both houses, whether amended or unamended. It is analogous to a ordinary bill which, whether amended or unamended in RS, needs to be passed in both the houses.
 
It can be defeated only in RS, since the government enjoys majority in LS.
Quite recently the opposition defeated the original Motion of Thanks that was moved in RS. You can read the details here. http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/fei sty-opposition-has-its-
way/article6956063.ece
in UPSC, where UPSC mentions them to be judicial officers.
You may check the following books too. http://tinyurl.com/gw5y292 http://tinyurl.com/z9j9t96
http://tinyurl.com/h55hzpc
A motion of thanks is nothing but the government's account of itself and its plans.So, its defeat simply means the opposition in RS as a whole does not agree with the government's plans.

89. Canaries are used to detect Methane too. So, options containing both CO and Methane should be correct.
4. Option (d) should be "A is incorrect, but
R is correct." Rest will remain the same.

26. Mughal paintings and Mughal School of Painting are two different things.
A school of painting develops by a body of works, and not by few works
commissioned in a non-organized manner. Mughal school is a synthesis of many styles - Indian, Islamic and Persian, and it started in the reign of Akbar. Statement 1
is correct.

28. As given, option (a) is a more appropriate answer than (b). Pradeshikas and Rajukas were not only judicial officers but also handled administrative matters, For e.g. Rajukas were revenue collectors, and toured the district with Pradeshikas. But, they did not maintain land records. Yuktas were responsible for collecting taxes. However, judicial functions were predominantly handled by Pradeshikas
and Rajukas. There was a similar question

34. There are many theories that try to explain the causes of Monsoon. The old Classical theory postulated that Monsoon is caused by differential heating of land and air. But, this theory could not explain the intricacies of Monsoon and the fact that it doesn't occur everywhere land-sea are found.
The modern theories, instead stress on jet streams, air mass and other intricate geographical phenomena. Discussing them is not relevant or useful for Prelims.
However, what should be noted is that there are many other factors apart from land-sea differential heating that cause/affect Monsoon type weather.

42. Protection status of White backed, Long Billed and Slender Billed Vultures was upgraded from Schedule IV to Schedule I of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972, in December 2015.
So, all statements should be correct. We had earlier relied on MoEF data which was not updated. This source is up to
date.
http://envfor.nic.in/legis/wildlife/wildlife2s1. pdf

60. Under Ethanol Blending Programme (EBP), the Central Government has scaled up blending targets from 5% to
10% to promote blending of ethanol with
petrol and its use as alternative fuel.
 
63. Both statement 1 and 3 are correct. Correct answer will be A.
Statement 3:  suppose Company X borrows $1000 at an exchange rate of 50 rupees per dollar totally borrowing Rs.
50,000. X intends to earn Rs. 1000 from this investment in domestic market.
If rupee depreciates to 60 Rs. per dollar, the net debt liability increases because X pays the debt in dollars (not rupees). It means while it borrowed Rs. 50,000, it will have to repay only Rs. 60,000. However, the profits it is making from the investment is only Rs. 1000. So, there is a net loss of Rs. 9,000 to the ECB client.
If suppose, rupee appreciates to 40, X will only have to pay Rs. 4,0000, and enjoy a surplus of Rs. 10,000 as well the Rs. 1000 return on investment. So, appreciation of the currency benefits the ECB client. Statement 3 is correct.

77. The executive can appropriate funds from the Contingency fund without prior authorization from legislature. But, it must be authorized later by the Parliament.

93. Only statement 2 is correct.
Make in India is being implemented by Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion under the Ministry of Commerce and Industry, Government of India.

97. The food shortage due to famine like situation became more acute since 1941, and reached a peak in 1943 Famine. This added as a fuel to the failure of Cripps Mission and was an important immediate reason for the same.
4. The given answer and explanation are correct.
Mangroves grow in saline waters, but there is a limit to tolerance of salinity in Mangroves. If salinity exceeds the tolerable limits, it adversely affects Mangroves. You can take an analogy of high rainfall and soil fertility: more is good, but too much of rainfall leaches the soil.

11. Answer will be option (a). Statement
2 is incorrect. Along with B.R. Ambedkar, M.R. Jayakar and T.B. Sapru also participated in all Round table conferences.

46. All central taxes form part of divisible pool of taxes excluding surcharges and cess.
Some taxes directly form part of State's revenue (e.g. Agricultural land stamp duty), and others are devolved by the Centre to the states once the centre appropriates it (e.g. Corporate tax).
Such an arrangement is made to ensure more efficient tax collection and reducing legal ambiguities in tax collection.

94. A recent NASA study suggests that
HFCs may harm ozone layer.
As per the NASA research, it does. They have disproved a long-held assumption which was also the basis of including HFC in many international climate change negotiations.
http://www.nasa.gov/press- release/goddard/nasa-study-shows-that- common-coolants-contribute-to-ozone- depletion
We are not sure if UPSC will notice this new research, since we have observed they sometimes rely on old and often outdated sources.
 
2. UPSC official key for 2015 Prelims considers lack of ITCZ formation as a reason for less frequent cyclones in South Atlantic Ocean. We believe that it is also due to lower sea surface temperatures.

33. Please see this link http://interstatecouncil.nic.in/formations.ht
ml#subnav1_2
Buddhist council was held in Sri Lanka as mentioned in the question.

53. IUCN Website lists Hangul as species of Least Concern (as it is not evaluated for long), but we believe the status is
outdated. Hangul is listed under Schedule- I of the Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act,
1972 and Jammu & Kashmir Wildlife
(Protection) Act, 1978 and has also been listed among the top fifteen species of high conservation priority by the Government of India.

67. Turkey borders Mediterranean Sea and Black Sea (not Caspian Sea).

73. The statement that India "floats" its currency is different from saying we follow a "floating" or "managed exchange rate regime". The currency is always floated in the international market, but at times RBI intervenes to halt its depreciation/ appreciation.

89. The answer is option (a) Eastern
Himalayas, not Western Himalayas.

94. A volcanic eruption can lead to groundshaking too, which should not be confused with earthquakes.
So, statement A is incorrect, as neither all volcanic eruptions lead to earthquakes, nor is a volcanic eruption caused necessarily by an earthquake.

100. It is said that the Sarvastivada tradition fourth Buddhist council was convened at Kasmir by Kanishka, but the Theravada tradition does not recognize this council. The Theravada fourth
5. RS elections rely on party whip system and transparency induced by the open ballot voting system. But, there is no legal provision that binds the MPs must vote as per the directions of the party whip. Anti- defection law does not apply to it, and thus the experts have recommended bringing Anti-defection law to RS elections as well.
Also see, this http://eci.nic.in/eci_main1/current/PN1072
012.pdf\

25. Updated list of World heritage site also includes Khangchendzonga National Park and Great Himalayan National Park.

45. Please discard the options related to Exports and Software Industries.
As per the la

55. A Bill introduced for the purpose of increasing the pusine judges of the Supreme Court is not considered as a constitutional amendment under A368 of the Constitution.

56. Every state has many coastal areas. While Mangroves are found in all coastal states, it is not found in all coastal areas for lack of suitable conditions like proper
salinity, mudflats etc.
 
88. Correct answer is option (a). Trade balance forms part of the Net Income from abroad, not Net Factor Income from abroad.
NFIA is the income earned by factors working in host or foreign nation, and does not include value of imports or exports as such. So, (a) is the answer.
From the expenditure side, GDP at current market prices can be seen as the sum of (a) consumption—both private and public (b) investment, also known as Gross Capital Formation (GCF) which comprises fixed capital formation, change in stock
and valuables, and, (c) net exports which represent the difference between exports and imports of goods and non-factor services (Net factor Income excluded). So, option (c) is wrong.

19. Constitutional amendment bills do not require the prior permission of the President for introduction. Also, Article 110 of the Constitution deals with the definition of money bills. It states that a bill is
deemed to be a money bill if it contains
'only' provisions dealing with all or any of the following matters (inter alia)
•   The imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax.
•   So, clearly option (c) requires prior
Presidential assent as it becomes a money bill (please add the word
'only' to option (c) )

36. We have revised the Statement 2 of the question to read "Non-repatriable NRI investment is now considered as domestic investment." This is a correct statement and now as per the revised
statement answer will be option (b).
The mayaram committee recommended treating non-repatriable (that which is not taken abroad) NRI investment as domestic investments. They were being treated as FDI earlier.
The Union Cabinet recently approved the review of Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) Policy on investments by Non-Resident Indians (NRIs), Persons of Indian Origin (PIOs) and Overseas Citizens of India (OCIs).  Their non-repatriable investments will now be considered as domestic investments.

56. There is a proposal that the Ministry of Panchayati Raj and Drinking Water and Sanitation (which are separate ministries now) to be merged under the MoRD.
But, the MoRD (even now) displays them as departments under it (despite the change being made official). Moreover, a common Minister is heading these departments/ministries. MoRD site may or may not have been updated.
We withdraw these options given the pending proposals and lack of clarity.

75. Co-operative banks have a three tier structure — primary (agriculture or urban) credit societies, district central co- operative banks and at the apex level, state co-operative banks. Urban Cooperative Banks come under the regulatory domain of State governments and RBI. Others are regulated by NABARD.

81. MFI regulation status is not very clear in India. See, http://www.thehindubusinessline.com/mar kets/centre-told-to-come-clear-on- regulator-for-mfis/article8119923.ece
http://indianexpress.com/article/business/b usiness-others/mudra-not-to-regulate- micro-finance-institutions-govt/
 
Unless the proposed reforms are implemented, we should be taking the regulator as the RBI.

8. The 1773 Act had created the Executive
Council for the Governor-General of
Bengal (not Governor-General).
•   Later, the Act of 1833 made the Govenor-General of Bengal as the Governor-General of India. But, at this point of time, all powers were vested in him.
•   Then, the Act of 1853 separated the legislative and executive functions of the Governor General's council (note - not the executive Council).
•   Then in the Act of 1861, the executive council was made functional with the introduction of the portfolio system, and was authorized to issue final orders on behalf of the Government.
You can see it here http://cabsec.nic.in/about_origin.php

27. Wikipedia and other sources may be outdated.  Please see http://cabsec.nic.in/showpdf.php?type=cou ncil_cabinet_committees

58. UNESCO covers monuments of Fatehpur Sikri, so we are removing Buland Darwaza from the options. Please see this for further information http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/255

68. Shravanabelagola is located around
80 Kms from Mysore. AL Basham wrongly mentions it to be in Mysore in his book – The Wonder that was India. The first statement should read, "The rock-cut
medieval image of the Jaina saint
Gomateshwara can be found in
Shravanabelagola in Karnataka"

71. Phytoplankton hve many types of organisms - plants, bacteria etc. Only some types of phytoplankton can fix nitrogen, which cannot be generalized.

79. Please see this for further clarifications http://www.mohfw.nic.in/showfile.php?lid=
3724

5. The Lucknow pact was signed at the Lucknow Session of the Indian National Congress. The session resulted in moderate-extremist unity, and the
Lucknow pact resulted in an agreement for
coordinated action against British Rule by
INC and Muslim league.

6.  Statement 4: The essential idea is that the banks should not exploit the consumers that are often laymen when it comes to a technical field like banking.
For e.g. some time back many banks came with teaser home loans, which promised ultra low fixed interest rates in
the initial years, only to be hiked later. This practice was severely discouraged by RBI. You can read about it here http://www.thehindubusinessline.com/opini on/all-you-wanted-to-know-about-teaser- home-loans/article7575686.ece

17. It is the split (ideological) at the Gaya session that was caused by the calling off of the Non-Cooperation movement, not the formation of Swaraj party. The Swarajists believed in the council entry programme, and thus formed a separate group within Congress.

57.  Statement 1: The statements implies the principle of meritocracy vis-a-vis a "spoils system" that was prevalent earlier.
 
A strong ICS was to be strictly based on the principles of merit and competence 
The grea

94. Please see this http://tinyurl.com/j5edaou
Cloudy conditions and precipitation exists at the periphery of anticyclones. Otherwise, such a high pressure region generally shows fine and clear weather.

38. Statement 1 should mention Centrally Sponsored Schemes instead of Central Sector schemes. The explanation takes care of it.

46. The fact that there are other states that share boundary with three nations doesn't make statement 2 wrong. Statement doesn't mention that Arunachal Pradesh is the only state to border maximum number of nations.

52. The correct answer is D, not B, which is mistakenly given. Narmada, Tapi, Sabarmati and Mahi are some of the major rivers that flow to the West.

63. Patna is also beyond tropic of cancer, so it will also never receive vertical rays of the exactly overhead Sun.

96. Uzbekistan became a member of the Eurasian Economic Community (EEC), but later withdrew from it. So, statement 1
will be wrong. Uzbekistan is also not the member of the Eurasian Economic Union
(EEU) that has replaced the EEC.
Members of the EEU are Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Russia. Out of them, Russia, Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan are SCO members. Other SCO members that are not a part of EEU (or earlier EEC) are China and
Uzbekistan. So, only statements 2 and 3 are correct. Correct answer is C.

13. Some have argued that the water on moon should immediately freeze.
But, the case of water boiling on the moon is a bit more nuanced.
Water in the bottle boils and converts to gaseous form due to lack of any air pressure on moon. This Boiling is not due to a change in water temperature in the first place. The boiling may, however, be accelerated if the bottle is opened on the sunlit side of the moon, where the temperature is high.
All water in the bottle tries to escape from the bottle in form of a gas due to boiling and a lack of air pressure above. As the water is converted to gas, its surface area increases, which lowers its temperature. On the dark side of the moon, this may cause the water to freeze. Low temperature on the dark side further makes water freeze. But, ultimately all water (including frozen water) sublimates due to lack of any air pressure above it, getting converted into gaseous form, and escapes the bottle.

15. Certiorari is corrective in nature and can only be resorted to when the judgment has been passed. Prohibition applies
when a case is proceeding. Laxmikanth is wrong in saying that Certiorari is preventive. Please see last page here http://odisha.gov.in/e-
 
magazine/Orissareview/jan-
2007/engpdf/5-7.pdf

18.  It has been mistakenly given as A. It should clearly be B, as also given in the explanation.

19. The answer is A only. But option should more correctly read, "Turning at least one water scared village in each district of the country into water surplus village."

25.http://dipp.nic.in/English/Policies/Sector s_Under_Automatic_Route_With_Conditio
ns.pdf
nature of reality, consciousness and others.
So, it would be wrong to claim that Jaina philosophy was already in existence due to the economic conditions prevailing in that period. It was due to the efforts of the earlier Tirthankaras that Jaina philosophy took final shape during the lifetime of Vardhamana Mahavira.
Thank you.

37. There are two types of RFID tags - active and passive. Passive tags have lower range. Low-frequency and high- frequency tags tags are read from within three feet (1 meter) and Ultra High Frequency (UHF) tags are read from 10 to
20 feet. Active tags broadcast a signal, so
they have a much longer read range—300 feet or more—than passive tags. In view of this, the answer should be "all statements are correct".

50. Uranium is also one of the groundwater contaminants. This question has also been asked by UPSC with slightly different options in 2013. There is no correct option in the question.

89. Some have argued that Statement 2 should be correct, as socio-economic conditions play a major role in the development of any philosophical though system.
But, what should be noted is that Jaina philosophy was not restricted only to non- violence, truth, celibacy etc. which clearly have a bearing on and influenced by
socio-economic conditions.
But that, the philosophy also covered metaphysical questions on soul, matter,
 
