Corrigendum
Insights Prelims 
Series 2016
Legend:
Document contains three categories.
(i) Errors – Both in the solution  and the explanation.  They  are  marked  in "ORANGE  Bold  font".  Suitable clarification  is  provided  wherever necessary.
(ii) Typos – Explanation is correct and complete in this case. But, the Solution (answer) option is printed incorrectly. Clarification for typos are given in "Regular BLACK font".
(iii)  Clarifications   –  In  the  Discussion pages at the website, several doubts/disputes/ clarifications were asked/raised/requested.  We  tried  to address  nearly  all  queries  in  the Discussion  pages  wherever  it  was possible   or   required.   However,   some doubts remain; they are addressed here in "Regular BLUE Font".
The classification has been made to make the document  more readable so that you quickly address your doubts.

21. Correct answer will be B instead of
c)
Clarification: Hallur is in Karnataka. NCERT   wrongly   mentions   it   to   be   in present day AP.

14.  Clarification:  Karnataka  announced the IT policy in 1997. Rest will be same.
30. Correct answer will be A. Clarification:   Poona   Sarvajanik   Sabha
was established  by MG Ranade  in 1870
along  with  Ganesh  Vasudeo  and  others. So, statement 1 is correct.

70.  Clarification:  The  Regulating  Act  of
1773 created the office with the title of Governor-General   of  the  Presidency   of Fort William, or Governor-General  of Bengal.   The   Government   of   India   Act
1833 re-designated the office with the title of Governor-General of India.
So,  the  first  ever  Governor-general (without  the  official  title)  of  British  India was  Warren  Hastings  (1773-1785).  With the  passing  of  the  charter  act  in  1833, Lord William Bentinck became the first governor general of India.
With   the   Act   of   1858,   the   Governor- General of India became the "Viceroy and Governor-General of India".
Warren Hastings was NOT involved in the Battle   of   Buxar.   He   was   involved   in reforming  the  administration  in  the aftermath. Please modify option B accordingly. Rest will remain the same.

65.   Clarification:   Statement   1   should read "It has been declared as the state animal of Andhra Pradesh" instead of Telangana.   Spotted   Deer   is  the   State Animal of Telangana, whereas Black Buck is that of AP.

45. Correct  answer  will be B as per  the explanation.

74. Correct answer will be C, instead of
a)
Clarification:    Both    relief    and continentality  will  play  a  role  in determining the weather and climate of a place.   Mountains   may   accentuate   the effect of continentality. Please refer to http://tinyurl.com/gp9gejq    for understanding it better.

76. Option (b) should be "North and North- Western India". Rest is same.

32. Correct answer will be A instead of
b)
Clarification: In grafting two plants are used to develop a new plant with combined traits from the two parent plants. So, that makes option (a) valid. Option (a) should be read as a possibility, i.e. "Multiple plants can be involved to produce a progeny". Option (b) will not be entirely correct as it says "Only one plant is involved in creating an offspring".

11. Correct answer will be C instead of
b)
Clarification: Inclusion of states is a new model of infrastructural development in railways  where  joint  vehicles  are  formed by  both  Central  and  state  governments. You can read the link for more information.
http://indianexpress.com/article/india/india- news-india/fifth-state-to-sign-pact-
railways-chhattisgarh-sign-jv-for-
infrastructure-development/

23. Correct answer will be A instead of
c)
Clarification: IBSA members are major democracies   of   their   respective continents, not all are the largest. Nigeria is the largest democracy in Africa.

47. Correct answer will be B instead of
d)
Clarification:  Conversion  of light  energy to chemical  energy and splitting  of water molecules  into  hydrogen  and  oxygen  is one of the processes involved in photosynthesis.

51. Correct answer will be D instead of
b)
Clarification: India has ratified the Stockholm    Convention    on    Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs). 
 

10.  Clarification:  In the explanation part, it should actually be "both regions have active  volcanoes  like  the  Ring  of  Fire", NOT  "Both  regions  come  under  Ring  of Fire".  The  Alpine-Himalayan   belt  is  the next  most  seismically  active  region  after the Ring of Fire.
Question  numbers  6, 9, 11, 13 and 89 were  incompletely  given  in  the  online
version of the 

21.  Please  exchange  the  words  latitude and longitude between statement 1 and 2. Statement 1 should read "It is spread in a large  geographical  area  longitude-wise", and  statement  2  should  read  as  "It  is spread   in   a   large   geographical   area latitude-wise". Rest will be the same.

31.   Clarification:  The   cold   winds   are largely blocked by Himalayas due to which India  is saved  from  a very  cold  and  dry weather. But, as the blocking is not complete,   the  cold  winds  from  Central Asia still affect the climate of northern regions such as Delhi.
You can see it here. http://tinyurl.com/hdgwyou
95. All the bacteria given in the statement
1, 2 and 3 are used  for bio-remediation.
Correct answer will be D instead of A.

51.  Clarification: Statement 3 is incorrect as also given  in the solution.  The explanation says that all three statements are correct but the answer is A (1 and 2 are correct).

40.  Clarification: Port blair is NOT a major port of India, as also given in the explanation. https://community.data.gov.in/major-ports- in-india/

40.   Clarification:   ADB   was  formed   in
1966 and not in 1997, as given in the explanation.

48. Clarification: In the explanation, "statement  3 is correct", as also clear by the solution and reasoning given there.

69.  Answer  is  option  (a)  as  also  given clearly in the explanation.

70.   Clarification:  Kunlun  mountains  are not in India. So, 3 would be incorrect.

91.  Clarification: The  speaker  does  not appoint the LoP. S/he recognizes the LoP in case the criteria (e.g. Mavalankar Rule) are fulfilled. LoP is not like a minister who is "appointed" by President on the advice of PM.
