INSIGHTS ON INDIA TEST SERIES - 2015



INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK PRELIMINARY EXAM – 2015


INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST - 1

GENERAL STUDIES PAPER-I
SOLUTIONS

http://insightsonindia.com


INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST SERIES FOR CIVIL SERVICES PRELIMINARY EXAM



1.   Solution: b)

In the world due to technical and user base reasons the mobile numbers at present varied from 10 to 11 digits. Due to technical reasons two countries, UK and China moved to 11 digits in mobile phone numbers. In India all mobile numbers have 10 digits under the government‟s National Numbering Plan (NNP).

The number of digits in a mobile phone number describe the maximum mobile phones we can have without dialling the country code, that is 91 (for India). If we had a 9 – digit cell number, the maximum number of cell numbers possible would have been 109, ie. a maximum of 1000 million or 100 crore subscribers. Since our population is close to 125 crore, obviously we cannot have a 9- digit cell phone number. Adopting a 10– digits cell number offers a capacity to have 10 billion or 1000 crore subscribers and the total population would get at least one mobile number each.

In 2003, the Department of Telecommunication ( DoT) In India had implemented the 10– digit mobile numbers which will meet the needs for 30 long years. On February 2009, India registered a user base of 375.74 million wireless subscribers. 10-digit numbers can cater to an additional 250 million users. Under the current 10-digit numbering scheme, only a
maximum of 1 billion mobile numbers can be issued and the mobile phone connections in India would cross this mark in the next couple of years. DoT had previously proposed a transfer of numbers from10 -digits to 11- digits in January 2010.

At present all mobile phone numbers are 10 digits long and the way to split the numbers is defined in the National Numbering Plan 2003 as XXXX – NNNNNN where XXXX is the Network operator, NNNNNN is the subscriber numbers.




http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/question-corner/article6398015.ece










http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 1
INSIGHTS ON INDIA TEST SERIES - 2015


2.   Solution: d)

The Garo Hills) are part of the Garo-Khasi range in Meghalaya, India. They are inhabited mainly by tribal dwellers, the majority of whom are Garo people. It is one of the wettest places in the world. The chief meals of the Garos consist of rice with onions, capsicum and salt thrice a day.

The society is matrilineal like the Khasis and the Jaintias. Till death, the new-born baby belongs to the mother's family, irrespective of sex, even after marriage. Marriage within the clan is completely prohibited and severely punishable for both the Khasis and the Garos. Till now, the institution of Bachelors Dormitories which is gradually disappearing amongst the tribes of North Eastern Region, are found in the Garo villages. In such dormitories young people stay and live together till they are married. They receive various training in the dormitories like protection of crops, construction of roads, organising festivals, sports and ceremonies. This institution is similar to ancient agoges of Sparta.

3.   Solution: d)

The Iranians and the Greeks who came through the northwest about 2500 years ago and
were familiar with the Indus, called it the Hindos or the Indos, and the land to the east of the river was called India. The name Bharata was used for a group of people who lived in the north-west, and who are mentioned in the Rigveda, the earliest composition in Sanskrit (dated to about 3500 years ago). Later it was used for the country.




4.   Solution: b)

Asoka's edicts are to be found scattered in more than thirty places throughout India, Nepal, Pakistan and Afghanistan. Most of them are written in Brahmi script from which all Indian scripts and many of those used in Southeast Asia later developed. The language used in the edicts found in the eastern part of the sub-continent is a type of Magadhi, probably the official language of Asoka's court. The language used in the edicts found in the western part of India is closer to Sanskrit although one bilingual edict in Afghanistan is written in Aramaic and Greek. Asoka's edicts, which comprise the earliest decipherable corpus of written documents from India, have survived throughout the centuries because they are written on rocks and stone pillars.




5.   Solution: d)

There are at least four reasons why hunter-gatherers moved from place to place.

First, if they had stayed at one place for a long time, they would have eaten up all the available plant and animal resources. Therefore, they would have had to go elsewhere in
search of food.



http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 2
INSIGHTS ON INDIA TEST SERIES - 2015


Second, animals move from place to place either in search of smaller prey, or, in the case of deer and wild cattle, in search of grass and leaves. That is why those who hunted them had to follow their movements.

Third, plants and trees bear fruit in different seasons. So, people may have moved from season to season in search of different kinds of plants.

Fourth, people, plants and animals need water to survive. Water is found in lakes, streams and rivers. While many rivers and lakes are perennial (with water throughout the year) others are seasonal. People living on their banks would have had to go in search of water during the dry seasons (winter and summer). Besides, people may have travelled to meet their friends and relatives.




6.   Solution: a)

Neolithic archaeological site in Uttar Pradesh state of northern India, dated between 4000-
1200 BC. Koldihwa was an agricultural village of circular uts, with stone axes, bone and stone tools, pottery, and cattle pens; and early evidence of rice cultivation, found as impressions in ceramic vessels.




7.   Solution: b)

Catal Huyuk was a very large Neolithic and Chalcolithic proto-city settlement in
southern Anatolia, which existed from approximately 7500 BC to 5700 BC, and flourished around 7000BC.[1] It is the largest and best-preserved Neolithic site found to date. In July
2012, it was inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.

Çatalhöyük is located overlooking the Konya Plain, southeast of the present-day city
of Konya (ancient Iconium) in Turkey, approximately 140 km (87 mi) from the twin-coned volcano of Mount Hasan. The eastern settlement forms a mound which would have risen about 20 m (66 ft) above the plain at the time of the latest Neolithic occupation. There is also a smaller settlement mound to the west and a Byzantine settlement a few hundred meters to the east. The prehistoric mound settlements were abandoned before the Bronze Age. A channel of the Çarşamba river once flowed between the two mounds, and the settlement
was built on alluvial clay which may have been favourable for early agriculture.

http://www.catalhoyuk.com/history.html



8.   Solution: a)

Many of these cities were divided into two or more parts. Usually, the part to the west was smaller but higher. Archaeologists describe this as the citadel. Generally, the part to the east
was larger but lower. This is called the lower town. Very often walls of baked brick were

http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 3
INSIGHTS ON INDIA TEST SERIES - 2015


built around each part. The bricks were so well made that they have lasted for thousands of years. The bricks were laid in an interlocking pattern and that made the walls strong.

In some cities, special buildings were constructed on the citadel. For example, in Mohenjodaro, a very special tank, which archaeologists call the Great Bath, was built in this area. This was lined with bricks, coated with plaster, and made water-tight with a layer of natural tar. There were steps leading down to it from two sides, while there were rooms on all sides. Water was probably brought in from a well, and drained out after use. Perhaps important people took a dip in this tank on special occasions.




9.   Solution: c)

Most of the things that have been found by archaeologists in Harappa are made of stone, shell and metal, including copper, bronze, gold and silver. Copper and bronze were used to make tools, weapons, ornaments and vessels. Gold and silver were used to make ornaments and vessels. Perhaps the most striking finds are those of beads, weights, and blades.




10. Solution: c)

Ghod River is located in Pune District, Maharashtra, western India.[1] It is a tributary of the Bhima River.The Ghod originates on the eastern slopes of the Western Ghats at 1,090 metres (3,580 ft) above sea level. It flows in an east-southeast direction for approximately 200 kilometres (120 mi) before its confluence with the Bhima. It flows from the northern side of
the Bhimashankar hills.

The Kukadi River is one of the tributaries of the Ghod. Inamgaon, a post-Harappan agrarian village located along the Ghod, has been studied for its archaeological finds.The river is
dammed by the Ghod Dam.



11. Solution: a)


Choosing leaders or rulers by voting is something that has become common during the last fifty years or so. But, around 3000 years ago, we find some changes taking place in the ways in which rajas were chosen. Some men now became recognised as rajas by performing very big sacrifices. The ashvamedha or horse sacrifice was one such ritual. A horse was let loose to wander freely and it was guarded by the raja‟s men. If the horse wandered into the kingdoms of other rajas and they stopped it, they had to fight. If they allowed the horse to pass, it meant that they accepted that the raja who wanted to perform the sacrifice was stronger than them. These rajas were then invited to the sacrifice, which was performed by
specially trained priests, who were rewarded with gifts. The raja who organised the sacrifice
was recognised as being very powerful, and all those who came brought gifts for him.


http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 4
INSIGHTS ON INDIA TEST SERIES - 2015


12. Solution: c)


There were two major changes in agriculture around Mahajanapada period. One was the growing use of iron ploughshares. This meant that heavy, clayey soil could be turned over better than with a wooden ploughshare, so that more grain could be produced. Second, people began transplanting paddy. This meant that instead of scattering seed on the ground, from which plants would sprout, saplings were grown and then planted in the fields. This led to increased production, as many more plants survived. However, it was back breaking work. Generally, slave men and women, (dasas and dasis) and landless agricultural
labourers (kammakaras) had to do this work.


13. Solution: b)


Siddhartha, also known as Gautama, the founder of Buddhism, was born about 2500 years ago. This was a time of rapid change in the lives of people. As you saw in Chapter 6, some kings in the mahajanapadas were growing more powerful. New cities were developing, and life was changing in the villages as well .Many thinkers were trying to understand these
changes in society. They also wanted to try and find out the true meaning of life.


The Buddha belonged to a small gana known as the Sakya gana, and was a kshatriya. When he was a young man, he left the comforts of his home in search of knowledge. He wandered for several years, meeting and holding discussions with other thinkers. He finally decided to find his own path to realisation, and meditated for days on end under a peepal tree at Bodh Gaya in Bihar, where he attained enlightenment. After that, he was known as the Buddha or the Wise One. He then went to Sarnath, near Varanasi, where he taught for the first time. He spent the rest of his life travelling on foot, going from place to place, teaching people, till he
passed away at Kusinara.


Regarding Gana and Sangha


While Magadha became a powerful kingdom, Vajji, with its capital at Vaishali (Bihar), was
under a different form of government, known as gana o sangha.


In a gana or a sangha there were not one, but many rulers. Sometimes, even when thousands of men ruled together, each one was known as a raja. These rajas performed rituals together. They also met in assemblies, and decided what had to be done and how, through discussion and debate. For example, if they were attacked by an enemy, they met to discuss what
should be done to meet the threat. However, women, dasas and kammakaras could not participate in these assemblies.

Both the Buddha and Mahavira belonged to ganas or sanghas. Some of the most vivid descriptions of life in the sanghas can be found in Buddhist books.


http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 5
INSIGHTS ON INDIA TEST SERIES - 2015


Mahavira belonged to Vajji sangha.


14. Solution: a)


Around the time that the Buddha was preaching and perhaps a little earlier, other thinkers also tried to find answers to difficult questions. Some of them wanted to know about life after death, others wanted to know why sacrifices should be performed. Many of these thinkers felt that there was something permanent in the universe that would last even after death. They described this as the atman or the individual soul and the brahman or the
universal soul. They believed that ultimately, both the atman and the brahman were one.


Many of their ideas were recorded in the Upanishads. These were part of the later Vedic texts. Upanishad literally means „approaching and  sitting  near‟ and the texts contain conversations between teachers and students. Often, ideas were presented through simple
dialogues.


15. Solution: c)


The most famous thinker of the Jainas, Vardhamana Mahavira, also spread his message around this time, i.e. 2500 years ago. He was a kshatriya prince of the Lichchhavis, a group that was part of the Vajji sangha, about which you read in Chapter 6. At the age of thirty, he left home and went to live in a forest. For twelve years he led a hard and lonely life, at the
end of which he attained enlightenment.


He taught a simple doctrine: men and women who wished to know the truth must leave their homes. They must follow very strictly the rules of ahimsa, which means not hurting or killing living beings.  “All beings,” said Mahavira “long to live. To all things life is dear.” Ordinary people could understand the teachings of Mahavira and his followers, because they used Prakrit. There were several forms of Prakrit, used in different parts of the country, and named after the regions in which they were used. For example, the Prakrit spoken in
Magadha was known as Magadhi.


16. Solution: b)


Zoroaster was an Iranian prophet. His teachings are contained in a book called the Avesta. The language of the Avesta, and the practices described in it are very similar to those of the Vedas. The basic teachings of Zoroaster are contained in the maxim  “Good thoughts, Good Words and Good Deeds.” Here is a verse from the Zend  Avesta:

“Lord,  grant strength and  the rule of truth and good  thinking, by means of which  one shall create peace and tranquillity.”




http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 6
INSIGHTS ON INDIA TEST SERIES - 2015


For more than a thousand years, Zoroastrianism was a major religion in Iran. Later, some Zoroastrians migrated from Iran and settled down in the coastal towns of Gujarat and Maharashtra. They were the ancestors of today‟s Parsis.


Today, Shia Islam dominates religion in Iran.

17. Solution: d)

Accountability of the government is basically answerability for its deeds. If the activities of the government can be communicated and questioned by the people, it shows that there is a sense of answerability. Finally it is upto the people to decide the fate of the government by voting.

All these are ways in which the government can be made accountable. You can also see several rallies, marches and protests that keep the government of the day at its toe.

18. Solution: d)

Autocracy and Monarchy are two different political systems. An autocrat is an absolute dictator for e.g. in Syria.

A democracy is termed as monarchy when the head of state is chosen on the hereditary basis. Republic form of democracy is when the head of state is either directly or indirectly elected.

19. Solution: d)

Women suffrage movement dates back to the First world war days (not the 1857 revolt). The Women's Indian Association (WIA) was founded in 1917. It sought votes for women and the right to hold legislative office on the same basis as men. These positions were endorsed by the main political groupings, the Indian National Congress and the All-India Muslim League. British and Indian feminists combined in 1918 to publish a magazine Stri
Dharma that featured international news from a feminist perspective. In 1919 in
the Montagu–Chelmsford Reforms, the British set up provincial legislatures which had the power to grant women's suffrage. Madras in 1921 granted votes to wealthy and educated women, under the same terms that applied to men. The other provinces followed, but not the princely states (which did not have votes for men either).

20. Solution: a)

There is no term like Judicial sovereignty. In India no organ is supreme. There is separation of powers between different organs. So even the Parliament is not supreme or sovereign. Its authority is restricted by Fundamental rights and Judicial oversight.

21. Solution: d)

Ladakh is a desert in the mountains in the eastern part of Jammu and Kashmir. Very little
agriculture is possible here since this region does not receive any rain and is covered in


http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 7
INSIGHTS ON INDIA TEST SERIES - 2015


snow for a large part of the year. There are very few trees that can grow in the region. For drinking water, people depend on the melting snow during the summer months. So, people here keep sheep and the sheep in this region are special because they produce pashmina wool. This wool is prized and pashmina shawls cost a lot of money. The people in Ladakh carefully collect the wool of the sheep and sell this to traders from Kashmir. Pashmina shawls are chiefly woven in Kashmir.

Ladakh is also called Little Tibet. Islam was introduced in this region more than four hundred years ago and there is a significant Muslim population here. Ladakh has a very rich oral tradition of songs and poems. Local versions of the Tibetan national epic the Kesar Saga are performed and sung by both Muslims and Buddhists.

22. Solution: b)

Any one who has the right to vote and lives in the premises if a Panchayat is a member of
the Gram Sabha. Panchayat is elected by it. The Sarpanch is usually elected by the Panchayat
– it depends from state to state.

The Gram Sabha keeps a track of the work of Gram Panchayat and prevents misuse of money. Some of the works by Gram Panchayat has to be approved by the Gram Sabha.




23. Solution: a)

The constitution via the 73rd amendment provides the skeleton for rural government. The rest is decided by the states by laws enacted in the legislature.

The District Panchayat is the at the top of the hierarchy in rural government. It prepares plan for the whole district with the help of Panchayat samitits and municipalities. In this way it regulates the sanctioning of money to the gram Panchayats.

Panchayat secretary is a bureaucrat and selected by the Civil Services examination of the concerned state. The state government appoints the Panchayat secretary.

24. Solution: d)

He provides all this information to the government thus keeping it up to date. He is supervised by senior bureaucrats in the revenue department. He is also under the control of District collector.

25. Solution: a)

The District collector or the BDO issues such important certificates. The only duty of the
Tehsildar is to make sure that these certificates are disbursed to the needy properly.

26. Solution: b)





http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 8
INSIGHTS ON INDIA TEST SERIES - 2015


Option A is a consequence of seasonal income, not a reason. Not having agricultural land is evident from them being called landless in the first place. That is not the cause of seasonal income.

Policies for landless labourers do exist. But they do not have to do with their income except schemes like MGNREGA.

The correct reason is that agriculture is seasonal in nature. So they do no get employment throughout the year.

27. Solution: d)

The fact that unemployment and low skill labour are found easily in India leads to the easy availability of casual labour.

The law does not regulate the hiring and firing of the casual labourers as they are part of the informal economy.




28. Solution: d)

The Mid Day Meal Scheme is a programme of the Government of India designed to improve the nutritional status of school-age children nation wide. The programme supplies free lunches on working days for children in Primary and Upper Primary Classes in
Government, Government Aided, Local Body, Education Guarantee Scheme, and Alternate Innovative Education Centres, Madarsa and Maqtabs supported under Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan, and National Child Labour Project schools run by the Ministry of Labour. Serving
120,000,000 children in over 1,265,000 schools and Education Guarantee Scheme centres, it is
the largest such programme in the world.

It has also helped fight caste prejudice in rural areas as all students eat together. It has generated kitchen employment for women and farmers.




29. Solution: c)

While tribals are socio-economically weaker than mainstream community, there is no
specific evidence that this inequality can also be seen across several tribal groups in India.

There are strong evidences for the other options like Sachar committee for Muslims
(religion).




30. Solution: d)






http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                        Page 9
INSIGHTS ON INDIA TEST SERIES - 2015


The constitution of India prescribes in Directive principles of State policies that it shall be the state‟s endeavour to raise the level of nutrition and  standard of living and to improve public health.

The National health policy 2002 prescribes the role of government in public health.

Several laws related to health in India are:

    The Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act and Rules
    The Pre-Natal Diagnostic Techniques (PNDT) Act and Rules
    Acts in Disability
    Insecticides Act and Rules
    Maternity Benefit Act and Rules
    Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act and Rules
    The Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954
    Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940
    Bio-Medical Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 1998
    The Pharmacy Act, 1948
    The Transplantation of Human Organs Act and Rules
    Environmental Acts and Rules
    Consumer Protection Act and Medical Profession
    Mental Health Act, 1987
    Food Safety and Standards Regulations
    The Protection of Women From Domestic Violence Act, 2005
    The Marriage Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2010
    The Prohibition Of Sexual Harassment Of Women At Workplace Bill, 2010
    Food Safety and Standards (Prohibition and Restrictions on Sales) Regulations, 2011
    Food Safety and Standards (Contaminants, Toxins and Residues) Regulations, 2011


31. Solution: b)

Sub-centre is the first point of contact between the community an public health system. For every 3000-4000 of population there is a sub-centre. For every 4-5 sub-centres, there is a primary health centre. And for every 4-5 primary health centres, there is a community health centre.




32. Solution: d)

All states do not have the same number of constituencies. India being a federal nation has nothing to with the number of assembly seats in a state. The federal character of india has more to do with the representation of states in the Rajya Sabha.




33. Solution: d)

http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 10
INSIGHTS ON INDIA TEST SERIES - 2015


Government is formed from the legislature. So the whole legislature can NOT be called the governemt. State judiciary and human rights commission keep a check on the activities of the government. They can not be a part of the state government.




34. Solution: d)

The Prevention of Sexual harassment at Workplace Act, 2013 was recently enacted. Domestic violence act is in place since 2005.




35. Solution: a)

Large bourses who control the money flow to media can prevent unbiased reporting from media. They further may have connection with the political class and this may encourage selective and distorted reporting.

Option 3 is in fact a way to make the functioning of media transparent and unbiased.




36. Solution: d)

In India, production of sugar from Sugarcane mostly takes place at Cooperative Sugar Mills owned by local Farmers The Shareholders include all farmers, small and large,
supplying sugarcane to the mill.

Amul is an Indian dairy cooperative, based at Anand in the state of Gujarat, India. Amul spurred India's White Revolution, which made the country the world's largest producer of milk and milk products. In the process Amul became the largest food brand in India and has ventured into markets overseas.

Both rural and urban cooperative banks exist which help the marginalized sections.




37. Solution: a)

Most planets also rotate on their axes (as well as revolve) in an anti-clockwise direction, but
Venus rotates clockwise (called "retrograde" rotation) once every 243 Earth days.




38. Solution: a)

Comet






http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 11
INSIGHTS ON INDIA TEST SERIES - 2015


     A comet is a relatively small solar system body that orbits the Sun. When close enough to the Sun they display a visible coma (a fuzzy outline or atmosphere due to solar radiation) and sometimes a tail.

Asteroid

     Asteroids are small solar system bodies that orbit the Sun. Made of rock and metal, they can also contain organic compounds. Asteroids are similar to comets but do not have a visible coma (fuzzy outline and tail) like comets do.

Meteoroid

     A meteoroid is a small rock or particle of debris in our solar system. They range in size from dust to around 10 metres in diameter (larger objects are usually referred to as asteroids).

Meteor

     A meteoroid that burns up as it passes through the Earth‟s atmosphere is known as
a meteor. If you‟ve ever looked up at the sky at night and seen a streak of light or
„shooting star‟ what  you are actually seeing  is a meteor.

Meteorite

     A meteoroid that survives falling through the Earth‟s atmosphere and colliding with the Earth‟s surface  is known as a meteorite.



39. Solution: d)

The mid-day sun is exactly overhead at least once a year on all latitudes in between the Tropic of Cancer and the Tropic of Capricorn. This area, therefore, receives the maximum heat and is called the Torrid Zone. The mid-day sun never shines overhead on any latitude beyond the Tropic of Cancer  and the Tropic of Capricorn. The angle of the sun‟s rays goes on decreasing towards the poles. As such, the areas bounded by the Tropic of Cancer and
the Arctic Circle in the Northern Hemisphere, and the Tropic of Capricorn and the Antarctic
Circle in the Southern Hemisphere, have moderate temperatures. These are, therefore, called
Temperate Zones.

The distance between latitudes keep increasing as one moves from equator to the poles. The same between longitudes is constant at the same latitude.

40. Solution: a)

Options 1 and 2 can be logically deduced. Option 3 may be possible if Earth stops revolving around the Sun. Stopping rotation would not affect its elliptical orbit.

41. Solution: a)



http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 12
INSIGHTS ON INDIA TEST SERIES - 2015


Self-explanatory. However, at the equator the level of water is a little higher by 8cm. This is because of greater solar insolation received at the equator. More heat causes expansion in the sea water volume.




42. Solution: c)

The Atacama Desert is a plateau in South America, covering a 1,000-kilometre strip of land on the Pacific coast, west of the Andes mountains. It is the driest non-polar desert in the world.

The Great Victoria Desert, an interim Australian bioregion, is a sparsely populated desert area in Western Australia and South Australia.

43. Solution: a)

The indented coastline as given in the figure below helps in two ways. One, it provides natural sideways protection for the ships if they harbor there. And two, due to its shape, less cost would have to be incurred even if artificial ports are to made there.



















44.  Solution: c)

There are three types of mountains- Fold Mountains, Block Mountains and the Volcanic Mountains. The Himalayan Mountains and the Alps are young fold mountains with rugged relief and high conical peaks. The Aravali range in India is one of the oldest fold mountain systems in the world. The range has considerably worn down due to the processes of erosion. The Appalachians in North America and the Ural mountains in Russia have rounded features and low elevation. They are very old fold mountains.




45. Solution: a)

Self-explanatory.




http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 13
INSIGHTS ON INDIA TEST SERIES - 2015


46. Solution: b)

The Vindhyas and the Satpuras are the important ranges in the Pennisular plateau. The rivers Narmada and Tapi flow through these ranges. These are west-flowing rivers that drain into the Arabian Sea.

The Western Ghats or Sahyadris border the plateau in the west and the Eastern Ghats provide the eastern boundary. While the Western Ghats are almost continuous, the Eastern Ghats are broken and uneven (Figure 7.3). The plateau is rich in minerals like coal and iron- ore. To the West of the Western Ghats and the East of Eastern Ghats lie the Coastal plains. The western coastal plains are very narrow. The eastern Coastal plains are much broader.




47. Solution: b)

Continentality means that the more a place is surrounded by land, the more extreme its weather will be .Because land heats faster as compared to sea.

Opposed to this, closeness to the sea moderates weather. Because in the day the sea heats slower than land. This cool sea breeze blows across the land thus reducing the day temperatures.

In the night the sea cools down slower. And the exact opposite happens. This keeps the temperature moderate.



48. Solution: c)

Lakshadweep is a coral island. The Sundarbans  is a natural region in Bengal. It is the largest single block of tidal halophytic mangrove forest in the world.




49. Solution: d)

Sundarbans house littoral and swamp forests. Mangroves are found here, not evergreen forests. However, the area surrounding Sundarbans have tropical evergreen forests.

Other places (except Andaman and Nicobar) have mangroves, but not evergreen forests.




50. Solution: d)

Continental crust is less denser than ocean crust as the later is made of basaltic rocks.

The main constituents of the former are Silica and Aluminium; and that of the later are Silica and Magnesium.


http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 14
INSIGHTS ON INDIA TEST SERIES - 2015




51. Solution: b)

Sedimentary rocks are formed when sediments (broken from a rock) are deposited and consolidated under pressure or temperature or in other ways. Only igneous rocks can be directly formed from magma, not sedimentary rocks.




52. Solution: c)

Sediment load has to do with formation of floodplains and levees. This is how an ox-bow lake is formed.
As the river enters the plain it twists and turns forming large bends known as meanders.
Due to continuous erosion and deposition along the sides of the meander, the ends of the meander loop come closer and closer. In due course of time the meander loop cuts off from the river and forms a cut-off lake, also called an ox-bow lake.

















53. Solution: d)

























http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 15
INSIGHTS ON INDIA TEST SERIES - 2015




54. Solution: c)

Albedo is the reflectivity of a surface. The more ice is there on the earth, the more it will reflect sunrays as white ice is a good reflector. Therefore, albedo will decrease. So the temperature of the earth will increase.

This and the melting of the snow will cause an expansion in the volume of sea water leading to the flooding of the coastal areas.

Floods and drought will become more severe and frequent in certain pockets of the world. This is because some regions will become hotter than usual. They will experience either more intense rain leading to floods or more intense evaporation leading to hydrological drought.

Such disturbance in the local weather, and climate later on, will disturb the local environment. This will create problems for the species which will find it tough to adapt to the sudden changing environment; flood; drought; high temperature; changing flora etc. Some of them may go extinct too.




55. Solution: a)

While nitrogen is used by plants for making food, they do not obtain it directly from atmosphere. Certain bacteria fix nitrogen from the atmosphere and make it available to the plants in the form of nitrate etc.

Hydrogen and oxygen from the atmosphere are not used in making food.




56. Solution: c)

Self-explanatory. Refer to page no. 22 – Structure of atmosphere – Chapter 4- NCERT Geo class 7th for more related details.




57. Solution: d)

Winds can be broadly divided into three types.

1. Permanent winds – The trade winds, westerlies and easterlies are the permanent winds.These blow constantly throughout the year in a particular direction.

2. Seasonal winds – These winds change their direction in different seasons. For example monsoons in India.

3. Local winds – These blow only during a particular period of the day or year in a small area.

http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 16
INSIGHTS ON INDIA TEST SERIES - 2015




58. Solution: d)

All are true. Jet planes flying in the sky leave a white trail behind them. The moisture from their engines condenses. We see trails of this condensed moisture for some time when there is no air movement to disturb it.




59. Solution: d)

During a storm, the winds blowing at very high speed form huge waves. These may cause tremendous destruction. An earthquake, a volcanic eruption or underwater landslides can shift large amounts of ocean water. As a result a huge tidal wave called tsunami, that may be as high as 15m., is formed. The largest tsunami ever measured was 150m. high. These waves travel at a speed of more than 700 km. per hour. The tsunami of 2004 caused wide spread damage in the coastal areas of India. The Indira point in the Andaman and Nicobar islands got submerged after the tsunami.




60. Solution: d)

The strong gravitational pull exerted by the sun and the moon  on the earth‟s surface  causes the tides. The water of the earth closer to the moon gets pulled under the influence of the moon‟s gravitational force and  causes  high tide. During the full moon  and new moon  days, the sun, the moon and the earth are in the same line and the tides are highest. These tides are called spring tides. But when the moon is in its first and last quarter, the ocean waters get drawn in diagonally opposite directions by the gravitational pull of sun and earth resulting
in low tides. These tides are called neap tides.




61. Solution: a)

High tides help in navigation. They raise the water level close to the shores. This helps the ships to arrive at the harbour more easily. The high tides also help in fishing. Many more fish come closer to the shore during the high tide. This enables fishermen to get a plentiful catch. The rise and fall of water due to tides is being used to generate electricity in some places.

Marine upwelling is a different phenomen altogether.

Winds blowing across the ocean surface push water away. Water then rises up from beneath the surface to replace the water that was pushed away. This process is known as
“upwelling.”





http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 17
INSIGHTS ON INDIA TEST SERIES - 2015


Upwelling occurs in the open ocean and along coastlines. The reverse process, called “downwelling,” also occurs when wind causes  surface  water to build up along a coastline and the surface water eventually sinks toward the bottom.

Water that rises to the surface as a result of upwelling is typically colder and is rich in nutrients. These nutrients “fertilize” surface  waters, meaning that these surface waters often have high biological productivity.  Therefore, good fishing grounds typically are found where upwelling is common.




62. Solution: d)

Self-explanatory. Refer to the last two pages of chapter 5 for more information on warm and old currents.




63. Solution: a)

They are also found in large parts of India.

Mediterranean vegetation is mostly found in the areas around the Mediterranean sea in
Europe, Africa and Asia, hence the name.

Boreal forests are cold forests which have mostly coniferous trees.




64. Solution: d)

There most important difference between a steppe and a savanna is where it is located. Savannas lie nearer the equator and are warmer than steppes. Being nearer the rainforest means they have two major seasons: a hot, wet summer and a marginally cooler, but much drier winter. Steppes, by contrast, lie further from the equator and in sheltered areas. This means the precipitation they get is dispersed evenly throughout the year. Fewer large plants can take root under such dry conditions. Being further from the equator also means colder conditions, and in some northern steppes, snow, rather than rain, is common.


Read more at : http://www.ehow.com/info_8468978_differences-between-steppes- savannas.html

65. Solution: a)

If you reach the polar region (Tundra type of vegetation) you will find the place extremely cold. The growth of natural vegetation is very limited here. Only mosses, lichens and very
small shrubs are found here. It grows during the very short summer.





http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 18
INSIGHTS ON INDIA TEST SERIES - 2015


66. Solution: d)

Waterways are the cheapest for carrying heavy and bulky goods over long distances. They are mainly of two types – inland waterways and sea routes. Navigable rivers, canals and lakes are used as inland waterways. Some of the important inland waterways are the Ganga- Brahmaputra river system, the Great Lakes in North America and the river Nile in Africa.
Sea routes and oceanic routes are mostly used for transporting merchandise and goods from
one country to another. These routes are connected with the ports.



67. Solution: d)


Arikamedu is an archaeological site in Kakkayanthope, Ariyankuppam
Commune, Puducherry. It is located at a distance 7 km from its capital Pondicherry, in the Indian territory of Puducherry, where Mortimer Wheeler conducted his best-known excavation in the 1940s. Arikamedu - 'Arikan-medu or Poduke' which literally means,
'eroding mound'. Roman lamps, glassware and gems have also been found at the site.


For Map, refer to NCERT Class VI History  - Page No. – 85.


68. Solution: b)


In the northern part of the country, the village headman was known as the grama bhojaka. Usually, men from the same family held the position for generations. In other words, the post was hereditary. The grama bhojaka was often the largest landowner. Generally, he had slaves and hired workers to cultivate the land. Besides, as he was powerful, the king often used him to collect taxes from the village. He also functioned as a judge, and sometimes as a
policeman.


Apart from the gramabhojaka, there were other independent farmers, known as grihapatis, most of whom were smaller landowners. And then there were men and women such as the dasa karmakara, who did not own land, and had to earn a living working on the fields owned by others. In most villages there were also some crafts persons such as the
blacksmith, potter, carpenter and weaver.


69. Solution: c)


Refer page 107, NCERT Class VI History Book.


70. Solution: b)


A famous Tamil epic, the Silappadikaram, was composed by a poet named Ilango, around
1800 years ago. It is the story of a merchant named Kovalan, who lived in Puhar and fell in love with a courtesan named Madhavi, neglecting his wife Kannagi. Later, he and Kannagi

http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 19
INSIGHTS ON INDIA TEST SERIES - 2015


left Puhar and went to Madurai, where he was wrongly accused of theft by the court jeweller of the Pandya king. The king sentenced Kovalan to death. Kannagi, who still loved him, was full of grief and anger at this injustice, and destroyed the entire city of Madurai.

Another Tamil epic, the Manimekalai was composed by Sattanar around 1400 years ago. This describes the story of the daughter of Kovalan and Madhavi. These beautiful compositions were lost to scholars for many centuries, till their manuscripts were
rediscovered, about a hundred years ago.


71. Solution: d)


Both are correct.


http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/super-cyber-intelligence-body-soon-announces-it-
minister/article6408263.ece


72. Solution: c)


It is a tradition that dates back as far as the 11th century when it originated in the villages of the Red River Delta area of northern Vietnam. Today's Vietnamese water puppetry is a
unique variation on the ancient Asian puppet tradition.

The puppets are made out of wood and then lacquered. The shows are performed in a waist- deep pool. A large rod supports the puppet under the water and is used by the puppeteers, who are normally hidden behind a screen, to control them. Thus the puppets appear to be moving over the water. When the rice fields would flood, the villagers would entertain each
other using this form of puppet play.

http://www.thehindu.com/business/Industry/india-vietnam-to-sign-key-oil-search-
pact/article6410313.ece (see the emage)



73. Solution: a)

Space Exploration Technologies Corporation, or SpaceX, is a space transport services company headquartered in Hawthorne, California. It was founded in 2002 by
former PayPal entrepreneur and Tesla Motors CEO Elon Musk. SpaceX was founded with
the goal of reducing space transportation costs and enabling the colonization of Mars. It has developed the Falcon 1 and Falcon 9 launch vehicles, both of which were designed from conception to eventually become reusable. SpaceX also developed the Dragon spacecraft, which are flown into orbit by the Falcon 9 launch vehicle, initially transporting cargo and later planned to carry humans to the International Space Station and other destinations.





http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 20
INSIGHTS ON INDIA TEST SERIES - 2015


In 2006, NASA awarded the company a Commercial Orbital Transportation Services (COTS) contract to design and demonstrate a launch system to resupply cargo to the International Space Station (ISS). SpaceX has since flown four missions to the ISS.
http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/science/nasa-fourth-spacex-cargo-mission-will-carry- first-3d-printer-to-the-international-space-station/article6410118.ece



74. Solution: c)

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) is a proposed regional free-trade agreement. As of
2014 twelve countries throughout the Asia-Pacific region have participated in negotiations on the TPP: Australia, Brunei Darussalam, Canada, Chile, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New
Zealand, Peru, Singapore, the United States, and Vietnam.

India is not involved in its negotiations.

http://www.ustr.gov/tpp



75. Solution: a)

The deployment of IndARC,  the country‟s  first underwater moored observatory in the Kongsfjorden fjord, half way between Norway and the North Pole, represents a major milestone in India‟s scientific endeavours in the Arctic region.

Designed and developed by scientists from the Earth System Science Organisation (ESSO), National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research (NCAOR), National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT) and Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS), IndARC was deployed from RV Lance, a research vessel belonging to the Norwegian Polar Institute on July 23.

The observatory is anchored at a depth of 192 m and has an array of 10 state-of-the-art oceanographic sensors strategically positioned at various depths in the water.


http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/energy-and-environment/indias-arctic-observatory-
to-aid-climate-change-studies/article6405727.ece



76. Solution: c)

http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/science/spinosaurus-aegyptiacus-alienlike-giant- waterliving-dinosaur-unveiled/article6403739.ece



77. Solution: d)

Both are wrong.



http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 21
INSIGHTS ON INDIA TEST SERIES - 2015


The Jaipur Foot, also known as the Jaipur Leg, is a rubber-based prosthetic leg for people with below-knee amputations. Although inferior in many ways to the composite carbon fibre variants, its variable applicability and cost efficiency make it an acceptable choice for
prosthesis. Ram Chander Sharma designed and developed it in 1968.

The Jaipur Foot is made of polyurethane, which at the time was the new material used in the production of the prostheses. The material increases the durability and the convenience of use. Now the government of India supports Bhagwan Mahavir Viklang Sahyata Samiti with
financial aid to carry out the work done by the organization.

http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/other-states/jaipur-foot-to-help-cows-
now/article6405736.ece



78. Solution: c)

At about 31 per cent of the world total, Australia has the largest known reserves of uranium.

Just before concluding the civil nuclear agreement with India, Australia had drawn the curtain on its uranium trade with Russia, which is one of the largest suppliers of uranium to India.

India is the only non-NPT signatory to which Australia will be supplying uranium. Besides
Russia, India imports most of its uranium from Kazakhstan and France.


http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/australiabanking-on-uranium-pact-to-gain-
edge-over-eurasian-rivals/article6401600.ece



79. Solution: c)

http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/centre-to-fund-swachh-vidyalaya-
campaign/article6401957.ece



80. Solution: a)

http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/nasa-to-map-earth-forests-in-3d/article6397048.ece



81. Solution: b)

Self-explanatory. Refer to the the section  “Life in Ganga-Brahmaputra basin”-  Chapter 8 – 7th
Geo NCERT




82.   Solution: a)



http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 22
INSIGHTS ON INDIA TEST SERIES - 2015


The main crop is paddy since cultivation of paddy requires sufficient water, it is grown in the areas where the amount of rainfall is high. Wheat, maize, sorghum, gram and millets are the other crops that are grown. Cash crops like sugarcane and jute are also grown. Banana plantations are seen in some areas of the plain. In West Bengal and Assam tea is grown in plantations (Fig. 8.10). Silk is produced through the cultivation of silk worms in parts of Bihar and Assam.




83. Solution: b)

































84. Solution: a)

Refer to sec 1.2 chapter 1 – class 7th Science NCERT




85. Solution: a)

Normally bacteria are present in our mouth but they are not harmful to us. However, if we do not clean our teeth and mouth after eating, many harmful bacteria also begin to live and grow in it. These bacteria break down the sugars present from the leftover food and release acids. The acids gradually damage the teeth. This is called tooth decay.




86. Solution: a)


http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 23
INSIGHTS ON INDIA TEST SERIES - 2015


Refer to http://www.instructables.com/id/Oral-Rehydration-Salts-ORS/




87. Solution: a)

Refer to the link for more information on disease causing bacteria in humans http://www.biotechnologyforums.com/thread-1945.html
88. Solution: a)

We often use electricity and fuels like coal and wood to keep our houses cool or warm. It is possible to construct buildings, that are not affected much by heat and cold outside. This can be done by constructing outer walls of buildings so that they have trapped layers of air. One way of doing this is to use hollow bricks, which are available these days.




89. Solution: a)

The most commonly used natural indicator is litmus. It is extracted from lichens . It has a mauve (purple) colour in distilled water. When added to an acidic solution, it turns red and when added to a basic solution, it turns blue. It is available in the form of a solution, or in the form of strips of paper, known as litmus paper. Generally, it is available as red and blue litmus paper.




90. Solution: d)

The rain becomes acidic because carbon dioxide, sulphur dioxide and nitrogen dioxide (which are released into the air as pollutants) dissolve in rain drops to form carbonic acid, sulphuric acid and nitric acid respectively. Acid rain can cause damage to buildings, historical monuments, plants and animals.




91. Solution: a)

Self-explnatory. The effect of an acid can be neutralized using a base.




92. Solution: b)

Self-explanatory.

93. Solution: d)





http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 24
INSIGHTS ON INDIA TEST SERIES - 2015


94. Solution: d)

http://science.howstuffworks.com/life/fungi/yeast-info.htm




95. Solution: a)

Plants absorb mineral nutrients and water from the soil. Not all the water absorbed is
utilised by the plant. The water evaporates through the stomata present on the surface of the leaves by the process of transpiration. The evaporation of water from leaves generates a suction pull (the same that you produce when you suck water through a straw) which can pull water to great heights in the tall trees. Transpiration also cools the plant.




96. Solution: d)

Refer to http://www.biology-resources.com/plants-vegetative-reproduction-01.html




97. Solution: a)

The images reflected in a convex mirror, then, look smaller than they are -- they're compressed. This is why convex mirrors are used on cars: They reflect more in a smaller space. In other words, a convex mirror has a wider field of view than a flat one, which can only reflect the area right in front of it. With a wider field of view, the driver has more information about the area to the right of the car.




98. Solution: d)

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Water_pollution_in_India#Other_problems




99. Solution: a)

Refer to http://www.botanical-online.com/english/eucalyptus.htm




100.            Solution: a)

http://donateeyes.org/what-is-eye-donation/








http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 25
INSIGHTS ON INDIA TEST SERIES - 2015









































































http://insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 26
