Corrigendum  

Insights Test Series 
2015 

Legend: 

Document contains three categories. 

(i) Errors - Both in the solution and the explanation. They are marked in “RED Bold font”.     Suitable     explanation     is    provided wherever possible.  

(ii)    Typos   –   Explanation    is   correct    and complete   in   this   case.   But   the   Solution (answer)  option  is  printed  incorrectly.  They are given in “Regular BLACK font”. 

(iii) Clarifications  – In the Discussion pages at the website, several doubts/disputes/ clarifications    were    asked/raised/requested. We have tried to answer nearly all queries wherever it was possible or required. They are in “Regular BLUE Font”.    

The  classification  has  been  made  so  that  you 
quickly access your doubts.  

 

Test 1 

8. Answer will be B, instead of A, as also given 
in the explanation. 

39. Clarification – The distance between latitudes keep “decreasing” (increasing was mentioned in the explanation previously – wrong)  as  one  moves  from  equator  to  the poles.    The    same    between    longitudes    is constant at the same latitude. 

41. Clarification – The level  of sea is almost same    everywhere    (even    though    due    to greater  temperature  it  is  8  cm  higher  near tropics).  This  fact  is  mentioned  in  the  NCERT, 
and questions based on it have been asked by UPSC too in the past. We will have to accept this as a fact.   

83.  Answer  will  be  C,  instead  of  B,  as  also 
given in the explanation. 

86.      Answer      should      be      D.      ORS      is 
recommended in Chickengunya too.  

 

Test 2 

53. Clarification  – If you a find a law unfair, you can approach the Supreme Court. You can give your own interpretation  of fundamental rights or basic structure while citing the law as unfair.  And  this  is  how  SC  has  tended  to expand the Fundamental rights in scope, especially Article 21. For e.g. Right to Good Governance  was  recognized  under  Right  to Life   and   Liberty   recently   by   the   Supreme Court.  A  group  of  eminent   citizens approached  the SC challenging  the non-fixed tenure of IAS officers which they alleged interfered in the proper functioning of democracy and good governance. Then in October 2013 this judgment was delivered urging  the  government  to  fix  the  tenure  of bureaucrats.  

62. Answer would be B, instead of D. In case of a non-cognizable  offence,  an investigation can   be   started   after   obtaining   permission from   magistrate.    But   in   the   case   of   a cognizable  offence, FIR is registered  first and the   investigation   is  launched.   It  has  been explained                   thoroughly                   here. http://surfpolice.blogspot.in/2013/06/police- investigation-and-public-officer.html 

66. Option  D should  be “1, 2, 3 and 5 only” instead of “1, 3, 4 and 5 only”. Explanation in the link also tells the same. Its a typo.  

 
Test 3 
Test 5 

13.  Answer  will  be  B,  instead  of  C,  as  also 
given in the explanation. 

35.  Clarification  –  Statement   2  should   be “public   tax   money”   and   not   just   “public money” to avoid the confusion. Withdrawal of money from Consolidated Funds of India requires   Parliamentary   approval,   not   from Public Accounts of India.  

39. Clarification  – Statement  2 says that the PM has absolute discretion in “appointing the Council of Ministers”. This is wrong since the appointment  is  done  by  the  President.  The PM  only  selected  the  ministers  to  be appointed.    Please   beware   of   such   small change  in  terminologies.  Our  constitution  is also based on such delicate language where a word has only a particular meaning. Appointment  is  appointment,  not  selection. For example,  we cannot  say UPSC ‘appoints’ civil servants.  

47. The answer will be B, instead of A. Explanation  given  is  partial  and  not appropriate.  President  can  also  amend  laws via the ordinance route. Supreme Court can change  a law by declaring  certain  section  of the law as void. Both amount to change in the laws.  The  Prime  Minister,  however,  does  not 
have any power to change the laws. 
19.   Answer   should   be   D   as   also   in   the 
explanation.  

30. Only statements  1, 2 and 3 are correct. There is a provision for reservation of women in NCPCR (six Members, out of which at least two shall be women). 

52.  Answer  will  be  C,  instead  of  A,  as  also 
implied in the explanation.  

65. Option  D is correct,  all are national  Park now,  and  map  given  is  outdated,  given  in NCERT. 

66.   Answer   will   be   B.   Map   is   outdated, Chandra Prabha is Wild life sanctuary in Uttar Pradesh, Gorumara is a National Park in West Bengal  and  is  Known  for  the  population  of One-horned    Rhino.   And   Mudumalai    is   a National park in Tamilnadu. 

68.   Option   C   will   be   correct,   some   typing 
mistake in the explanation. 

68. Only  statement  3 will  be correct.  There are typos in the explanation. The correct explanation  will be (as per Ministry  of Home Affairs): India has 15106.7 Km of land border running through 92 districts in 17 States and a coastline of 7516.6 Km touching 13 States and 
Union Territories (UTs). 




Test 4 

68. Forming a SHG can be considered as a fundamental right since Article 19 provides for the right to form associations. Correct answer will be D. Explanation given is wrong.  

93.  Answer  will  be  B,  instead  of  D,  as  also 
given in the explanation. 

 
Test 6 
Test 8 

23. Clarification – Coriolis force is caused due to rotation of the earth on its axis. It generally (not  always)  acts  perpendicular  to  the pressure gradient force because the pressure belts on earth lie in the north-south direction (Coriolis  force  showing  a  tendency  to  act  in east-west direction).  

64. Answer will be A, not D, as also implied in the explanation.  Phytosensing  has nothing to do with transportation in plants. 

77. Magnesium is must for Synthesis of Chlorophyll  in plants,  other  than that Iron is also   important,   as   explained   solution.   But most appropriate to match is Magnesium.    

96.   Option   B   will   be   correct,   explanation 
given is wrong. Please check class 12th NCERT 
– Themes in Indian History- III, Page number-
349. 

 

Test 7 

7. In statement  1, it should be Mizoram,  not Manipur, as also given in the explanation.  

15.  Vindhya  also  acts  as  water  divide.  So,  all 
options are correct.  

19.  Clarification  -  The  question  talks  about west-flowing rivers only as also implied in the question statement  (fixed course, absence of meanders etc.) 

25-  NCERT  class  11th  -  India  Physical Geography, Pg. 62 mentions, the National commission   on  Agriculture(1976)   has classified  social  forestry  into       three categories:-  Urban,  Rural  and  Farm  forestry. Answer should be A, not C.  

Q.87.  All  types  of  the  soils  are  found  in  India 
as also given in the explanation. 
3.  Answer  will  be  A,  instead  of  B,  as  per  the 
explanation.  

 

Test 9 

20. Please remove ‘NOT’ from the question statement  about  Agri-businesses.  Rest  is  as per the solution.  

64.  Answer  should  be  A,  instead  of  B,  as  also 
in the explanation. 

 

Test 10 

1.   Answer   will   be   A,   not   D,   as   per   the 
explanation.  

6.   Answer   will   be   A,   not   D,   as   per   the 
explanation.  

10.  Only  statement  3  is  correct.  Overall  sex ratio  has  improved,  whereas  child  sex  ratio has declined  in Census 2011 as compared  to Census 2001. 

19.   Answer   will   be   C,   not   D,   as   per   the 
explanation. 

52.   Answer   will   be   A,   not   D,   as   per   the 
explanation.  

74. Clarification  - Statement  1 is considered as communal by some historians, and not accepted  by others.  Therefore,  we withdraw this statement.  

 

Test 11 

51. Clarification - Net Factor Income from abroad is a sub-component of GNP. It is added to GDP to obtain GNP. Whether it is a BMW plant   in   India,   or   it   is   a   Reliance   plant   in 
Ontario, both will form part of the NFIA. BMW is     investment     coming     in,     Reliance     is investment going out.  

60. Only statement 1 correct. It is also implied 
in the explanation. 

64.   Answer   will   be  D,  instead   of  A,  also implied in the explanation.  Sterilization  helps fight inflation, protect against external shocks and stabilize the depreciation in the currency.  

 Test 12 
46.  Answer  should  be  D,  instead  of  A,  as  also 
given in the explanation. 

47.  Answer  should  be  B,  instead  of  C,  as  also 
given in the explanation. 

55. Answer should be D, instead of A, as also given in the explanation. Clarification – All environmental   protocols   and   treaties   deal with global commons  because  the biosphere belongs  to  the  entire  humanity,  and  not  to one sovereign nation. 

 

Test 13 

17.  Please  remove  “not”  from  statement  2. High   courts   can   definitely   issue   writs   for enforcing fundamental rights. 

41.  Answer  should  be  A,  instead  of  D,  as  also 
given in the explanation. 

43. Answer would be B, instead of A, as also implied in the explanation.  Reason (R) is just another  way  of  putting  Assertion  (A),  not  a reason. 

46. The question statement should be “Which 
of the above is/are correct?” 
95. Clarification  – Self-government  demands by Home Rule League meant self-government by Indians within the British Empire. Tilak had clarified  that  he  did  not  want  to  overthrow the British administration.  

100.  Clarification  –  Boddhisattva  also  helps 
others to attain enlightenment.  

 

Test 14 

1. Clarification – Invisible hand theory is when rational  economic  agents  acting  in their self- interest maximize the welfare of all agents without any coordination  and such intention. Its consequence is “supply and demand forces creating equilibrium in the economy.” But the Central point of the theory is not reaching equilibrium  (prices  and  output);  the  central point is - when markets are left unaltered,  it leads to maximum welfare of society because the   ‘invisible   hand’   is   working.   Hence   it provides  a theoretical  backing  to the idea of laissez faire or a free market.  

16. We withdraw  statement  3 which  is “The Constitution does not prescribe any qualifications    for    citizenship.”    It    can    be subject to multiple interpretations. The Constitution provides some basic criteria for citizenship    and    leaves    the    rest    to    be determined by the Parliament.  

50.  Answer  should  be  B,  instead  of  D.  Union 
of India constitutes only the states (not UTs). 

65.  Answer  should  be  “2  and  3  only”.  Article 
13  relates  to  Judicial  Review.  Article  19  is Right to Freedom. 

 Test 15 
26.   Answer   should   be   D,   instead   of   B. 
Narmada and tapi are major river basins.  
74. Please remove NOT from the Question statement.    J It   is   also   implied   by   the explanation. 

98.  Answer  should  be  B  instead  of  C,  as  also 
implied by the explanation.  

 

Test 16 

35. Answer should be D, instead of A. SLR can 
also be maintained in Cash. 

54. It should be “Who are eligible for election to  the  office  of  Vice-President”,   instead  of “Who are NOT eligible?”  J It is also implied by the explanation.  

64. Option D should be “2 only” and it should be  the  correct   answer.   List  system   is  not adopted in India. For Presidential elections, Single Transferable vote system is adopted. It is also implied by the explanation.  

81.  Statement  2  should  be  “Commonweal”, 
instead of “Commonwealth.”  

88. Statement 1 should be “Sharp Decline in growth   rate   of   rural   wages”,   instead   of “Sharp decline in rural wages.” 

92.  Answer  will  be  C,  instead  of  A,  as  also 
implied by the explanation.  

 
Test 18 

8. Answer  should  be A, instead  of C as also given   in  The   Hindu   Article   provided   as  a reference.  

10. Clarification – There are cases where a certain  tax,  say  Service  Tax  may  be  greater than Customs tax in the ESTIMATED BUDGET, but  lesser  in  REVISED  ESTIMATES.  The question   will   clarify   which   case   it   seeks answer to. In case, if you are asked to arrange the  taxes  in  decreasing  quantum  of collections, always use revised estimates. However, these details will not be asked. Only the quantum of the highest tax collected can be asked.  

48. Clarification – About Employment  rate – Correct   answer   is  A  as  also   given   in  the solution. Option C also MAY also seem correct as some aspirants have argued. But here is a catch.  Option  C says employment  rate to be “the  total  percentage  of people  employed  in the country  divided by the total working  age population”. However, NOT all working age population CAN WORK. The working age population    may    include    disabled    people, highly unskilled labour, unwilling adults, criminals  etc.  They  are  NOT  included  in  the calculation of employment growth rate.  

 

Test 17 

64.    Answer    should    be    B    as    per    the 
explanation. 

86.  Answer  should  be  A,  instead  of  D,  as  also 
given in the explanation. 

 

 

 
Test 19 

39. Only  Statement  1 is correct.  Uranus  and Venus   both   revolve   in   clockwise   direction around  the  sun  (when  earth’s  movement  is taken as anti-clockwise).  

63.   Only   statement   1   is   correct.   It   is   also 
implied by the explanation.  

84.  Answer  would  be  D  instead  of  B,  as  also 
implied in the explanation.  

 
Test 20 and Extra Test 

No Correction. 

 

Test 21 

16.  Answer  should  be A, instead  of D. Coral reefs grow in clear conditions, as also clear in the explanation. 

23.  Answer  will  be  D  instead  of  A. Temperature    changes    will   bring   pressure changes lowering the reading of barometer. 

48. Answer would be D instead of B.  

60. Answer should be D instead of C as also in 
the explanation. 

 

Test 22 

4. Answer should be B, instead of D as per the 
explanation.  

12. Clarification - The question  should  read, “Consider  the  following  about  the  temples made  in Dravidian  style  of temple architecture”,  instead  of  “Consider  the following about the Dravidian style of temple architecture”.  This is because  Dravidian  style can accommodate several shapes like square, wagon-vaulted,   horse-shoe  shaped.  But  the temple plan will always be square.  

16.  Only  correct  statements   are  2  and  3. Kiosks  are  found  both  in  Hindu  and  Indo- Islamic architecture.  

18.  Answer  should  be  B  instead  of  C,  as  also 
implied in the explanation.  

27. Answer should be C, instead of D as given in the explanation.  Naga painting  is found in Ajanta caves, not Ellora.  
32.  Option  D  should  be  “1,  2,  3,  4  only” instead  of “All  of the  above”.  Explanation  is correct.   

39. Clarification - An extensive system of shallow/short   roots   help   desert   plants   to capture soil water only a few hours after it has rained, thus utilizing water most effectively by not    allowing     water    to    seep    deep    in groundwater.  

57. Clarification – IGMSY does not aim at promoting  institutional  delivery.  That  is  the aim  of  Janani  Suraksha  Yojana.  Institutional delivery is incidental to IGMSY. 

60. Clarification  – In Parasitism,  one species the parasite, benefits at the expense of the other. In antibiosis, both organisms can harm each other.  

66.  Answer  should  be  D  instead  of  A,  as  also 
given in the explanation.  

81.  Answer  should  be  A,  instead  of  D,  as  per 
the explanation.  

90.  Answer  should  be  B,  instead  of  C  as  also 
implied in the explanation.   

 

Test 23 

11. Answer  should be B instead  of A. OECD concerns  itself  with  the member  nations.  Its policies, agreements, publications and every such other activity is targeted towards the welfare of its member nations. Incidentally, it also  contributes  to  world  development.  But that cannot be considered to be its mission. 

22. Option D should be “1 and 3 only”, instead 
of “All of the above”. Explanation is correct.  

51.  Answer  should  be  A  instead  of  C  as  also 
implied in the explanation. 
58. Clarification - In option A, it should be bio- capacity     of    the    environment,     not    the population. Rest is fine. 

 

Test 24 

4. Answer  should  be D, instead  of A. Clarification – Sea weeds can act as phyto- accumulators  by concentrating  heavy metals, PAHs   (Poly   Aromatic   Hydrocarbons),   PCBs (Poly Chlorinated Biphenols), and other toxins and pollutants from the water. 

13. Answer  should  be B instead  of D. Since the upper catchment  area of Kaveri  receives rainfall during the southwest monsoon season (summer) and the lower part during the northeast monsoon season (winter), the river carries water throughout the year with comparatively  less fluctuation  than the other Peninsular rivers. 

Extra Test 

No corrections.  

Test 25 

2.  Answer  should  be  A,  instead  of  D  as  also 
implied by the explanation. 

28. As implied by the explanation answer is A, 
not C.  

51.  Answer  should  be  D,  instead  of  B  as  also 
implied in the explanation. Also, a clarification 
–  Iron  is  a  micro-nutrient  for  plants  as  it  is only needed in small amounts. Too much iron can be toxic to plants. 

Test 26 

1.  Clarification   –  An  ordinance   cannot   be passed by the President  on grounds of ONLY public  interest  unless  any  one  or  both  the houses   are   in   recess.   That   is   the   ONLY 
condition to promulgate or re-promulgate and ordinance. There is no difference between the two  when  it  comes  to  procedural  matters. This applies even during the “Emergency”.  

5. Answer should be “None of the options” instead   of   D   (1   only).   It   is   as   per   the Explanation. 

36. Option C (which is also the correct answer) 
should be “1, 2, 3 and 5 only” instead of “1, 2, 
3 and 4 only”. It is as per the old numbering. Also,  a  minor  correction,  “runs”  instead  of “rund” in the question! J 

53. Option C should be “Ratio of body weight by square of body height” as also explained in the solution. 

75.  As  also  given  in  the  explanation,  answer 
should be C, instead of A (typo). 

96.  As  also  given  in  the  explanation,  answer 
should be C, instead of A (typo). 

 

Test 27 

17. The question statement is asking for “Correct”  options,  instead  of  “incorrect” (typo). You can also understand  this through the explanation. 

54- Clarification  - EIA is NOT concerned  with Social Impact Assessment. It is concerned with environmental and developmental impact assessment.      There      is      a      fundamental difference between these terminologies. 

97. Clarification  – There  is nothing  called  as bi-annual Parliamentary financial review (statement 3). How can it be an instrument of accountability? J 

 

 
Test 28 

7. All statements are correct, i.e. government insures crop against pest, adverse events, shortfall   in   yield   and   post-harvest    losses within a specified time. Answer should be 1, 2, 
3 and 4 – all, as also given in the explanation.  

31.  Clarification  -  In  the  statement  1, President    can   appoint   ‘anyone’    means   - anyone even outside of Parliament. Only a member  of  that  house  can  be  appointed  as Pro tem speaker. If we say, anyone can be appointed  as a minister  (for six months), the statement will be correct, because he can be literally anyone.  

45. As also implied by the explanation, answer 
should be D, instead of A. 

57. Option D should be “1 and 3 only”, instead of “2 and 3 only”. The correct answer is also implied by the explanation.  

66. Option  D should  be “1, 2, 3 and 4 only” instead of “1, 2 and 3 only”. And this will also be   the   right   answer   as   implied   by   the explanation. 

72.  Answer  should  be  B,  instead  of  A  as  also 
implied by the explanation. 

86. As implied by the explanation too, answer should be D instead  of A. “Enhancement”  of housing   means   improving   existing   housing infrastructure. 

 

Test 29 

24. As implied by the explanation too, answer 
should be B instead of A (typo). 

55. Clarification  – Both CAG and CEC cannot be reappointed. This provision has been made to      safeguard      the      independence      and impartiality  of  the  Office  (even  though  the 
Constitution has not specified the term of the CEC).    It    can    be    found    in    the    Election Commission Act, 1991.  

60.  Clarification  –  Swaraj  or  Self  rule  is  as much a political philosophy as an economic philosophy.  Both  cannot  exist  without  each other as per Gandhian thinking.  

63. Answer  should  be A instead  of D as per the explanation.  CPI does not include  all the goods that are covered by WPI.  

http://www.vakilno1.com/bareacts/laws/elec tion-commission-act-
1991.html#4_Term_of_office 

68. As also implied in the explanation, the answer should be C, instead of A. Orographic rain has nothing to do with Thunderstorms. 

83. Clarification - The Lucknow Pact also established cordial relations between the two prominent groups of the Indian National Congress  –  the  extremists  led  by  Bal Gangadhar  Tilak,  and  the  moderates  led  by Gopal Krishna Gokhale. It is not know only for the pact between Muslim league and INC. 

90.  Asiatic  elephants  are  “endangered”  as per  IUCN.  Correct  statements  should  be  1 and 3 only.  

 

Test 30 

30.   The   third   option   should   be   “3   only” instead of “1 and 3 only” (typo). Constituent assembly  was not elected  on universal  adult franchise, as implied in the explanation.  

33. The question statement should be “Which of the following CAN be forced on Indian citizens?” It was mentioned as “CAN NOT”. It is also implied in the explanation. 
35. Clarification – Some aspirants have asked whether PIL is a legal instrument or not? PIL is NOT a legal instrument. It is not enshrined in any Parliamentary Law.  

43.  Answer  should  be  A,  instead  of  D  as  also 
implied by the explanation.  

51. Option D should be “1 and 4 only” instead of “1 and 2 only”. Ashokan pillars are not monolithic and they have been erected in the Indian subcontinent (outside India too). 

56.  Statement  1  should  be  “Rainfall throughout the year.” Please remove “High” from it. 

64. The principal gases in Magma are all those as mentioned  in the explanation  – Methane, Carbon dioxide, water vapour and Sulphur dioxide.  So,  statements   1,  2,  3  and  4  are correct. None of the given options is correct. We apologize for the typo error. 

93. Answer should be C instead of D. Woods Dispatch emphasized on education in mother tongue for the natives. 

 

Test 31 

20. Answer should be A instead of D (typo). All major   rock-cut   schools   were   not   born   in Amaravati. How can they be? J  

21. All three statements are correct. Ken and Betwa both are tributaries of Yamuna River as also in the explanation.  

55. Answer should be C, not A. Section 66A of 
the IT Act has been repealed. 

86. In the explanation  there is a typo. “Time zone   of   a   place   is   decided   only   by   its longitude (NOT latitude).” 

 
Test 32 

3. Clarification - It is Maximum Retail Price (MRP),   not   Minimum   Retail   Price   in   the question statement. J 

47. Answer  should  be D instead  of A (typo). Ocean acidification affects coral reefs. With ocean acidification,  corals cannot  absorb the calcium carbonate they need to maintain their skeletons.  

70. Clarification  - Instead of the term “keeps narrowing till it reaches the top”, it should be “keeps  narrowing  rapidly  till  it  reaches  the top”. Only if it reduces rapidly there is a high chance   that   Country   X   will   not   have   an increasing   population.   If  it  simply  reduces, there are chances that Country X will have an increasing   population.   Correct   answer   will remain D with the above modification.  

99. Answer should be A instead of D (typo). 

100. Answer should be C instead of A (typo). 


  

Test 33 

We  will  try  to  address  all  the  doubts/queries 
raised at the discussion page itself.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

---CONCLUDED--- 
