Insights Mock tests – 2015: Test 27 Solutions



1.  Solution: c)

http://www.fssai.gov.in/AboutFSSAI/introduction.aspx

http://www.ndtv.com/india-news/nestle-approaches-bombay-high-court-against-
fssai-maharashtra-fda-order-770688

It has been established under Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 which consolidates various acts & orders that have hitherto handled food related issues in various Ministries and Departments. FSSAI has been created for laying down science based standards for articles of food and to regulate their manufacture, storage, distribution, sale and import to ensure availability of safe and wholesome food for human consumption.

Various central Acts like Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 , Fruit Products Order , 1955, Meat Food Products Order , 1973, Vegetable Oil Products (Control) Order, 1947,Edible Oils Packaging (Regulation)Order  1988, Solvent Extracted Oil, De- Oiled Meal and Edible Flour (Control) Order, 1967, Milk and Milk Products Order, 1992 etc were repealed after commencement of FSS Act, 2006.




2.  Solution: a)

Anti-dumping duty is imposed by government on imported products which have prices less than their normal values or domestic price.

Usually countries initiate anti-dumping probes to check if domestic industry has been hurt because of a surge in below-cost imports.

Anti-Dumping Duty is imposed under the multilateral WTO regime and varies from product to product and from country to country.

In India, anti-dumping duty is recommended by the Union Ministry of Commerce, while the Union Finance Ministry imposes it.



3.  Solution: c)

The Constitution (119th Amendment) Bill has been passed by the Parliament of India on 7th May 2015.While India will gain 510 acres of land, ten thousand acres of land will notionally go to Bangladesh. However, these are remote enclaves which India cannot access. This legislation will redraw India‘s boundary with Bangladesh by exchanging enclaves in Assam, West Bengal, Tripura and Meghalaya.

Implications of the agreement are:



http://www.insightsonindia.com                           INSIGHTS                                                               Page 1
Insights Mock tests – 2015: Test 27 Solutions


    It will secure the long stranded boundary and enable to curb the illegal migration, smuggling and criminal acts cross the border.
    It would help those stateless citizens by granting the citizenship from their
respective countries.
    It would help settle the boundary dispute at several points in Meghalaya, Tripura, Assam, and west Bengal.
    It would improve the access to the underdeveloped north -eastern state and
would further enhance the developmental works in the region.
    It would help to increase the connectivity with the south -east Asia as part of
India‘s North-eastern policy.



4.  Solution: a)

Recently Union Home Ministry has appointed Senior IPS Officer RC Tayal as the new Director General (DG) of India‘s elite counter-terror force National Security Guard (NSG).


It also nodal agency for counter-terror and counter-hijack operations and later was tasked to protect high-risk VVIPs. It operates under the oversight of the Ministry of Home Affairs and is headed by the Director General of the Indian Police Service (IPS).

The NSG members are also known as Black Cats because of the black drill cotton coveralls and balaclavas or helmets they wear.



5.  Solution: a)

http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/health/us-doctors-perform-worlds-first- skullscalp-transplant/article7285933.ece

Organ transplantation  is the moving of an organ from one body to another or from a donor site to another location on the person's own body, to replace the recipient's damaged or absent organ.

Organs that can be transplanted are
the heart, kidneys, liver, lungs, pancreas, intestine, and thymus. Tissues include bones, tendons (both referred to as musculoskeletal grafts),cornea, skin, heart valves, nerves and veins.

Organ donors may be living, brain dead, or dead via circulatory death.




6.  Solution: b)

http://www.insightsonindia.com                           INSIGHTS                                                               Page 2
Insights Mock tests – 2015: Test 27 Solutions


Under the nationwide campaign a village with acute water scarcity on a pilot project will be selected as Jal Gram.

In this identified village a comprehensive integrated development plan will be framed and several water conservation activities will be launched.

Activities proposed under the campaign include rain water harvesting, recycling of waste water, micro irrigation for using water efficiently and mass awareness program. Along with it, a cadre of local water professional Jal Mitra will be created and they will be given training to create mass awareness.

As pilot project, activities under this nation campaign will be run in one water stressed village in each 672 districts in the country.




7.  Solution: b)

Al-Biruni‘s Kitab-ul-Hind, written in Arabic, is simple and lucid. It is a voluminous text, divided into 80 chapters on subjects such as religion and philosophy, festivals, astronomy, alchemy, manners and customs, social life, weights and measures, iconography, laws and metrology. Generally (though not always), Al-Biruni adopted a distinctive structure in each chapter, beginning with a question, following this up with a description based on Sanskritic traditions, and concluding with a comparison with other cultures. Some present-day scholars have argued that this almost geometric structure, remarkable for its precision and predictability, owed much to his mathematical orientation. Al-Biruni, who wrote in Arabic, probably intended his work for peoples living along the frontiers of the subcontinent. He was familiar with translations and adaptations of Sanskrit, Pali and Prakrit texts into Arabic – these ranged from fables to works on astronomy and medicine. However, he was also critical about the ways in which these texts were written, and clearly wanted to improve on them.




8.  Solution: c)

Recently, India has lost a poultry case against United States at World Trade Organization (WTO) after WTO‘s Dispute Settlement Board (DSB) ruled that India‘s ban on import of poultry meat, eggs and live pigs from US is inconsistent with the international norms.

India had banned imports of various agriculture products including poultry me at and eggs from the US in 2007.





http://www.insightsonindia.com                           INSIGHTS                                                               Page 3
Insights Mock tests – 2015: Test 27 Solutions


These poultry products were banned as a precautionary measure to prevent outbreaks of Avian Influenza and bird flu fears. In March 2012, US had dragged India to the WTO for banning these products and  had  contended India‘s import prohibition saying that it was not based on the relevant international standard or on a scientific risk assessment.

Earlier in October 2014 WTO Appellate Body had ruled in favour of US and clearly mentioned that India‘s ban  measures are arbitrarily and unjustifiably discrimination on international trade and constitutes a disguised restriction on it.

Protectionism (saving domestic industries) is a clear violation of WTO rules.



9.  Solution: b)

Refer to this article. It has been explained beautifully http://www.investopedia.com/articles/investing/082113/understanding -interest-
rates-nominal-real-and-effective.asp

You should also know that the higher is the difference between the real and nominal rates; the less profitable is the lending business to the bank.




10.            Solution: a)

Corporate farming is a term used to describe companies that own or influence farms and agricultural practices on a large scale. This includes not only corporate ownership of farms and selling of agricultural products, but also the roles of these companies in influencing agricultural education, research, and public policy through funding initiatives and lobbying efforts.

Contract farming- In contrast, Farming contracts are agreements between a farmer and a buyer that stipulates what the farmer will grow and how much they will grow usually in return for guaranteed purchase of the product or financial support in purchase of inputs (e.g. feed for livestock growers).




11. Solution: c)

François Bernier (25 September 1620 – 22 September 1688) was a French physician and traveller. He was born at Joué-Etiau in Anjou. He was briefly personal physician to Prince Dara Shikoh, the elder son of Shah Jahan, and after Dara Shikoh's fall was attached to the court of the Emperor Aurangzeb for around 12 years during his stay
in India.




http://www.insightsonindia.com                           INSIGHTS                                                               Page 4
Insights Mock tests – 2015: Test 27 Solutions


His 1684 publication  Nouvelle division de la terre par les différentes espèces ou races qui l'habitent is considered the first published post-Classical classification of humans into distinct races. He also wrote Travels in the Mughal Empire, which is mainly about the reigns of Dara Shikoh and Aurangzeb. It is based on his own extensive journeys and observations, and on information from eminent Mughal courtiers who had witnessed the events at first hand.




12. Solution: a)

African countries have signed a historic The Tripartite Free Trade Area (TFTA) that facilitates creation of Africa‘s largest free-trade zone.


















































http://www.insightsonindia.com                           INSIGHTS                                                               Page 5
Insights Mock tests – 2015: Test 27 Solutions




13. Solution: d)

The following are denied to foreign citizens, also called aliens:

    Right against discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth (Article 15).
    Right to equality of opportunity in the matter of public employment (Article
16).
    Right to freedom of speech and expression, assembly, association, movement, residence and profession (Article 19).
    Cultural and educational rights (Articles 29 and 30).
    Right to vote in elections to the Lok Sabha and state legislative assembly.
    Right to contest for the membership of the Parliament and the state legislature.
    Eligibility to hold certain public offices, that is, President of India, Vice-
President of India, judges of the Supreme Court and the high courts, governor of states, attorney general of India and advocate general of states.






14. Solution: d)

Climate refers to the sum total of weather conditions and variations over a large area for a long period of time (more than thirty years). Weather refers to the state of the atmosphere over an area at any point of time. The elements of weather and climate are the same, i.e. temperature, atmospheric pressure, wind, humidity and precipitation.




15. Solution: c)

The 1919 act divided the provincial subjects into two parts — transferred and reserved.

The transferred subjects were to be administered by the governor with the aid of ministers responsible to the legislative Council.

The reserved subjects, on the other hand, were to be administered by the governor and his executive council without being responsible to the legislative Council.






http://www.insightsonindia.com                           INSIGHTS                                                               Page 6
Insights Mock tests – 2015: Test 27 Solutions


This dual scheme of governance was known as - ‗dyarchy‘ - a term derived from the Greek word di-arche which means double rule. However, this experiment was largely unsuccessful.




16. Solution: a)

When the President‘s rule is imposed in a state, the Parliament becomes empowered to make laws with respect to any matter in the State List in relation to that state. A law made so by the Parliament continues to be operative even after the president‘s rule.

All the decisions concerning the state emanate from the President based on the advice given by Council of Ministers.

The state legislature is also either suspended or dissolved.




17. Solution: d)

In introducing the Permanent Settlement, British officials hoped to resolve the problems they had been facing since the conquest of Bengal. By the 1770s, the rural economy in Bengal was in crisis, with recurrent famines and declining agricultural output. Officials felt that agriculture, trade and the revenue resources of the state could all be developed by encouraging investment in agriculture. This could be done by securing rights of property and permanently fixing the rates of revenue demand. If the revenue demand of the state was permanently fixed, then the Company could
look forward to a regular flow of revenue, while entrepreneurs could feel sure of earning a profit from their investment, since the state would not siphon it off by increasing its claim. The process, officials hoped, would lead to the emergence of a class of yeomen farmers and rich landowners who would have the capital and enterprise to improve agriculture. Nurtured by the British, this class would also be loyal to the Company.






18.Solution: d)

Union Government has launched IAP HealthPhone programme, world‘s largest
digital mass education programme to address malnutrition in women and children.


This programme is initiative of Indian Academy of Pediatrics (IAP) in partnership with Union Ministry of Women and Child Development (WCD); United Nations


http://www.insightsonindia.com                           INSIGHTS                                                               Page 7
Insights Mock tests – 2015: Test 27 Solutions


Children‘s Fund (UNICEF); Supported by Vodafone India. It is a public-private partnership (PPP) initiative that seeks to educate over 6 million girls and women between 13 and 35 years of age and their families on better health and nutrition practices by 2018 by leveraging penetration of mobile phones in the country. It will promote and distribute four re-edited videos from the Poshan (nutritional videos) series in 18 Indian languages, which are jointly produced by Union Ministry WCD and UNICEF.


The three-year intensive awareness campaign under IAP HealthPhone programme is expected to benefit to improve health of around 60 million children born by 2025 in India and  also play important transformative role in India‘s fight aga inst malnutrition.




19.  Solution: b)

Mandamus literally means ‗we command‘. It is a command issued by the court to a public official asking him to perform his official duties that he has failed or refused to perform. It can also be issued against any public body, a corporation, an inferior court, a tribunal or government for the same purpose.

The writ of mandamus cannot be issued (a) against a private individual or body; (b) to enforce departmental instruction that does not possess statutory force; (c) when the duty is discretionary and not mandatory; (d) to enforce a contractual obligation; (e) against the president of India or the state governors; and (f) against the chief justice of a high court acting in judicial capacity.






20.           Solution: d)

GNP is basically GDP plus net factor income from abroad (NFIA).

NFIA includes imports, exports, remittances etc. So any change in them will immediately change the GNP.

Moreover, lower interest rates in the economy encourage consumption and boost capital investment leading to a higher GDP (hence GNP) in the short-run.




21. Solution: d)

Article 355: Duty of the Union to protect States against external aggression and internal disturbance - It shall be the duty of the Union to protect every State against

http://www.insightsonindia.com                           INSIGHTS                                                               Page 8
Insights Mock tests – 2015: Test 27 Solutions


external aggression and internal disturbance and to ensure that the government of every State is carried on in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution.

Article 365: Article 365 says that where any state has failed to comply with (or to give effect to) any directions given by the Centre, it will be lawful for the President to hold that a situation has arisen in which the government of the state cannot be carried on in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution. It means tha t, in such a situation, the President‘s rule can be imposed in the state under Article 356.




22.            Solution: b)

British General Charles Cornwallis, the 2nd Earl Cornwallis, was appointed in February 1786 to serve as both Commander-in-Chief  of British India and Governor of the Presidency of Fort William, also known as the Bengal Presidency. Based in Calcutta, he oversaw the consolidation of British control over much of peninsular India, setting the stage for the British Raj. He was also instrumental in enacting administrative and legal reforms that fundamentally altered civil administration and land management practices in India. According to historian Jerry Dupont,
Cornwallis was responsible for "laying the foundation for British rule throughout
India and setting standards for the services, courts, and revenue collection that remained remarkably unaltered almost to the end of the British era."




23.            Solution: b)

Scientific forestry is the science of managing forests. It was a system introduced in the colonial times.

Plantation crops were introduced by replacing the local forests with one type of trees introduced in a row.

Moreover, the forests were surveyed by officials and various plans were made for better forest management.

Essentially, the main goal is to create and implement systems that allow forests to continue a sustainable continuation of environmental supplies and services. The challenge is to create systems that are socially accepted while sustaining the resource and any other resources that might be affected.




24.             Solution: a)

The Battle of Karnal (February 24, 1739 was a decisive victory for Nader Shah, the emperor of the Iranian Afsharid dynasty during his invasion of India. The Shah's

http://www.insightsonindia.com                           INSIGHTS                                                               Page 9
Insights Mock tests – 2015: Test 27 Solutions


forces defeated the army of Muhammad Shah which was roughly six times the size of his own in what is regarded as the crowning achievement in a spectacular military career. the Indian army was lured into battle in segments and defeated in detail, in little more than three hours, paving the way for the Afsharid sack of Delhi. The battle took place near Karnal, 110 kilometres (68 mi) north of Delhi, India.

Aurangzeb had died in 1707 itself. Hence statement 1 is wrong.




25.            Solution: a)

Read the mechanism here http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/cyclone- ashobaa-slows-monsoon-progress-india

The southwest monsoon winds have entered east and northeast India. Heavy rains have already been reported in Arunachal Pradesh, Assam and Meghalaya.




26.            Solution: d)

Monetary Authority:

     Formulates, implements and monitors the monetary policy.

     Objective: maintaining price stability and ensuring adequate flow of credit to productive sectors.

Regulator and supervisor of the financial system:

     Prescribes broad parameters of banking operations within which the country's banking and financial system functions.

     Objective: maintain public confidence in the system, protect depositors' interest and provide cost-effective banking services to the public.

Manager of Foreign Exchange

     Manages the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999.

     Objective: to facilitate external trade and payment and promote orderly development and maintenance of foreign exchange market in India.

Issuer of currency:

     Issues and exchanges or destroys currency and coins not fit for circulation.

     Objective: to give the public adequate quantity of supplies of currency notes and coins and in good quality.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                           INSIGHTS                                                            Page 10
Insights Mock tests – 2015: Test 27 Solutions


Developmental role

     Performs a wide range of promotional functions to support national objectives.

Related Functions

     Banker to the Government: performs merchant banking function for the central and the state governments; also acts as their banker.

     Banker to banks: maintains banking accounts of all scheduled banks.




27.            Solution: d)

Read the link for understanding the issue.

http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/environment -ministry-may-allow-hunting- nuisance-wild-animals

The Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change (MoEFCC) is planning to allow the legitimate hunting of wild animals such as blue bulls (nilgai) and wild boars to tackle man-animal conflict.

According to environment minister Prakash Javadekar, the ministry is mulling the implementation of an office memorandum passed in December last year, which states that wild animals which destroy crops should be treated as vermins. However, the ministry‘s move has drawn flak from animal rights groups.




28.            Solution: b)

Maanikavasagar was a 9th-century Tamil poet who wrote Tiruvasakam, a book of Shaiva hymns. Manikkavasakar was one of the main authors of saivite tirumurai: his work forms one volume of the Tirumurai, the key religious text of Tamil Shaiva Siddhanta. A minister to the Pandya king Varagunavarman  II (c. 862 C.E. – 885
C.E.) (also called Arimarthana Pandiyan), he lived in Madurai. His work is a poetic
expression of the joy of God-experience, the anguish of being separated from God. Although he is a prominent saint in Southern India, he is not counted among the sixty-three nayanars.




29.            Solution: b)

The trade winds are the prevailing pattern of easterly surface winds found in the tropics, within the lower portion of the Earth's atmosphere, in the lower section of

http://www.insightsonindia.com                           INSIGHTS                                                            Page 11
Insights Mock tests – 2015: Test 27 Solutions


the troposphere near the Earth's equator. The trade winds blow predominantly from the northeast in the Northern Hemisphere and from the southeast in the Southern Hemisphere, strengthening during the winter and when the Arctic oscillation is in its warm phase. Historically, the trade winds have been used by captains of sailing ships to cross the world's oceans for centuries, and enabled European empire expansion into the Americas and trade routes to become established across the Atlantic and Pacific oceans.




30.           Solution: d)

Tax expenditures are revenue losses attributable to tax provisions that often result from the use of the tax system to promote social goals without incurring direct expenditures.

Income tax provisions generally seek to promote one or more of three broad objectives: measuring income accurately, distributing fiscal benefits and burdens based on a household‘s ability to pay, and  promoting activities or behavior that are considered socially desirable. Tax expenditures are tax provisions that are not structural features of the income tax or necessary to measure income accurately.




31. Solution: d)

Printing money is more or less always inflationary if not backed up immediately with supply side augmentations.

Rupee depreciation feeds in the cost of our imports especially making oil costlier. This impacts the vital transportation sector from where inflation is fed in other sectors of the economy too quickly.

High tax rebates quickly increase the purchasing power of the citizens. This leads to higher demand, and if not backed by greater supply, will lead to inflationary pressures.




32.            Solution: a)

It has been explained here. Giving the account of the crisis here would be difficult.

http://www.educationworld.com/a_lesson/explaining -the-greek-economic-crisis- with-students.shtml

Also read the introduction of this article https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Greek_government-debt_crisis


http://www.insightsonindia.com                           INSIGHTS                                                            Page 12
Insights Mock tests – 2015: Test 27 Solutions


No need to read in-depth. Just get a general idea.




33.            Solution: c)

Subsidiary Alliance was a system devised by Lord Wellesley in 1798. All those who entered into such an alliance with the British had to accept certain terms and conditions: (a) The British would be responsible for protecting their ally from external and internal threats to their power. (b) In the territory of the ally, a British armed contingent would be stationed. (c) The ally would have to provide the resources for maintaining this contingent. (d) The ally could enter into agreements with other rulers or engage in warfare only with the permission of the British.




34.            Solution: b)

A non-bank financial institution (NBFI) is a financial institution that does not have a full banking license or is not supervised by a national or international banking regulatory agency. NBFIs facilitate bank-related financial services, such
as investment, risk pooling, contractual savings, and market brokering. Examples of
these include insurance firms, pawn shops, cashier's check issuers, check
cashing locations, payday lending, currency exchanges, and microloan organizations.

They provide "multiple alternatives to transform an economy's savings into capital investment [which] act as backup facilities should the primary form of intermediation fail.




35.            Solution: a)

http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/rising-sea-levels-could-force-marine-life- towards-poles

Rising sea temperatures caused by global climate change could drive many marine creatures away from the Equator, but their move toward the poles promises to put them in peril in habitats that are smaller and less hospitable.




36.            Solution: a)

The western cyclonic disturbances are weather phenomena of the winter months brought in by the westerly flow from the Mediterranean region. They usually
influence the weather of the north and north -western regions of India.



http://www.insightsonindia.com                           INSIGHTS                                                            Page 13
Insights Mock tests – 2015: Test 27 Solutions


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Western_Disturbance

http://www.skymetweather.com/content/weather -faqs/what-is-western- disturbance/




37.            Solution: a)

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_Network_of_Biosphere_Reserves_in_Asia_a
nd_the_Pacific#India

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_Network_of_Biosphere_Reserves




38.            Solution: d)

An 'Endemic Species' is one that is only found in that region and nowhere else in the world. As such they are of conservation concern because they are not widespread and may be confined to only one or two protected areas.

Sal and wild mango are two examples of endemic flora of the Pachmarhi Biosphere Reserve. Bison, Indian giant squirrel and flying squirrel are endemic fauna of this area.

Destruction of their habitat, increasing population an d introduction of new species may affect the natural habitat of endemic species and endanger their existence.




39.            Solution: d)

In some women oviducts are blocked. These women are unable to bear babies because sperms cannot reach the egg for fertilization. In such cases, doctors collect freshly released egg and sperms and keep them together for a few hours for IVF or in vitro fertilization (fertilization outside the body).

In case fertilization occurs, the zygote is allowed to develop for about a week and then it is placed in the mother‘s uterus.

Complete development takes place in the uterus and the baby is born like any other baby. Babies born through this technique are called test -tube babies. This term is
actually misleading because babies cannot grow in test tubes.








http://www.insightsonindia.com                           INSIGHTS                                                            Page 14
Insights Mock tests – 2015: Test 27 Solutions


40.           Solution: c)

In Mahayana and Vajrayana Buddhism, Marici is a deva or bodhisattva associated with light and the sun. She is known as Molizhitian or Molizhitian Pusa in China and Marishi-ten in Japan and in Tibetan as 'Odzer Canma, "Woman Endowed with Rays of Light" (Wylie: 'od zer can ma). She is one of the 20 (or 24). In Taoism and Chinese folk religion, Marici is known under the epithet of the Lady of Dipper Mother; or Doumu, a name sometimes used by Buddhists.






41. Solution: c)

Some gases preven t the escape of heat from the Earth. An increase in the percentage of such gases in the atmosphere would cause the average temperatures to increase worldwide and this is called the greenhouse effect.

Carbon dioxide is one of the greenhouse gases. An increa se in the carbon dioxide content in the atmosphere would cause more heat to be retained by the atmosphere and lead to global warming.

Ozone concentration has no relation with the amount of carbon dioxide.




42.            Solution: a)

The study has mentioned that population this bird species which is also known as the
―rice bird‖ in China has plunged by 90 percent since  1980 and  disappearing from
Eastern Europe, Japan and parts of Russia.












The main reason mentioned in the study for decline of songbirds is illegal hunting for food and sold on the black market in China.

It should be noted that Yellow-breasted buntings is Eurasian passerine bird that belongs to the bunting family (Emberizidae). It is migratory bird wintering in south -
east Asia, India, and southern China.




http://www.insightsonindia.com                           INSIGHTS                                                            Page 15
Insights Mock tests – 2015: Test 27 Solutions


43.            Solution: a)

In the Fourth Anglo-Mysore War, the combined forces of the British East India
Company and the Nizam of Hyderabad defeated Tipu, and he was killed on 4 May
1799 while defending his fort of Srirangapatna.




44.            Solution: c)

The CVC is headed by a Central Vigilance Commissioner and has two Vigilance
Commissioners.

President Pranab Mukherjee has appointed KV Chowdary new Central Vigilance
Commissioner.

Central Vigilance Commissioner and has two Vigilance Commissioners are appointed by President on the recommendations of select committee comprising of Prime Minister as Chairperson, Union Minister of Home Affairs and Leader of the second largest party in the Lok Sabha or majority group leader in parliament.

Its function is to monitor all vigilance activity under the Union Government and advise various authorities in Union Government organizations in planning, executing, reviewing and reforming their vigilance work.




45.            Solution: a)

One or two episodes from Mahabharata are chosen for the night‘s performance. The main singer continuously sits throughout the performance and with powerful singing and symbolic gestures he assumes all the characters of the episode one after another.

Pankida is sung by the peasants of Rajasthan while doing work in the fields, the peasants sing and speak while playing algoza and manjira. The literal meaning of the word ‗Pankhida‘ is lover.




46.            Solution: c)

On the basis of the availability of water, these forests are further divided into moist and dry deciduous. The former is found in areas receiving rainfall between 200 and
100 cm. These forests exist, therefore, mostly in the eastern part of the country –
northeastern states, along the foothills of the Himalayas, Jharkhand, West Orissa and Chhattisgarh, and on the eastern slopes of the Western Ghats. Teak is the most dominant species of this forest. Bamboos, sal, shisham, sandalwood, khair, kusum,
arjun, mulberry are other commercially important species.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                           INSIGHTS                                                            Page 16
Insights Mock tests – 2015: Test 27 Solutions




47.            Solution: d)

The ocean crust rocks are much younger than the continental rocks. The age of rocks in the oceanic crust is nowhere more than 200 million years old. Some of the continental rock formations are as old as 3,200 million old.

This is due to sea floor spreading. Lava from deep in the ocean comes out on the surface creating new sediments on the ocean floor.

Constant eruptions at the crest of oceanic ridges cause the rupture of the oceanic crust and the new lava wedges into it, pushing the oceanic crust on either side. The ocean floor, thus spreads.

So, Rocks closer to the mid-oceanic ridges are normal polarity and are the youngest. The age of the rocks increases as one moves away from the crest.






48.            Solution: c)

After 11 years, Sundaram Ravi became the first Indian after S. Venkataraghavan  to be inducted in the International Cricket Council‘s (ICC) Elite Panel of Umpires
following an annual review and selection process.

The Emirates Elite Panel of ICC Umpires was selected by the ICC Umpires Selection Panel consisting of Chairman, Geoff Allardice, ICC‘s General Manager – Cricket, ICC Chief Match Referee Ranjan Madugalle, ex-England player and coach and umpire, David Lloyd, and Srinivas Venkataraghavan,  the former India captain and international umpire.

http://www.icc-cricket.com/news/2015/media-releases/88126/icc-announces- emirates-elite-panel-of-icc-umpires-for-2015-2016

http://www.thehindu.com/sport/cricket/ravi-inducted-into-icc-elite-panel-of-
umpires/article7282542.ece




49.            Solution: b)

There are sixteen nutrients which are essential for plants.

Air supplies carbon and oxygen, hydrogen comes from water, and soil supplies the other thirteen nutrients to plants.



http://www.insightsonindia.com                           INSIGHTS                                                            Page 17
Insights Mock tests – 2015: Test 27 Solutions


As far as other nutrients are concerned, here is a very important table.





50.            Solution: c)

Kālīghāṭ painting, short-lived style of watercolour painting produced in the 19th century in India by artists in the Calcutta marketplace for sale to pilgrims visiting the Kālīghāṭ temple. The style is characterized by broad sweeping brush lines, bold colours, and simplification of forms suitable for their mass production. The
paintings, usually 17 by 11 inches (43 by 28 centimetres), were done on blank sheets,
with no attempt made to fill in the backgrounds.

Most usually depicted were the popular Hindu deities, but scenes of contemporary life are also found. The school, which rose in response to the competition of cheap coloured lithographs, soon lost the contest and disappeared rapidly. The charm and vigour  of Kālīghāṭ painting had an influence on a number of modern Indian painters, as can be seen in the work of Jamini Roy.




51. Solution: b)

The name Pakistan or Pak-stan is coined by a Punjabi Muslim student at Cambridge, Choudhry Rehmat Ali.




52.            Solution: a)

http://khoyapaya.gov.in/mpp/home

Khoya Paya is joint initiative of the Union Ministry of Women and Child Development (WCD) and the Department of Electronics and Information Technology (DeitY). The first-of-its-kind web portal will serve as a platform for people to not only report a missing child but also track the efforts towards his or her
recovery.






http://www.insightsonindia.com                           INSIGHTS                                                            Page 18
Insights Mock tests – 2015: Test 27 Solutions


The website will also provide links to court orders wherein police have been mandated to register an FIR in the matter of a child gone missing and treat it as either abduction or trafficking unless it is proved otherwise in the investigation.




53.            Solution: d)

Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has reduced the policy repo rate under the liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) by 25 basis points from 7.5 per cent to 7.25 per cent with immediate effect.

The concept of repo rate has been covered in previous tests. You should understand its consequences here http://blog.bankbazaar.com/rbi-repo-cut-how-it-affects-your- loans-and-deposits/




54.            Solution: c)

An environmental impact assessment (EIA) is an assessment of the possible impacts that a proposed project may have on the environment, consisting of
the environmental, social and economic aspects. The purpose of the assessment is to ensure that decision makers consider the environmental impacts when deciding whether or not to proceed with a project.

The International Association for Impact Assessment (IAIA) defines an environmental impact assessment as "the process of identifying, predicting, evaluating and mitigating the biophysical, social, and other relevant effects of development proposals prior to major decisions being taken and commitments made."

EIAs are unique in that they do not require adheren ce to a predetermined environmental outcome, but rather they require decision makers to account for environmental values in their decisions and to justify those decisions in light of detailed environmental studies and public comments on the potential envi ronmental impacts.

PIB Features




55.            Solution: c)

There were many reasons why the British took upon themselves the task of town planning from the early years of their rule in Bengal. One immediate reason was
defence. In 1756, Sirajudaula, the Nawab of Bengal, attacked Calcutta and sacked the


http://www.insightsonindia.com                           INSIGHTS                                                            Page 19
Insights Mock tests – 2015: Test 27 Solutions


small fort which the British traders had built as their depot for goods. The English East India Company traders had been continuously questioning the sovereignty of the Nawab. They were reluctant to pay customs duties, and refused to comply with the terms on which they were expected to operate. So Sirajudaula wanted to assert his authority.

Subsequently, in 1757, when Sirajudaula was defeated in the Battle of Plassey, the East India Company decided to build a new fort, one that could not be easily attacked. Calcutta had grown from three villages called Sutanati, Kolkata and Govindapur. The Company cleared a site in the southernmost village of Govindapur and the traders and weavers living there were asked to move out. Around the new Fort William they left a vast open space which came to be locally known as the Maidan or garer-math.

This was done so that there would be no obstructions to a straight line of fire from the Fort against an advancing enemy army. Once the British became more confident about their permanent presence in Calcutta, they started moving out of the Fort and building residences along the periphery of the Maidan. That was how the English settlement in Calcutta gradually started taking shape. The vast open spa ce around the Fort (which still exists) became a landmark, Calcutta‘s first significant town planning measure.




56.            Solution: a)

These committees present their report to the House or to the Speaker / Chairman. They have a secretariat provided by the Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha.

The consultative committees, which also consist of members of Parliament, are not parliamentary committees as they do not fulfill these conditions.

The Constitution of India makes a mention of these committees at different places, but without making any specific provisions regarding their composition, tenure, functions, etc. All these matters are dealt by the rules of two Houses.




57.Solution: b)

http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/green -climate-fund-racing-get-its-show- road-cop-21

The Green Climate Fund (GCF) is a fund within the framework of
the UNFCCC founded as a mechanism to redistribute money from the developed to the developing world, in order to assist the developing countries
in adaptation and mitigation practices to counter climate change. The GCF is based

http://www.insightsonindia.com                           INSIGHTS                                                            Page 20
Insights Mock tests – 2015: Test 27 Solutions


in the new Songdo district of Incheon, South Korea. It is governed by a Board of 24 members and initially supported by an Interim Secretariat.




58.             Solution: a)

The Sambhar Salt Lake, India's largest inland salt lake, a bowl shape lake encircles historical Sambhar Lake Town located 96 km south west of the city of Jaipur (Northwest India) and 64 km north east of Ajmer along National Highway 8 in Rajasthan.




59.            Solution: d)

Articles 52 to 78 in part V of the Constitution deal with the Union Executive.

The Union executive consists of the President, the Vice -President, the Prime
Minister, the council of ministers and the attorney general of India.

Even though other officials are a part of the executive branch of the government, the constitution does not mention them explicitly.




60.           Solution: d)

Article 75 says only that the Prime Minister shall be appointed by the president.

However, this does not imply that the president is free to appoint any one as the Prime Minister. In accordance with the conventions of the parliamentary system of government, the President has to appoint the leader of the majority party in the Lok Sabha as the Prime Minister. But, when no party has a clear majority in the Lok Sabha, then the President may exercise his personal discretion in the selection and appointment of the Prime Minister.

Moreover, the PM can be a member of any of the houses.




61. Solution: d)

Fiscal deficit need not always be inflationary.

If enhanced government spending is supplemented by supply increases, it can actually lead to greater economic growth and low inflation.





http://www.insightsonindia.com                           INSIGHTS                                                            Page 21
Insights Mock tests – 2015: Test 27 Solutions


Supply side bottlenecks are caused by low government spending or neglect; low gross capital formation; and lack of private sector participa tion in creating infrastructure.




62.            Solution: d)

Gene therapy is an experimental technique that uses genes to treat or prevent disease. In the future, this technique may allow doctors to treat a disorder by inserting a gene into a patient‘s cells instead of using drugs or surgery. For e.g. it can be used to treat developmental defects in a child/embryo.

Correction of a genetic defect involves delivery of a normal gene into the individual or embryo to take over the function of and compensate for the non-functional gene.

Although gene therapy is a promising treatment option for a number of diseases (including inherited disorders, some types of cancer, and certain viral infections), the technique remains risky and is still under study to make sure that it will be safe and effective. Gene therapy is currently only being tested for the treatment of diseases that have no other cures.




63.            Solution: d)

As per recently published study, camels aged less than four years might be a major source of Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS). The study was published in the journal Emerging Infectious Diseases.

Refer to https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Middle_East_respiratory_syndrome_coronavirus#E
volution

http://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/262538.php




64.            Solution: c)

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vachana_sahitya

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nayanars




65.            Solution: c)

For drinking purposes, water should be tested for fluoride ion concentration.



http://www.insightsonindia.com                           INSIGHTS                                                            Page 22
Insights Mock tests – 2015: Test 27 Solutions


Its deficiency in drinking water is harmful to man and causes diseases such as tooth decay etc. The F– ions make the enamel on teeth much harder.

However, F– ion concentration above 2 ppm causes brown mottling of teeth. At the same time, excess fluoride (over 10 ppm) causes harmful effect to bones and teeth, as reported from some parts of Rajasthan.

The maximum limit of nitrate in drinking water is 50 ppm. Excess nitrate (not fluoride) in drinking water can cause disease such  as methemoglobinemia (‗blue baby‘ syndrome).




66.            Solution: d)

The autotrophs capture the energy present in sunlight and convert it into chemical energy. This energy supports all the activities of the living world.

From autotrophs, the energy goes to the heterotrophs and decomposers when one form of energy is changed to another, some energy is lost to the environment in forms which cannot be used again.

When green plants are eaten by primary consumers, a great deal of energy is lost as heat to the environment, some amount goes into digestion and in doing work and the rest goes towards growth and reproduction. An average of 10% of the food eaten is turned into its own body and made available for the next level of consumers.




67.            Solution: b)

Monetary policy review falls under the RBI, which is not the government. It acts independently of the government in deciding monetary policy.

Fiscal stimulus means greater flow of government spending in productive sectors. It boosts growth.

Welfare transfers augment the earnings of poor households providing them with economic security as well as enhanced purchasing power which leads to more demand and higher economic growth.




68.            Solution: d)

The SDR is an international reserve asset, created by the IMF in 1969 to supplement
its member countries‘ official reserves.




http://www.insightsonindia.com                           INSIGHTS                                                            Page 23
Insights Mock tests – 2015: Test 27 Solutions


Its value is based on a basket of four key international currencies, and SDRs can be exchanged for freely usable currencies.

The SDR is neither a currency, nor a claim on the IMF. Rather, it is a potential claim on the freely usable currencies of IMF members. Holders of SDRs can obtain these currencies in exchange for their SDRs in two ways: first, through the arrangement of voluntary exchanges between members; and second, by the IMF designating members with strong external positions to purchase SDRs from members with weak external positions.

In addition to its role as a supplementary reserve asset, the SDR serves as the unit of account of the IMF and some other international organizations.






69.            Solution: a)

The Labour force participation rate refers to the n umber of people who are either employed or are actively looking for work. The number of people who are no longer actively searching for work would not be included in the participation rate.

During an economic recession, many workers often get discouraged and stop looking for employment, as a result, the participation rate decreases.




70.            Solution: a)

The DPSP clearly mentions in the articles 39 (a) and  (b) that it is the state‘s goal to reduce income inequalities and ensure that surplus income is redistributed  to avoid concentration of money in the economy.

Preamble merely talks about economic and social equality in general terms. Hence, DPSP will be a preferred option to Preamble.



71.  Solution: d)

Early in 1946 fresh elections were held to the provincial legisla tures. The Congress swept the ―General‖ category, but in the seats specifically reserved for Muslims the League won an overwhelming majority. The political polarisation was complete. A Cabinet Mission sent in the summer of 1946 failed to get the Congress a nd the League to agree on a federal system that would keep India together while allowing
the provinces a degree of autonomy. After the talks broke down, Jinnah called for a


http://www.insightsonindia.com                           INSIGHTS                                                            Page 24
Insights Mock tests – 2015: Test 27 Solutions


―Direct Action  Day‖ to press the League‘s  demand for Pakistan. On the designated day, 16 August 1946, bloody riots broke out in Calcutta. The violence spread to rural Bengal, then to Bihar, and then across the country to the United Provinces and the Punjab. In some places, Muslims were the main sufferers, in other places, Hindus.




https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1946_Cabinet_Mission_to_India




72.            Solution: c)

One method of replenishing the soil with nutrients is through crop rotation. This can be done by growing different crops alternately.

Earlier, farmers in northern India used to grow legumes as fodder in one season and wheat in the next season. This helped in the replenishment of the soil with nitrogen. Farmers are being encouraged to adopt this practice.

Moreover, in the alternate rows in the field, two different crops can be grown in different seasons alternatively.






















73.            Solution: d)

http://www.nda.agric.za/docs/grain/grain.htm

But, large scale storage of grains is done in silos and granaries to protect them from pests like rats and insects.

Dried neem leaves are used for storing food grains at home. For storing large quantities of grains in big godowns, specific chemical treatments are required to
protect them from pests and microorganisms.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                           INSIGHTS                                                            Page 25
Insights Mock tests – 2015: Test 27 Solutions




74.            Solution: c)

Westminster is a place in London where the British Parliament is located. It is often used as a symbol of the British Parliament.

The Parliament is the legislative organ of the Union government. It occupies a pre- eminent and central position in the Indian democratic political system due to adoption of the parliamentary form of government, also known as ‗Westminster‘ model of government.

Indian constitution departs on a number of principles from the British co nstitution namely – federalism v/s unitary government; monarchy v/s republic; judicial review etc.




75.Solution: b)

He is provided with a security of tenure. He can be removed only by a resolution passed by the Lok Sabha by an absolute majority (ie, a majority of the total members of the House) and not by an ordinary majority (ie, a majority of the members present and voting in the House). This motion of removal can be considered and discussed only when it has the support of at least 50 members.

Moreover, his powers of regulating procedure or conducting business or maintaining order in the House are not subject to the jurisdiction of any Court.

He cannot vote in the first instance. He can only exercise a casting vote in the event of a tie. This makes the position of Speaker impartial.




76.            Solution: b)

Original jurisdiction means the power of a high court to hear disputes in the first instance, not by way of appeal.

Some other matters that come under this are:

    Matters of admirality, will, marriage, divorce, company laws and contempt of court.
    Cases ordered to be transferred from a subordinate court involving the
interpretation of the Constitution to its own file

Before 1973, the Calcutta, Bombay and Madras High Courts also had original criminal jurisdiction. This was fully abolished by the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                           INSIGHTS                                                            Page 26
Insights Mock tests – 2015: Test 27 Solutions




77.  Solution: d)

It is located in Bangladesh.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Noakhali_District

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Noakhali_riots




78.             Solution: b)

The river Indus rises in Tibet, near Lake Mansarowar. Flowing west, it enters India in the Ladakh district of Jammu and Kashmir. It forms a picturesque gorge in this part. Several tributaries, the Zaskar, the Nubra, the Shyok and the Hunza, join it in the Kashmir region. The Indus flows through Baltistan and Gilgit and emerges from the mountains at Attock. The Satluj, the Beas, the Ravi, the Chenab and the Jhelum join together to enter the Indus near Mithankot in Pakistan.




79.            Solution: b)

It makes recommendations on the following matters:

    The distribution of the net proceeds of taxes to be shared between the Centre and the states, and the allocation between the states of the respective shares of such proceeds.
    The principles that should govern the grants-in-aid to the states by the Centre
(i.e., out of the consolidated fund of India).
    The measures needed to augment the consolidated fund of a state to supplement the resources of the panchayats and the municipalities in the state on the basis of the recommendations made by the state finance commission.
    Any other matter referred to it by the president in the interests of sound finance.




80.           Solution: c)

Manipuri is one of the main styles of Indian Art or Classical Dances.

The origin of Manipuri dance can be traced back to ancient times that go beyond recorded history. The dance in Manipur is associated with rituals and traditional festivals, there are legendary references to the dances of Shiva and Parvati and other
gods and goddesses who created the universe.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                           INSIGHTS                                                            Page 27
Insights Mock tests – 2015: Test 27 Solutions



Lai Haraoba is one of the main festivals still performed in Manipur which has its roots in the pre-Vaishnavite period.

The Sattriya dance form was introduced in the 15th century A.D by the great Vaishnava saint and reformer of Assam, Mahapurusha Sankaradeva as a powerful medium for propagation of the Vaishnava faith.




81.Solution: d)

Landmarks in the Discovery and Conservation of Vijayanagara

1800 Colin Mackenzie visits Vijayanagara

1856 Alexander Greenlaw takes the first detailed photographs of archaeological remains at Hampi

1876 J.F. Fleet begins documenting the inscriptions on the temple walls at the site

1902 Conservation begins under John Marshall

1986 Hampi declared a World Heritage site by UNESCO

Source: NCERT Class XII, History




82.            Solution: c)






















83.            Solution: d)

The Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) is the central recruiting agency in
India. It is an independent constitutional body. Even though its advice is not binding

http://www.insightsonindia.com                           INSIGHTS                                                            Page 28
Insights Mock tests – 2015: Test 27 Solutions


on the government, it is NOT merely an advisory body (that would make its position very weak, which is not the case).

The UPSC presents, annually, to the presi-dent a report on its performance. The President places this report before both the Houses of Parliament, along with a memorandum explaining the cases where the advice of the Commission was not accepted and the reasons for such non-acceptance.

All such cases of non-acceptance must be approved by the Appointments Committee of the Union cabinet. An individual ministry or department has no power to reject the advice of the UPSC.




84.            Solution: a)

Rotation of earth causes Coriolis force which only leads to the redistribution of heat (insolation) by way of trade winds, cyclones etc. It does not affect the amount of insolation received by the Earth.

Similarly, atmospheric circulation only redistributes heat on earth.

On the other hand, if earth was more tilted, it would receive even lesser solar insolation at the poles.

Clouds reflect solar insolation back in the space. So it reduces the amount received to earth.




85.            Solution: d)

Reason for statement 1: Generally the amount of solar insolation reduces which leads to lesser temperature and thus lesser evaporation -> lesser precipitation. This is a general rule. There can be exceptions to it when the area is given rainfall by cyclonic depressions etc.

Reason for statement 2: More moisture laden winds are found in the coastal areas due to the proximity of the ocean, hence more rainfall.

Reason for statement 3: Same as above. Oceans are rich in water -> more evaporation -> more precipitation.




86.            Solution: c)

Species capture and store energy, produce and decompose organic materials, help to cycle water and nutrients throughout the ecosystem, fix atmospheric gases and help

http://www.insightsonindia.com                           INSIGHTS                                                            Page 29
Insights Mock tests – 2015: Test 27 Solutions


regulate the climate. These functions are important for ecosystem function and human survival.

The more diverse an ecosystem, better are the chances for the species to survive through adversities and attacks, and consequently, is more productive. Hence, the loss of species would decrease the ability of the system to maintain itself.

Hence, the more the variety of species in an ecosystem, the more stable the ecosystem is likely to be.




87.            Solution: b)

When algae die, they decompose and the nutrients contained in th at organic matter are converted into inorganic form by microorganisms. This decomposition process consumes oxygen, which reduces the concentration of dissolved oxygen. The depleted oxygen levels in turn may lead to fish kills and a range of other effects reducing bio-diversity. Nutrients may become concentrated in an anoxic zone and may only be made available again during autumn turn-over or in conditions of turbulent flow.

Enhanced growth of aquatic vegetation or phytoplankton and algal blooms disrupts normal functioning of the ecosystem, causing a variety of problems such as a lack
of oxygen needed for fish and shellfish to survive. The water becomes cloudy, typically coloured a shade of green, yellow, brown, or red. Eutrophication also decreases the value of rivers, lakes and aesthetic enjoyment. Health problems can occur where eutrophic conditions interfere with drinking water treatment.




88.           Solution: d)

Irreparable computers and other electronic goods are known as electronic wastes (e - wastes). E-wastes are buried in landfills or incinerated. Over half of the e-wastes generated in the developed world are exported to developing countries, mainly to China, India and Pakistan, where metals like copper, iron, silicon, nickel and gold are recovered during recycling process.

Unlike developed countries, which have specifically built facilities for recycling of e - wastes, recycling in developing countries often involves manual participation thus exposing workers to toxic substances present in e-wastes. Recycling is the only solution for the treatment of e-waste, provided it is carried out in an environment
friendly manner.






http://www.insightsonindia.com                           INSIGHTS                                                            Page 30
Insights Mock tests – 2015: Test 27 Solutions


89.            Solution: c)

UV radiation of wavelengths shorter than UV-Blue, are almost completely absorbed
by Earth‘s atmosphere, given that the ozone  layer is intact.

But, UV-B damages DNA and mutation may occur. It causes aging of skin, damage to skin cells and various types of skin cancers.

In human eye, cornea absorbs UV-B radiation, and a high dose of UV-B causes inflammation of cornea, called snow-blindness, cataract, etc. Such exposure may permanently damage the cornea.




90.           Solution: d)





















Petroleum was formed from organisms living in the sea. As these organisms died, their bodies settled at the bottom of the sea and got covered with layers of sand and clay. Over millions of years, absence of air, high temperature and high pressure transformed the dead organisms into petroleum and natural gas.






91. Solution: d)

You should know three things by reserved and protected forests:

    Declared by the state governments (unlike Wildlife Sanctuaries or National
Parks)

    These are forested lands where human activity (like hunting, logging, grazing etc) may be permitted on a sustainable basis


http://www.insightsonindia.com                           INSIGHTS                                                            Page 31
Insights Mock tests – 2015: Test 27 Solutions


    The key difference between Reserved Forests and Protected Forests is that in Reserved Forests explicit permission is required for such activities whereas in Protected Forests such activities are permitted unless explicitly prohibited




92.            Solution: d)

In the performance of his official duties, the Attorney General has the right of audience in all courts in the territory of India.

Further, he has the right to speak and to take part in the proceedings of both the Houses of Parliament or their joint sitting and any committee of the Parliament of which he may be named a member, but without a right to vote.

He enjoys all the privileges and immunities that are available to a member of
Parliament.




93.            Solution: c)

Irrigation without proper drainage of water leads to waterlogging in the soil. Besides affecting the crops, waterlogging draws salt to the surface of the soil.

The salt then is deposited as a thin crust on the land surface or starts collecting at the roots of the plants.

This increased salt content is inimical to the growth of crops and is extremely damaging to agriculture. Waterlogging and soil salinity are some of the problems that have come in the wake of the Green Revolution.




94.            Solution: d)

Biopiracy is a situation where indigenous knowledge of nature, originating with indigenous peoples, is used by others for profit, without permission from an d with little or no compensation or recognition to the indigenous people themselves.

Moreover, it is also used to refer to the use of bio-resources by multinational companies and other organisations without proper authorisation from the countries and people concerned without compensatory payment.

Traditional knowledge related to bio -resources can be exploited to develop modern applications and can also be used to save time, effort and expenditure during their
commercialisation.




http://www.insightsonindia.com                           INSIGHTS                                                            Page 32
Insights Mock tests – 2015: Test 27 Solutions


95.             Solution: a)

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tadoba_Andhari_Tiger_Project





96.            Solution: c)

Researchers in Peru have discovered trios of statuettes which belong to some 3,800 years ago. These statuettes are believed to be created by the ancient Caral civilization some 3,800 years ago.

The Caral civilization had  emerged some  5,000 years ago and  had  lived in Peru‘s Supe Valley. They have left behind impressive architecture including pyramids and sunken amphitheaters.

Among discovered statuettes, two are of the figures consisting of a naked man and woman painted in white, black and red. It is believed that they represent political authorities. The third statue is of women with 28 fingers and red dots on her white face. It is believed that she represent a priestess. Researchers also have unearthed two mud figurines of women‘s faces wrapped in cloth and  covered with yellow, blue and orange feathers.




97.            Solution: a)

FRBM Act, 2003 strives for Inter-generational equity in government finances. So, it restricts borrowing from the RBI by the Central government other than in some specific cases.

Moreover, it puts a rational limit on the fiscal deficit as a percentage of GDP to tackle political populism.

Annual budgets are scrutinized by various Parliamentary committees and then voted by the Parliament. Hence, the legislature ensures the executive is spending right.




98.            Solution: c)

Gross Primary Deficit is Gross Fiscal Deficit less interest payments. Net Primary Deficit is Net Fiscal Deficit minus net interest payments. Net interest payment is interest paid minus interest receipt.

Even though government runs a primary deficit, it need not borrow to fund its consumption requirements.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                           INSIGHTS                                                            Page 33
Insights Mock tests – 2015: Test 27 Solutions


Revenue deficit (revenue receipts – revenue expenditure) will mean that the government is falling short even for regular budget expenditures.




99.            Solution: a)

It is India‘s first indigenously-built largest aircraft carrier. On completion it will carry up to 36 fixed-wing jets, including MiG-29 K and indigenous Light Combat Aircraft (LCA) Tejas.

The basic  design of the carrier is done by Indian Navy‘s Directorate of Naval Design
and was developed into detailed design by the design team of CSL.

After induction into Indian Navy its primary role will only be to defend the naval
fleet and  will be positioned in the Indian Ocean region where the world‘s commercial
and economic interests conflate.





100.         Solution: c)

Adipurana is a 10th-century Kannada text written in Champu style, a mix of prose and verse, dealing with the ten lives of the first tirthankara, Adinatha, also known as Rishabhanatha . This work is known to be the first work of Kannada poet Adikavi Pampa (941 CE). It is based on the story narrated by Jinasenachar ya in his earlier Sanskrit work Purvapurana. Vikramarjuna Vijaya and Adipurana are, in some
respects, comparable to Milton's Paradise Lost and Paradise Regained.




























http://www.insightsonindia.com                           INSIGHTS                                                            Page 34
