                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  4 SOLUTIONS                     





1.   Solution: d)

The epidermis is usually made of a single layer of cells. In some plants living in very dry habitats, the epidermis may be thicker since protection against water loss is critical. The entire surface of a plant has this outer covering of epidermis. It protects all the parts of the plant.

Epidermal cells on the aerial parts of the plant often secrete a waxy, water-resistant layer on their outer surface. This aids in protection against loss of
water, mechanical injury and invasion by parasitic fungi. Since it has a protective role to play, cells of epidermal tissue form a continuous layer without intercellular spaces. Most epidermal cells are relatively flat. Often their outer and side walls are thicker than the inner wall.




2.   Solution: a)

The origins of Indian cricket, that is, cricket played by Indians are to be found in Bombay and the first Indian community to start playing the game was the small community of Zoroastrians, the Parsis. Brought into close contact with the British because of their interest in trade and the first Indian community to westernise, the Parsis founded the first Indian cricket club, the Oriental Cricket Club in Bombay in 1848. Parsi clubs were funded and sponsored by Parsi businessmen like the Tatas and the Wadias. The white cricket elite in India offered no help to the enthusiastic Parsis. In fact, there was a quarrel between the Bombay Gymkhana, a
whites-only club, and Parsi cricketers over the use of a public park. The Parsis complained that the park was left unfit for cricket because the polo
ponies of the Bombay Gymkhana dug up the
surface. When it became clear that the colonial authorities were prejudiced in favour of their white compatriots, the Parsis built their own gymkhana
to play cricket in.

The rivalry between the Parsis and the racist Bombay Gymkhana had a happy ending for these pioneers of Indian cricket. A Parsi team beat the Bombay Gymkhana at cricket in 1889, just four years after the foundation of the Indian National Congress in 1885, an organisation that was lucky to have amongst its early leaders the great Parsi statesman and intellectual Dadabhai Naoroji.




3.   Solution: b)

Bastar is located in the southernmost part of Chhattisgarh and borders Andhra Pradesh, Orissa and Maharashtra. The central part of Bastar is on a plateau. To the north of this plateau is the Chhattisgarh plain and to its south is the Godavari plain. The river Indrawati winds across Bastar east to west. A number of different communities live in Bastar such as Maria and Muria Gonds, Dhurwas, Bhatras and Halbas. They speak different languages but share common customs and beliefs.




4.   Solution: c)

EXERCISING HAS various physical and mental health benefits. It is known to help in relieving stress-induced depression. But till now mechanisms behind this were not known. A study on mice has shown that physical activity causes changes in skeletal muscles that help it block kynurenine-a substance that accumulates in the blood during stress and in high amounts can cause depression-from entering the brain. Physical

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                            Page 1
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  4 SOLUTIONS                     


exercise increases protein PGC-1α1 in skeletal muscles. The study found that mice with high levels of PGC-1α1 also had a high level of an enzyme called KAT. This enzyme converted kynurenine into kynurenic acid, which is not able to pass from the blood to the brain, protecting the brain from stress. Source – Down To Earth.

For associated diseases:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kynurenine




5.   Solution: a)

Refer to the link  for basics about reserved forests etc. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reserved_forests_a nd_protected_forests_of_India

Typically, reserved forests are often upgraded to the status of wildlife sanctuaries, which in turn may be upgraded to the status of national parks, with each category receiving a higher degree of protection and government funding. For example, Sariska National Park was declared a
reserved forest in 1955, upgraded to the status of a wildlife sanctuary in 1958, becoming a Tiger Reserve in 1978. Sariska became a national park in
1992, though primary notification to declare it as a national park was issued as early as 1982.




6.   Solution: c)

Sacred groves - a wealth of diverse and rare species

Nature worship is an age old tribal belief based on the premise that all creations of nature have to be protected. Such beliefs have preserved several virgin forests in pristine form called Sacred Groves
(the forests of God and Goddesses). These patches of forest or parts of large forests have been left untouched by the local people and any interference with them is banned. Certain societies revere a particular tree which they have preserved from time immemorial. The Mundas and the Santhal of Chhota Nagpur region worship mahua (Bassia latifolia) and kadamba (Anthocaphalus cadamba) trees, and the tribals of Orissa and Bihar worship the tamarind (Tamarindus indica) and mango (Mangifera indica) trees during weddings. To many of us, peepal and banyan trees are
considered sacred.




7.   Solution: a)

Dams were traditionally built to impound rivers and rainwater that could be used later to irrigated agricultural fields. Today, dams are built not just for irrigation but for electricity generation, water supply for domestic and industrial uses, flood control, recreation, inland navigation and fish breeding. Hence, dams are now referred to as
multi-purpose projects where the many uses of the impounded water are integrated with one another. For example, in the Sutluj-Beas river basin, the Bhakra – Nangal project water is being used both for hydel power production and irrigation. Similarly, the Hirakud project in the Mahanadi basin integrates conservation of water with flood control.




8.   Solution: d)

Self-explanatory.

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                            Page 2
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  4 SOLUTIONS                     


9.   Solution: d)

NEP 1991 also known as liberalization, privatization and globalization policy gave a huge boost to the service sector. Refer to the Section on
―Rising importance of service sector in India‖ in Chapter 2 of class Xth NCERT economy for a detailed explanation. Because of the length of the explanation, it cannot be provided here.

10. Solution: c)

The First World War and the Second World War had a major impact on forests. In India, working plans were abandoned at this time, and the forest department cut trees freely to meet British war needs. In Java, just before the Japanese occupied the region,  the Dutch  followed ‗a scorched earth‘ policy, destroying sawmills, and burning huge piles of giant teak logs so that they would not fall into Japanese hands. The Japanese then exploited the forests recklessly for their own war industries, forcing forest villagers to cut down forests. Many villagers used this opportunity to expand cultivation in the forest. After the war, it was
difficult for the Indonesian forest service to get this
land  back. As in India,  people‘s need  for agricultural land has brought them into conflict with the forest department‘s desire  to control  the land and exclude people from it.

Since the 1980s, governments across Asia and
Africa have begun to see that scientific forestry and the policy of keeping forest communities away
from forests has resulted in many conflicts. Conservation of forests rather than collecting timber has become a more important goal. The government has recognised that in order to meet this goal, the people who live near the forests must be involved. In many cases, across India, from
Mizoram to Kerala, dense forests have survived
only because villages protected them in sacred groves known as sarnas, devarakudu, kan, rai, etc. Some villages have been patrolling their own forests, with each household taking it in turns, instead of leaving it to the forest guards. Local forest communities and environmentalists today are thinking of different forms of forest management.

11. Solution: d)

In between the rabi and the kharif seasons, there is a short season during the summer months known as the Zaid season. Some of the crops produced during ‗zaid‘ are watermelon, muskmelon, cucumber, vegetables and fodder crops. Sugarcane takes almost a year to grow.

12. Solution: b)

Rare earth minerals—-there are 17 of them—are vital for the production of smart phones, cameras, steel and hybrid cars, and hence the world economy. They are present in a significant amount on the sea floor, both in sovereign and international
waters. Polymetallic nodules are known to contain rare earth mineralsAt present, China contributes 90 per cent of the global production of the minerals. Developments in last five years show that
China has been using this monopoly to control the production and price of the minerals. So there have been attempts worldwide to realign strategic relations around exploration of rare earths in seabed. Developed countries are taking the lead.
Japan, along with the US and the EU, formed an


http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                            Page 3
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  4 SOLUTIONS                     


alliance to challenge China's restrictive policies in the WTO. In April 2014, the WTO ruled against China.

India has collaborated with Japan since November
2012 to develop rare earth materials. As part of India-Japan strategic collaboration, an agreement was signed for exploration and production of rare earths, following which India is setting up a monazite processing plant in Odisha. In April 2013, Japan disclosed discovery of a bounty of rare earths in the seabed around Minami-Tori-shima Island. Scientists claim the reserve holds 20 to 30 times more minerals than those being mined in China.

13. Solution: b)

Down to Earth - http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/silent- threat
14. Solution: d)

Pulses need less moisture and survive even in dry conditions. Being leguminous crops, all these crops except arhar help in restoring soil fertility by fixing nitrogen from the air. Therefore, these are mostly grown in rotation with other crops. Major pulse producing states in India are Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Maharashtra and Karnataka.




15. Solution: b)

Refer to http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_largest_pro ducing_countries_of_agricultural_commodities

Look at only where India is the major producer.




16. Solution: b)

http://thestudyofearth.blogspot.in/2012/03/plant ation-agriculture.html




17. Solution: d)

Manganese Nodules: A type of sediment scattered on the ocean floor, consisting mainly of manganese and iron, and usually containing small amounts of copper, nickel and cobalt.

This article shows the significance of manganese nodules for India http://www.thehindu.com/sci- tech/science/soon-nodules-to-be-mined-from-
seabed/article4577372.ece






http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                            Page 4
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  4 SOLUTIONS                     


18. Solution: d)

Agricultural modernization basically means using scientifically determined inputs like chemical fertilizers, insecticides, weedicides, pesticides etc. These chemicals flow from farm to nearby waterbodies and pollute the water.




19. Solution: a)

Toothpaste cleans your teeth. Abrasive minerals like silica, limestone, aluminium oxide and various phosphate minerals do the cleaning. Fluoride which is used to reduce cavities, comes from a mineral fluorite. Most toothpaste are made white with titanium oxide, which comes from minerals called rutile, ilmenite and anatase. The sparkle in
some toothpastes comes from mica. The toothbrush and tube containing the paste are made of plastics from petroleum.

20. Solution: c)


The Gaddi (aka Pahari Bharmauri) are a Hindu tribe living mainly in the Indian states of Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar
Pradesh and Punjab. They used to be considered
as scheduled tribe but some are scheduled caste or "untouchables" in the Punjab but are no longer considered such and are made up
of Rajputs, Khatris, Ranas, and Thakurs. They are said to have fled into the mountains centuries ago when the Muslims moved into the plains of northern India.

Many of them are shepherds and live a semi- nomadic lifestyle (transhumance)- having hill or mountains' feet villages where they live in winter,
while taking their flocks to higher ground for grazing in the summer.



21. Solution: c)

In the fluid a body weighs less due to buoyant force acting in upwards direction on the body. The gravitation force remains the same downwards. The net effect is reduction in actual seen weight.




22. Solution: d)

1. Megaphones or loudhailers, horns, musical instruments such as trumpets and shehanais, are all designed to send sound in a particular direction without spreading it in all directions, In these instruments, a tube followed by a conical opening reflects sound successively to guide most of the sound waves from the source in the forward direction towards the audience.

2. Stethoscope is a medical instrument used for listening to sounds produced within the body, chiefly in the heart or lungs. In stethoscopes the sound of the patient‘s heartbeat reaches the doctor‘s ears by multiple reflection of sound.

3. Generally the ceilings of concert halls, conference halls and cinema halls are curved so that sound after reflection reaches all corners of the hall.




23. Solution: b)

Just as we need food for development, growth and well-being, plants also require nutrients for growth. Nutrients are supplied to plants by air, water and soil. There are sixteen nutrients which are essential for plants. Air supplies carbon and oxygen,

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                            Page 5
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  4 SOLUTIONS                     


hydrogen comes from water, and soil supplies the other thirteen nutrients to plants. Amongst these thirteen nutrients, six are required in large quantities and are therefore called macronutrients. The other seven nutrients are used by plants in small quantities and are therefore called micro- nutrients
















24. Solution: d)

Refer to chapter 12 Science IXth NCERT section
12.5 for details. It has been explained thoroughly there.




25. Solution: c)

Gandhi initially said that:

‗I propose to discard at least up to 31st of October my topi and vest and to content myself with a loincloth, and a chaddar whenever necessary for protection of my body. I adopt the change because I have always hesitated to advise anything I may not be prepared to follow …‘

At this time, he did not want to use this dress all
his life and  only wanted to ‗experiment for a month or two‘. But soon he saw this as his duty to the
poor, and he never wore any other dress. He
consciously rejected the well-known clothes of the
Indian ascetic and adopted the dress of the poorest
Indian. Khadi, white and coarse, was to him a sign of purity, of simplicity, and of poverty. Wearing it became also a symbol of nationalism, a rejection of Western mill- made cloth.




26. Solution: d)

Photosynthesis consumes Co2 to make glucose. Calcification of shells requires carbonate dissolved in water (due to Co2). And phytoplanktons are a major carbon sink.




27. Solution: a)

Unlike most other lymphoid structures, the thymus grows rapidly and attains its greatest size relative to the rest of the body during fetal life and the first years after birth. Thereafter, it continues to grow, but more slowly than the other organs. At the onset of puberty, the thymus begins a slow process of shrinking. This gradual diminution in size continues for the rest of the individual‘s life.

The functions of the thymus that have so far been observed relate chiefly to the newborn. Removal of the organ in the adult has little effect, but when the thymus is removed in the newborn, T cells in the blood and lymphoid tissue are depleted, and failure of the immune system causes a gradual, fatal wasting disease. The animal whose thymus has been removed at birth is less able to reject foreign-tissue grafts or to make antibodies to certain antigens. Moreover, certain parts of the white pulp of the spleen and lymph nodes are much reduced in size. These results demonstrate that the T cells produced in the thymus and transported to the lymphoid tissues are crucial elements in the development of immunity.

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                            Page 6
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  4 SOLUTIONS                     


28. Solution: d)

The term water-pollution to cover the following effects:

1. The addition of undesirable substances to water- bodies. These substances could be the fertilisers and pesticides used in farming or they could be poisonous substances, like mercury salts which are used by paper-industries. These could also be disease-causing organisms, like the bacteria which cause cholera. Increase I nutrients can cause eutrophication in the water body leading to algal bloom and toxication.

2. The removal of desirable substances from water- bodies. Dissolved oxygen is used by the animals and plants that live in water. Any change that reduces the amount of this dissolved oxygen would adversely affect these aquatic organisms. Other nutrients could also be depleted from the water bodies.

3. A change in temperature. Aquatic organisms are used to a certain range of temperature in the water- body where they live, and a sudden marked
change in this temperature would be dangerous for them or affect their breeding. The eggs and larvae
of various animals are particularly susceptible to temperature changes.
India has been given license to mine in Indian ocean. For more details: http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/mining- deep-sea




31. Solution: d)

http://www.tradingeconomics.com/india/exports




32. Solution: d)

IRNSS is a navigation system that will cover India, and also extend 1,500 kms from its boundaries. It will provide accurate position information to users in India and will also be used for terrestrial and marine navigation, disaster management, fleet management and for vehicle tracking. However, to be able to use the IRNSS satellites, ISRO will have to launch at least four of the seven planned IRNSS satellites. IRNSS is similar to other satellite navigation service providers like USA‘s GPS (Global Positioning System), Russia‘s
Glonass, Europe‘s Galileo, Japan‘s Quasi  Zenith
and China‘s Beidou.




33. Solution: d)






See

29. Solution: d)
Aichi Biodiversity Targets

     Strategic Goal A: Address the underlying causes of biodiversity loss by mainstreaming
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inland_waterways_
of_India




30. Solution: a)
biodiversity across government and society
     Strategic Goal B: Reduce the direct pressures on
biodiversity and promote sustainable use
     Strategic Goal C: To improve the status of biodiversity by safeguarding ecosystems, species and genetic diversity



http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                            Page 7
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  4 SOLUTIONS                     


     Strategic Goal D: Enhance the benefits to all from biodiversity and ecosystem services
     Strategic Goal E: Enhance implementation
through participatory planning, knowledge management and capacity building



Strategic Goal A: Address the underlying causes of biodiversity loss by mainstreaming biodiversity across government and society

Target 1
By 2020, at the latest, people are aware of the values of biodiversity and the steps they can take to conserve and use it sustainably.

Target 2
By 2020, at the latest, biodiversity values have been integrated into national and local development and poverty reduction strategies and planning processes and are being incorporated into national accounting, as appropriate, and reporting systems.

Target 3
By 2020, at the latest, incentives, including subsidies, harmful to biodiversity are eliminated, phased out or reformed in order to minimize or avoid negative impacts, and positive incentives for the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity are developed and applied, consistent and in harmony with the Convention and other relevant international obligations, taking into account national socio economic conditions.

Target 4
By 2020, at the latest, Governments, business and stakeholders at all levels have taken steps to achieve or have
implemented plans for sustainable
production and consumption and have
kept the impacts of use of natural resources well within safe ecological limits.

Strategic Goal B: Reduce the direct pressures on biodiversity and promote sustainable use

Target 5
By 2020, the rate of loss of all natural habitats, including forests, is at least
halved and where feasible brought close to zero, and degradation and fragmentation is significantly reduced.


Target 6
By 2020 all fish and invertebrate stocks and aquatic plants are managed and harvested sustainably, legally and applying
ecosystem based approaches, so that overfishing is avoided, recovery plans and measures are in place for all depleted species, fisheries have no significant adverse impacts on threatened species and vulnerable ecosystems and the impacts of fisheries on stocks, species and ecosystems are within safe ecological limits.

Target 7
By 2020 areas under agriculture, aquaculture and forestry are managed sustainably, ensuring conservation of biodiversity.

Target 8
By 2020, pollution, including from excess nutrients, has been brought to levels that are not detrimental to ecosystem function and biodiversity.

Target 9
By 2020, invasive alien species and pathways are identified and prioritized, priority species are controlled or eradicated, and measures are in place to manage pathways to prevent their

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                            Page 8
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  4 SOLUTIONS                     


introduction and establishment.

Target 10
By 2015, the multiple anthropogenic pressures on coral reefs, and other vulnerable ecosystems impacted by climate change or ocean acidification are minimized, so as to maintain their integrity and functioning.

Strategic Goal C: To improve the status of biodiversity by safeguarding ecosystems, species and genetic diversity

Target 11
By 2020, at least 17 per cent of terrestrial
and inland water, and 10 per cent of coastal and marine areas, especially areas of particular importance for biodiversity and ecosystem services, are conserved through effectively and equitably managed, ecologically representative and well connected systems of protected areas
and other effective area-based conservation measures, and integrated into the wider landscapes and seascapes.

Target 12
By 2020 the extinction of known threatened
species has been prevented and their conservation status, particularly of those most in decline, has been improved and sustained.

Target 13
By 2020, the genetic diversity of cultivated plants and farmed and domesticated animals and of wild relatives, including other socio-economically as well as culturally valuable species, is maintained, and strategies have been developed and implemented for minimizing genetic erosion and safeguarding their genetic diversity.
Strategic Goal D: Enhance the benefits to all from biodiversity and ecosystem services

Target 14
By 2020, ecosystems that provide essential services, including services related to
water, and contribute to health, livelihoods and well-being, are restored and safeguarded, taking into account the needs of women, indigenous and local communities, and the poor and vulnerable.


Target 15
By 2020, ecosystem resilience and the
contribution of biodiversity to carbon stocks has been enhanced, through conservation and restoration, including restoration of at least 15 per cent of degraded ecosystems, thereby contributing to climate change mitigation and adaptation and to combating desertification.

Target 16
By 2015, the Nagoya Protocol on Access to
Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from their Utilization is in force and operational, consistent with national legislation.

Strategic Goal E: Enhance implementation through participatory planning, knowledge management and capacity building

Target 17
By 2015 each Party has developed, adopted
as a policy instrument, and has commenced implementing an effective, participatory and updated national biodiversity strategy and action plan.

Target 18
By 2020, the traditional knowledge, innovations and practices of indigenous and local communities relevant for the

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                            Page 9
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  4 SOLUTIONS                     


conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity, and their customary use of biological resources, are respected, subject to national legislation and relevant international obligations, and fully integrated and reflected in the implementation of the Convention with the full and effective participation of indigenous and local communities, at all relevant levels.

Target 19
By 2020, knowledge, the science base and
technologies relating to biodiversity, its values, functioning, status and trends, and the consequences of its loss, are improved, widely shared and transferred, and applied.

Target 20
By 2020, at the latest, the mobilization of
financial resources for effectively implementing the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020 from all sources, and in accordance with the consolidated and agreed process in the Strategy for Resource Mobilization, should increase substantially from the current levels. This target will be subject to changes contingent to resource needs assessments to be developed and reported by Parties.




34. Solution: a)


35. Solution: b)

Some time after his return to India from South Africa in 1915, Mahatma Gandhi transformed the Kashmiri cap that he sometimes used into a cheap white cotton khadi cap. For two years from 1919, he himself wore the cap, and then gave it up, but by this time it had become part of the nationalist
uniform and even a symbol of defiance. For example, the Gwalior state tried to prohibit its use in 1921 during the non co-operation movement. During the Khilafat movement the cap was worn
by large numbers of Hindus and Muslims. A group of Santhals who attacked the police in 1922 in Bengal demanding the release of Santhal prisoners believed that the Gandhi cap would protect them from bullets: three of them died as a result.

Large numbers of nationalists defiantly wore the Gandhi cap and were even beaten or arrested for doing so. With the rise of the Khilafat movement in the post-First World War years, the fez, a tasseled Turkish cap, became a sign of anti- colonialism in India. Though many Hindus – as in Hyderabad for instance – also wore the fez, it soon became identified solely with Muslims.




36. Solution: a)

Sharks BECOME abundant in a coral zone when the reefs are healthy. In a decade-long study conducted in the Great Barrier Reef, researchers used thousands of remote underwater video stations to count the number of sharks. The results showed that the health of coral reef had a huge affect on abundance of shark, especially the grey reef shark which is found on coral reefs. The study underlines the importance of coral reefs in protecting sharks Source: Down To Earth

Regarding Coral Bleaching:

Warmer water temperatures can result in coral bleaching. When water is too warm, corals will expel the algae (zooxanthellae) living in their tissues causing the coral to turn completely white. This is called coral bleaching. When a coral bleaches, it is not dead. Corals can survive a

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 10
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  4 SOLUTIONS                     


bleaching event, but they are under more stress and are subject to mortality. For more: http://oceanservice.noaa.gov/facts/coral_bleach.h tml

37. Solution: c)

Most of the petroleum occurrences in India are associated with anticlines and fault traps in the rock formations of the tertiary age. In regions of folding, anticlines or domes, it occurs where oil is trapped in the crest of the upfold. The oil bearing layer is a porous limestone or sandstone through which oil may flow. The oil is prevented from rising or sinking by intervening non-porous layers. Petroleum is also found in fault trap between porous and non-porous rocks. Gas, being lighter usually occurs above the oil.

38. Solution: d)

Refer http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Limestone#Uses




39. Solution: c)




40. Solution: d)

Refer to http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shale_gas#Environ ment

41. Solution: b)

Tea requires a moist fros-free climate with even rainfall throughout the year. Millet is a semi-arid area crop and thus can be grown in dry conditions.
42. Solution: d)

Large reserves of natural gas have been discovered in the Krishna- Godavari basin. Along the west coast the reserves of the Mumbai High and allied fields are supplemented by finds in the Gulf of Cambay. Andaman and Nicobar islands are also important areas having large reserves of natural gas.

Also refer to http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natural_resources_ of_India#Oil




43. Solution: d)

The British were worried that the use of forests by local people and the reckless felling of trees by traders would destroy forests. So they decided to invite a German expert, Dietrich Brandis, for
advice, and made him the first Inspector General of
Forests in India.

Brandis realised that a proper system had to be introduced to manage the forests and people had to be trained in the science of conservation. This system would need legal sanction. Rules about the use of forest resources had to be framed. Felling of trees and grazing had to be restricted so that forests could be preserved for timber production.
Anybody who cut trees without following the system had to be punished. So Brandis set up the Indian Forest Service in 1864 and helped formulate the Indian Forest Act of 1865. The Imperial Forest Research Institute was set up at Dehradun in 1906. The system they taught here was called ‗scientific forestry‘.  Many people now, including ecologists,
feel that this system is not scientific at all.




http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 11
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  4 SOLUTIONS                     


In scientific forestry, natural forests which had lots of different types of trees were cut down. In their place, one type of tree was planted in straight rows. This is called a plantation. Forest officials surveyed the forests, estimated the area under different types of trees, and made working plans for forest management. They planned how muchof the plantation area to cut every year. The area cut was then to be replanted so that it was ready to be cut again in some years.

After the Forest Act was enacted in 1865, it was amended twice, once in 1878 and then in 1927. The
1878 Act divided forests into three categories: reserved, protected and village forests. The best forests  were called ‗reserved forests‘. Villagers could not take anything from these forests, even for their own use. For house building or fuel, they could take wood from protected or village forests.




44. Solution: c)

Waterways are the cheapest means of transport. They are most suitable for carrying heavy and bulky goods. It is a fuel-efficient and environment friendly mode of transport. India has inland navigation waterways of 14,500 km in length. Out
of these only 3,700 km are navigable by mechanised boats.

Whereas the Indian coastline is some 7400 kms. 95 per cent of the country‘s trade volume (68 per cent in terms of value) is moved by sea.




45. Solution: a)

Living organisms also influence the formation of soil. The lichen grows on the surface of rocks.
While growing, they release certain substances that
cause the rock surface to powder down and form a thin layer of soil. Other small plants like moss, are able to grow on this surface now and they cause the rock to break up further. The roots of big trees sometimes go into cracks in the rocks and as the roots grow bigger, the crack is forced bigger.




46. Solution: d)

The warm and humid tropical regions of the earth, between the tropic of Cancer and the tropic of Capricorn, are rich in diversity of plant and animal life. This is called the region of megadiversity. Of the biodiversity of the planet, more than half is concentrated in a few countries – Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Mexico, Zaire, Madagascar, Australia, China, India, Indonesia and Malaysia.




47. Solution: c)

RESEARCHERS DID not consider climate change to be a factor in formation of tornadoes because there was no pattern to link the two. But an
analysis of records on tornadoes in the US between
1954 and 2013 has found that there has been a consistent decrease in the number of days witnessing at least one tornado, while the number of days having multiple tornadoes has increased. Though tornadoes are forming on fewer days (187 tornado days in 1971 against 79 in 2013), the severity and frequency of the number of tornadoes formed in one particular day has increased. There were 1,700 in 2011 and 2014 has already seen 189. Source: Down to Earth

A tornado is a violently rotating column of air that is in contact with both the surface of the earth and a cumulonimbus cloudor, in rare cases, the base of

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 12
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  4 SOLUTIONS                     


a cumulus cloud. They are often referred to as twisters or cyclones, although the wordcyclone is used in meteorology, in a wider
sense, to name any closed low pressure circulation.




48. Solution: d)

Wildlife CORRIDORS aretracts of natural land that connect habitats divided by agricultural or other human activities. These are set up to promote spread of native species. But such corridors can
also lead to spread of invasive species. A study in
Florida, US, found that polygyne fire ants (a type of slow-moving fire ants) were able to use wildlife corridors to spread and dominate the habitat. The study indicates it is crucial to study traits of likely invasive species before setting up a corridor.
Source: Down to Earth.

49. Solution: a)

Elemental oxygen is normally found in the form of a diatomic molecule. However, in the upper reaches of the atmosphere, a molecule containing
three atoms of oxygen is found. This would mean a formula of O3 and this is called ozone. Unlike the normal diatomic molecule of oxygen, ozone is poisonous and we are lucky that it is not stable nearer to the Earth‘s surface.  But it performs an essential function where it is found. It absorb harmful radiations from the Sun. This prevents those harmful radiations from reaching the surface
of the Earth where they may damage many forms of life.

50. Solution: c)

The low pressure system over Indian region are classified based on the maximum sustained winds speed associated with the system and the pressure deficit/ number of closed isobars associated with the system. The pressure criteria is used, when the system is over land and wind criteria is used, when the system is over the sea. The system is called as low if there is one closed isobar in the interval of 2 hPa. It is called depression, if there are two closed isobars, a deep depression, if there are three closed isobars and cyclonic storm if there are four or more closed isobars. The detailed classification based on wind criteria are given in the Table
below. Considering wind criteria, the system with wind speed of 17-27 knots is called as depression and the low pressure system with maximum sustained 3 minutes surface winds between 28-33 knots is called a deep depression. The system
with maximum sustained 3 minutes surface winds of 34 knots or more is called as cyclonic storm.

For interesting article: Regarding Cyclone Phailin and other Bay of Bengal related cyclones

http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/historic ally-prone-cyclones






51. Solution: d)

Varieties or strains of crops can be selected by breeding for various useful characteristics such as disease resistance, response to fertilisers, product quality and high yields. One way of incorporating

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 13
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  4 SOLUTIONS                     


desirable characters into crop varieties is by hybridisation. Hybridisation refers to crossing between genetically dissimilar plants. This crossing may be intervarietal (between different varieties), interspecific (between two different species of the same genus) or intergeneric (between different genera). Another way of improving the crop is by introducing a gene that would provide the desired characteristic. This results in genetically modified crops.




52. Solution: c)
Green manure: Prior to the sowing of the crop seeds, some plants like sun hemp or guar are grown and then mulched by ploughing them into the soil. These green plants thus turn into green manure which helps in enriching the soil in nitrogen and phosphorus.






It is considered a practice in organic farming.



53. Solution: d)




















Higher per capita income does not necessarily translate into better health or education indicators and vice versa. The availability and accessibility of public services like health and education should also be there.

Kerala has a low Infant Mortality Rate because it has adequate provision of basic health and educational facilities. Similarly, in some states, the Public Distribution System (PDS) functions well.
Health and nutritional status of people of such states is certainly likely to be better.




54. Solution: a)

Habitat destruction, hunting, poaching, over- exploitation, environmental pollution, poisoning and forest fires are factors, which have led to the decline  in India‘s biodiversity. Other important causes of environmental destruction are unequal

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 14
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  4 SOLUTIONS                     


access, inequitable consumption of resources and differential sharing of responsibility for environmental well-being.




55. Solution: c)

Intermediary goods are used to make final goods. If the value of intermediary goods are counted along with final goods, it will be double counting.




56. Solution: d)

Refer to http://www.mgnrega.co.in/

You can also view more about the scheme and its performance analysis.




57. Solution: a)

The term unorganised sector when used in the Indian context is defined by National Commission for Enterprises in the Unorganized Sector, in their Report on Conditions of Work and Promotion of Livelihoods in the Unorganised Sector as .... consisting of all unincorporated private enterprises owned by individuals or households engaged in the sale or production of goods and services operated on a proprietary or partnership basis and with less than
ten total workers. Amongst the characteristic features of this sector are ease of entry, smaller scale of operation, local ownership, uncertain legal status, labour-intensive and operating using lower technology based methods, flexible pricing, less sophisticated packing, absence of a brand name, unavailability of good storage facilities and an effective distribution network, inadequate access to
government schemes, finance and government aid,
lower entry barriers for employees, a higher proportion of migrants with a lower rate of compensation. Employees of enterprises belonging to the unorganised sector have lower job security and poorer chances of growth, and no leaves and paid holidays, they have lower protection against employers indulging in unfair or illegal practices.




58. Solution: c)

Refer to http://gradestack.com/CBSE-Class-
10th/Organised-and-Unorganised-Sectors/15078-
3004-4121-study-wtw




59. Solution: a)

Oceanic tides can be used to generate electricity. Floodgate dams are built across inlets. During high tide water flows into the inlet and gets trapped when the gate is closed. After the tide falls outside the flood gate, the water retained by the floodgate flows back to the sea via a pipe that carries it through a power-generating turbine. In India, the Gulf of Kuchchh, provides ideal conditions for utilising tidal energy.




60. Solution: b)

Option 2 and 3 satisfy all the criteria used to classify unorganized sector. Refer to the explanations given in the previous questions to understand the criteria.


http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 15
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  4 SOLUTIONS                     


61. Solution: b)

The Himalayan Yew (Taxus wallachiana) is a medicinal plant found in various parts of Himachal Pradesh and Arunachal Pradesh. A chemical compound called ‗taxol‘ is extracted from the bark, needles, twigs and roots of this tree, and it has been successfully used to treat some cancers – the drug
is now the biggest selling anti-cancer drug in the
world. The species is under great threat due to over-exploitation.




62. Solution: b)

Unwilling cultivators were made to produce opium through a system of advances. In the rural areas of Bengal and Bihar, there were large numbers of poor peasants. They never had enough to survive. It was difficult for them to pay rent to the landlord or to buy food and clothing. From the 1780s, such peasants found their village headmen (mahato) giving them money advances to produce opium. When offered a loan, the cultivators were tempted to accept, hoping to meet their immediate needs
and pay back the loan at a later stage.

But the loan tied the peasant to the headman and through him to the government. It was the government opium agents who were advancing the money to the headmen, who in turn gave it to the cultivators. By taking the loan, the cultivator was forced to grow opium on a specified area of land and hand over the produce to the agents once the crop had been harvested. He had no option of planting the field with a crop of his choice or of selling his produce to anyone but the government agent. And he had to accept the low price offered for the produce.
63. Solution: a)

Political control of India helped the British in two ways: Indian peasants could be forced to grow crops such as indigo, and cheap British manufacture easily replaced coarser Indian one. Large numbers of Indian weavers and spinners were left without work, and important textile weaving centres such as Murshidabad, Machilipatnam and Surat declined as demand fell.

Yet by the middle of the twentieth century, large numbers of people began boycotting British or mill- made cloth and adopting khadi, even though it was coarser, more expensive and difficult to obtain.
How did this change come about?

In 1905, Lord Curzon decided to partition Bengal to control the growing opposition to British rule. The Swadeshi movement developed in reaction to this measure. People were urged to boycott British goods of all kinds and start their own industries for the manufacture of goods such as matchboxes and cigarettes. Mass protests followed, with people vowing to cleanse themselves of colonial rule. The use of khadi was made a patriotic duty. Women were urged to throw away their silks and glass bangles and wear simple shell bangles. Rough homespun was glorified in songs and poems to popularise it.

The change of dress appealed largely to the upper castes and classes rather than to those who had to make do with less and could not afford the new products. After 15 years, many among the upper classes also returned to wearing European dress.

Though many people rallied to the cause of nationalism at this time, it was almost impossible to



http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 16
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  4 SOLUTIONS                     


compete with cheap British goods that had flooded the market.




64. Solutions: d)

The Androgen test is the latest means adopted by the International Association of Athletics Federation (IAAF) to weed out what it believes are
male interlopers in women‘s sporting competitions. Adopted in 2011 by IAAF and ratified by the International Olympic Committee a year later, the tests use testosterone levels to decide whether an athlete is feminine enough to take part  in women‘s competitions. An athlete can compete in this category only if her testosterone levels are below
the normal male range— a little over 3 ng/ml.

What Are Androgens?

Androgens are typically thought of as male hormones, but they also play an important role in women. In men, androgens support sperm production and the development of male secondary sex characteristics. Women produce androgens in their ovaries and adrenal cortex. Almost all of the androgens a woman makes are immediately converted into estrogen. Estrogen
promotes the development of female secondary sex characteristics. It is also involved in thickening the endometrium and regulating the menstrual cycle. The androgens that are not converted into estrogen play a role in sex drive and slowing bone loss.

Why Would You Have Androgen Levels
Checked?

In women, excess androgen production is the most common cause of an ovulatory (failure to ovulate) infertility. If you are having trouble getting pregnant, your androgen levels will be checked to
see if they could be preventing you from getting pregnant. Women who begin to display masculine physical features (such as increased body hair or a deepening voice) would also have their androgen levels checked. You would also have your androgen levels checked if your fertility doctor suspects you have polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS).

When Are Androgen Levels Checked?

Androgen can be checked at any time of the menstrual cycle. Levels are stable across the cycle. They can also be checked at any time in men.

What Do Androgen Levels Mean?

Androgen tests are done to find out the level of different androgens in your blood. A testosterone test is most common. You may also have your dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS) level checked if you have symptoms that warrant it. Your fertility doctor will make this decision with you.

Almost all women who have elevated androgen levels have an underlying cause that can be identified. Approximately 80 to 90 percent of women with high androgen levels have PCOS. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia, Cushing syndrome, and tumors on the ovaries or adrenal glands are all rare but possible causes of increased androgen levels.




65. Solution: d)

http://www.ncfc.org/about-ncfc/about-co-ops

In the Indian context refer to http://www.newindianexpress.com/states/odisha
/article1391165.ece

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 17
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  4 SOLUTIONS                     


66. Solution: c)

The actual weight of an object on earth = (weight of the object) – (centrifugal force cause due to rotation of earth)

Centrifugal force is caused due to rotation. So, if earth stops rotating centrifugal force will become zero. So all objects on earth (except at poles) will increase in actual weight.

But, at poles this does not happen because, at poles the earth‘s effect of rotation is nil. So, centrifugal force at poles is anways zero. So, at poles the weight of the object is just its own weight and does not change even if the earth stops rotating.

67. Solution: c)

RBI supervises using CRR, SLR, priority sector lending etc. The informal sector is too scattered and remote to monitored by any agency. Besides, it comes outside the framework of financial laws in India.

68. Solution: a)

Forming a SHG is not a fundamental right, forming a cooperative is.

Refer to http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Self- help_group_(finance)

69. Solution: d)

Refer to http://www.sezindia.nic.in/about- introduction.asp

70. Solution: c)

In 1985 United Nations adopted the UN Guidelines for Consumer Protection. This was a tool for
nations to adopt measures to protect consumers
and for consumer advocacy groups to press their
governments to do so. At the international level, this has become the foundation for consumer movement.

Indian constitution does not have any provision. Laws such as Consumer protection act, 1986 exist.




71. Solution: d)

http://www.consumerrights.org.in/rights.htm




72. Solution: d)

They are at Central, State and district levels with specifications for filing cases regarding to certain goods and services.

73. Solution: d)

Rubber: It is an equatorial crop, but under special conditions, it is also grown in tropical and sub- tropical areas. It requires moist and humid climate with rainfall of more than 200 cm. and temperature above 25°C. Rubber is an important industrial raw material. It is mainly grown in Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Andaman and Nicabar islands and Garo hills of Meghalaya. India ranks fifth among the world‘s natural rubber producers.

74. Solution: d)

International Resources: There are international institutions which regulate some resources. The oceanic resources beyond 200 km of the Exclusive Economic Zone belong to open ocean and no individual country can utilise these without the concurrence of international institutions. Anything useful found in the sea or seabed can be termed as a resource like gas, oil etc.

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 18
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  4 SOLUTIONS                     


77. Solution: a)

75. Solution: d)

Refer to http://www.cbd.int/sp/targets/

The Brundtland commission report introduced the term  ‗sustainable development‘. Agenda 21 was the action plan at the first earth summit on environmental change.




76. Solution: a)

The black soils are made up of extremely fine i.e. clayey material. They are well-known for their capacity to hold moisture. In addition, they are rich in soil nutrients, such as calcium carbonate, magnesium, potash and lime. These soils are generally poor in phosphoric contents. They develop deep cracks during hot weather, which helps in the proper aeration of the soil. These soils are sticky when wet and difficult to work on unless tilled immediately after the first shower or during
the pre-monsoon period.
The laterite soil develops in areas with high temperature and heavy rainfall. This is the result of intense leaching due to heavy rain. Humus content of the soil is low because most of the micro organisms, particularly the decomposers, like bacteria, get destroyed due to high temperature. Laterite soils are suitable for cultivation with adequate doses of manures and fertilizers. These soils are mainly found in Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh, and the hilly areas of Orissa and Assam.




78. Solution: d)

After adopting appropriate soil conservation techniques particularly in the hilly areas of Karnataka, Kerala and Tamil Nadu, this soil is very useful for growing tea and coffee. Red laterite soils in Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh and Kerala are more suitable for crops like cashew nut.




79. Solution: b)



















Annual state of forest report 2013

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 19
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  4 SOLUTIONS                     


82. Solutions: a)

80. Solution: a)

Tyndall effect can be observed when sunlight passes through the canopy of a dense forest. In the forest, mist contains tiny droplets of water, which act as particles of colloid dispersed in air.




81. Solution: a)

Examples of aerosols include haze, dust, particulate air pollutants and smoke

People generate aerosols for various purposes, including:

     as test aerosols for calibrating instruments, performing research, and testing sampling equipment and air filters;

     to deliver deodorants, paints, and other consumer products in sprays;

     for dispersal and agricultural application of pesticides;

     for medical treatment of respiratory disease; and

     in fuel injection systems and other combustion technology.

Some devices for generating aerosols are:

     Aerosol spray

     Atomizer nozzle or Nebulizer

     Electrospray

     Vibrating orifice aerosol generator (VOAG)
For first two points: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lead_poisoning#Ex posure_routes

The major sources of lead in drinking water are corrosion of household plumbing systems; and erosion of natural deposits. Lead enters the water (―leaches‖) through contact with the plumbing. Lead leaches into water through corrosion – a dissolving or wearing away of metal caused by a chemical reaction between water and your plumbing. Lead can leach into water from pipes, solder, fixtures and faucets (brass), and fittings. The amount of lead in your water also depends on the types and amounts of minerals in the water, how long the water stays in the pipes, the amount of wear in the pipes,  the water‘s acidity  and its temperature.

Although the main sources of exposure to lead are ingesting paint chips and inhaling dust.

83. Solution: a)




http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 20
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  4 SOLUTIONS                     


84. Solution: d)

Centrifugation is a process that involves the use of the centrifugal force for the sedimentation of heterogeneous mixtures with a centrifuge, used in industry and in laboratory settings. This process is used to separate two immiscible liquids. More- dense components of the mixture migrate away from the axis of the centrifuge, while less-dense components of the mixture migrate towards the axis.

Also refer to http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Centrifugation#Oth
er_applications




85. Solution: a)

TREES ARE the environmental source of Cryptococcus gattii, the fungus responsible for causing life-threatening lung and brain infections
in AIDS patients in southern California for decades.
Three tree species - Canary Island pine, pohutukawa and American sweetgum - are the primary hosts of the fungus behind one-third of all AIDS-related deaths. The study found that the fungus remains fertile even after isolation from its environment, reproducing by sexual or asexual means.


86. Solution: a)

Burning of paper and wood is a chemical change. The wood converts into carbon rich material after heating losing its original composition.




87. Solution: a)

Refer to http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Osmotic_pressure# Applications




88. Solution: d)

Refer to the section  ―Mode of occurrence of minerals‖ in Chapter 5 – 10th NCERT Geo.





http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 21
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  4 SOLUTIONS                     


89. Solution: b)















Share of iron-ore mining in India






90. Solution: b)

Indian coal quality is poor and the supplies are less given so many problems like mining licenses issue, problems of fuel supply agreements; technology deficit for sustainable coal mining etc.

Coking coal needs to be of higher quality and hence needs to be imported.

91. Solution: d)

Legally groundwater is not a community resource in India. It is considered to be that of the landowner‘s. The national water policy will however change this. It calls for making ground water a community resource.

Even though surface irrigation facilities are not adequate in India, it is not a reason for groundwater depletion. Provision of cheap electricity to farmers for drawing groundwater through pumps, and MSp based incentivization of cultivating water-intensive crops is the reason.
92. Solution: b)

http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/201
4-07-23/news/51932083_1_crude-oil-imports-oil- minister-dharmendra-pradhan-gas-production




93. Solution: d)

changesIN ocean temperatures have been attributed to global warming, but local winds can explain them better. Wind speed impacts ocean temperatures by changing the rate of evaporation. Faster wind means more evaporation and cooling. Between 1900 and 2012, changes in temperatures in Pacific Ocean waters off North America followed changes in wind directions and velocity. Ocean temperature in the region saw a steep rise between
1920 and 1940, though the increase in greenhouse gases during the period were negligible. Source: Down to Earth

Regarding density:

Temperature and density share an inverse relationship. As temperature increases, the space between water molecules increases—also known as density, which therefore decreases. If the temperature of water decreases its density increases, but only to a point. At a temperature
of 4°C pure water reaches its maximum or peak density, cooled further it expands and becomes less dense than the surrounding water which is why when water freezes at 0°C it floats.

Salinity and density share a positive relationship. As density increases, the amount of salts in the water—also known as salinity, increases. Various events can contribute to change in the density of
seawater.



http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 22
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  4 SOLUTIONS                     


Salinity can decrease from the melting of polar ice or increase from the freezing of polar ice. Evaporation increases salinity and density while the addition of freshwater decreases salinity and density.

94. Solution: c)

http://www.wildlifeindia.co.uk/birding- india/indian-wildlife-species.html




95. Solution: a)

Self-explanatory. The more water vapour is there is in the surrounding area of the cloth, the more saturated the air around it will be. If air is more saturated, there can not be more evaporation. Hence, wind helps.

96. Solution: a)

Hidden hunger, or micronutrient deficiency, is a major public health problem in developing countries caused by a lack of essential vitamins and minerals (e.g. vitamin A, zinc, iron, iodine) in the diet. Often, the signs of this form of malnutrition
are ‗hidden‘, as individuals may ‗look alright‘ but
suffer extremely negative impacts on health and
well‐being. For example, children may be stunted,
have poor night vision or suffer frequently from
illness. Adults, too, may succumb more frequently to illness and fatigue easily.

    Hidden hunger can lead to illness, blindness, premature death, reduced productivity, and impaired mental development, particularly among women and children in developing countries.
    1 out of 3 people in developing countries
suffers from hidden hunger, which
increases their vulnerability to infection, birth defects, and impaired development.
    People suffering from hidden hunger have diets that are deficient in micronutrients. They  habitually eat large amounts of staple food crops (such as maize, wheat, and rice) that are high in calories but lack sufficient micronutrients, and low amounts of foods that are rich in micronutrients such as fruits, vegetables, and animal and fish products.
    People suffering from hidden hunger are often too poor to be able to afford foods that are more nutritious, or otherwise lack access to these foods.




97. Solution: a)

The particles gain energy from your palm or surroundings and evaporate causing the palm to feel cool. After a hot sunny day, people sprinkle water on the roof or open ground because the large latent heat of vaporisation of water helps to cool
the hot surface.

98. Solution: a)

Option B is called disguised unemployment where people seem to be employed but they are not actually required on the job. In underemployment, irrespective of whether more or less people are employed, their productivity will always be below normal.




99. Solution: a)

A desert cooler cools better on a hot dry day because on a hot dry day temperature is high and humidity is less which helps in better evaporation.


http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 23
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  4 SOLUTIONS                     


Due to the higher rate of evaporation it gives better cooling effect.




100.           Solution: b)

ASIAN MONSOON system is much older than thought. Scientists believed that the system took form 22-25 million years ago due to the uplift of the Tibetan Plateau and the Himalayas. But research has shown that it came into existence 35-40 million years ago when carbon dioxide (CO2) levels were three-four times more than what they are now. The pattern became weak 34 million years ago when
the CO2 levels declined by 50 per cent. For the study, 40-million-year-old snail and mammal fossils in Myanmar were analysed to find the types of oxygen they contained. The ratio of oxygen-18 and oxygen-16 (two different forms of oxygen) showed that the animal lived in monsoonal conditions. Another study in China corroborated the results. Monsoon climate generates winter winds that bring dust from Central Asia to China. Such dust, dating 41 million years ago, was found
in Xining basin in central China. Linking the results with CO2 levels present at the time showed the
correlation. Source: Down to Earth.





















http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 24
