    




INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK PRELIMINARY EXAM - 2015  


INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST - 21

GENERAL STUDIES  

PAPER-I

Time Allowed: 1.5 Hours                                                                                           Maximum Marks: 170  


INSTRUCTIONS
1.   IMMEDITELY AFTER THE COMMENCEMENT  OF THE EXAMINATION, YOU SHOULD
CHECK  THAT  THIS  TEST  BOOKLET   DOES  NOT  HAVE  ANY  UNPRINTED   OR  TORN  OR MISSING PAGES OR ITEMS, ETC. IF SO, GET IT REPLACED BY A COMPLETE TEST BOOKLET.
2.  You have to enter your Roll Number on the Test I Booklet in the Box provided alongside. DO NOT write anything else on the Test Booklet.

4.  This Test Booklet contains 85 items (questions). Each item is printed only in English. Each item comprises four responses (answers). You will select the response which you want to mark on the Answer Sheet. In case you feel that there is more than one correct response, mark the response which you consider the best. In any case, choose ONLY ONE response for each item.
5.  You have to mark all your responses ONLY on the separate Answer Sheet provided.  See directions in the
Answer Sheet.
6.  All items carry equal marks.

7.  Before you proceed to mark in the Answer Sheet the response to various items in the Test Booklet, you have to fill in some particulars in the Answer Sheet as per instructions  sent to you with your Admission Certificate.

8.  After  you  have  completed  filling  in all your  responses  on the Answer  Sheet  and  the examination  has concluded, you should hand over to the Invigilator only the Answer Sheet. You are permitted to take away with you the Test Booklet.

9.  Sheets for rough work are appended in the Test Booklet at the end.
10.  Penalty for wrong answers :
THERE WILL BE PENALTY FOR WRONG ANSWERS MARKED BY A CANDIDATE IN THE OBJECTIVE TYPE QUESTION PAPERS.
(i)    There are four alternatives for the answer to every question. For each question for which a wrong answer has been given by the candidate, one-third of the marks assigned to that question will be deducted as penalty.
(ii)   If a candidate gives more than one answer, it will be treated as a wrong answer even if one of the given answers happens to be correct and there will be same penalty as above to that question.
(iii)     If a question is left blank, i.e., no answer is given by the candidate, there will be no penalty for that question.




    
http://insightsonindia.com


INSIGHTS  ON    INDIA    MOCK    TEST    SERIES    FOR    CIVIL    SERVICES    PRELIMINARY    EXAM    2015    
    



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Page  1    
    
    

1.   The list of castes or tribes that are to be identified as SCs or STs are specified in a)  a Presidential order with respect to
each State and Union Territory
(UT)
b)  the Fifth and Sixth Schedule of the
Constitution of India
c)  the resolutions passed by the respective state legislatures
d)  the order issued by the State Governor in the extra-ordinary Gazette of India




2.  As it does with respect to the SCs, the National Commission for SCs is also required to discharge similar functions with regard to the
1.   OBCs
2.  STs
3.  Anglo-Indian Community

Choose the correct answer from the codes given below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




3.  The Election Commission registers political parties for the purpose of elections and grants them recognition as national or state parties on the basis of their
1.   Assets and liabilities
2.  Geographical presence in more than four constituencies
3.  Number of workers, volunteers and election candidates
4.  Poll performance

Choose the correct answer from the codes given below.
a)  1 and 4 only b)  2 and 4 only c)  1 and 3 only d)  4 only




4.  Consider the following statements.
1.   There is only one general electoral roll for every territorial constituency for election to the Parliament and the state legislatures.
2.  The state legislatures, apart from Parliament can also make provision with respect to all matters relating to elections to the state legislatures.

Which of the above is/are true?

a)  1 only b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2 d)  None




5.  Which of the following government officials are a part of the machinery of Election Commission of India that conducts and supervises elections in India?
1.   Observers
2.  Presiding officer
3.  Returning Officer
4.  Chief Electoral Officer

Choose the correct answer from the codes given below.

a)  1 and 4 only b)  2 and 4 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Page  2    
    
    


6.  The Model Code of Conduct for guidance of candidates and political parties comes immediately into effect a)  after the Election Commission of
India announces the election schedule in a major press conference
b)  after the Election Commission of India issues a specific order enforcing the Model code of conduct
c)  automatically exactly one month
before the election dates
d)  after the deadline for nominating candidates ends




7.   Every candidate seeking election to the
Parliament or a State Legislature has
to furnish on his nomination paper the information on which of the following matters?
1.   Educational qualifications
2.  Criminal Record
3.  Assets and Liabilities
4.  Details of political funding


Choose the correct answer from the codes given below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  None of the above






9.  Which of the following correctly points the difference between Exit polls and Opinion Polls?
1.   Exit polls are not banned, but opinion polls are banned in India.
2.  Exit polls are taken after the elector votes and exits from a particular polling     booth; opinion polls are taken before the election.
3.  Exit polls are conducted by the Election Commission of India, whereas opinion             polls are conducted by private media agencies.

Choose the correct answer from the codes given below.
Choose the correct answer from the codes
given below.

a)  1 and 4 only
b)  2, 3 and 4 only c)  1, 2 and 3 only d)  All of the above




8.  Consider the following statements about Elections to Rajya Sabha.
1.   A candidate has to be an elector in the state from where he wishes to be elected in Rajya Sabha.
2.  Secret Ballot system is used in
Rajya Sabha elections.
3.  Both the Legislative assembly and the legislative council take part in the Rajya Sabha elections.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only d)  2 only




10. Disqualification on ground of defection does not apply in cases of
1.   Political Party mergers
2.  Political party splits
3.  A candidate quitting political party

Choose the correct answer from the codes given below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  2 only

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Page  3    
    
    




11. Consider a case where a MP has voted against his political party in the Parliament. Which among the following authorities will decide on his disqualification pertaining to anti- defection law?
a)  Presiding Officer of that House of
the Parliament
b)  President of India
c)  Election Commission of India
d)  Parliamentary Committee on Anti- defection




12. Which of the following authorities have a bearing on the decision of Nuclear retaliation to a first strike on India?
1.   Nuclear Command Authority
2.  Indian Armed Forces
3.  Parliament


c)  2 and 3 only d)  1 and 4 only




14. Article 366 contains the definitions of various terms used in different provisions of the constitution. Which of the following terms have NOT been defined in the Constitution?
1.   Indian State
2.  Ruler
3.  Anglo-Indian

Choose the correct answer from the codes given below.

a)  1 only b)  2 only c)  3 only
d)  All have been defined.




15. Consider the following associations of
Individual islands and the Straits that
Choose the correct answer from the codes
given below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only d)  1 only




13. In the Table of Precedence, which of the following figures/authorities precede the Chief Election Commissioner?
1.   Holders of Bharat Ratna decoration
2.  Judges of Supreme Court
3.  Attorney General of India
4.  Leader of Opposition, Lok Sabha.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only
b)  1, 2 and 4 only
separate them from Mainland.
1.   Newfoundland separated by Strait of Belle isle
2.  Tasmania by the Bass strait
3.  Madagascar by the Mozambique channel

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




16. The reef-building corals will NOT
flourish in conditions where
1.   Cold currents frequently upwell
2.  waters are very deep
3.  there is absence of silt and water is salty


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Page  4    
    
    
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




17. The Continental shelves are of great geographical significance for which of the following reasons?
1.   They are the richest fishing grounds in the world as they are rich in plankton growth.
2.  They help increase the height of tides.
3.  They are rich in hydrocarbon resources.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




19. The Norwegian coast, even at Latitude
60-70 degrees, is ice-free throughout the year because of the influence of
1.   Warm North Atlantic current
2.  Continentality
3.  Westerly trade winds

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only d)  1 only




20.Which of the following factors decide the movement of ocean currents?
1.   Planetary Winds
2.  Rotation of earth
3.  Salinity of Ocean
4.  Temperature of Ocean water

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.




18. A swimmer finds it easier to float in a more saline denser ocean than a less denser one. Which of the following factors would have contributed to making the ocean more saline making it easy to swim?
1.   High rate of evaporation
2.  Degree of water mixing by currents being less
3.  Less precipitation over that ocean

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above

a)  1 and 2 only
b)  1, 3 and 4 only c)  2, 3 and 4 only d)  All of the above




21. In the North Indian ocean, there is a complete reversal of the direction of ocean currents between Summer and Winter due to
a)  Western tropical cyclones
b)  Reversal in the direction of Jet streams
c)  Changes in the Monsoon winds d)  Cooling down of Tibetan plateau


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Page  5    
    
    


22. Consider the following statements:

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only
Assertion (A): Death rate due to diseases is
normally high in tropical countries and low in deserts.

Reason (R): Germs are not readily transmitted in regions of high temperature and low humidity.

In the context of the statements above, which of these is true?

a)  A and R both are true, and R is the correct explanation for A.
b)  A and R both are true, and R is the
NOT the correct explanation for A. c)  A is correct, R is incorrect.
d)  A and R both are incorrect.




23. A barometer if subjected to the same pressure will show different readings when the following change
1.   Altitude of the device
2.  Gravitational force at different latitudes
3.  Temperature

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




24. Relative humidity of the air in a particular location governs which of the following factors?
1.   Cloud formation
2.  Precipitation
3.  Circulation of Ocean currents

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.
c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




25. The phenomenon of continentality happens because
a)  Ocean currents cannot reach inner
seas surrounded by land
b)  land surfaces are heated and cooled faster than the ocean water around it
c)  there is a larger landmass in the Northern hemisphere than Southern hemisphere
d)  the effect of ocean waves and tides is less pronounced in inner continental regions




26. Consider the following.
1.   Cold air underlies warmer air at higher altitudes.
2.  Passage of a cold front
3.  Invasion of sea air by a cooler onshore breeze



Which of the above will be seen when temperature inversion occurs?

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above



27. Consider the following statements: Assertion (A): During a temperature
inversion, air pollution released into the atmosphere's lowest layer is trapped there
and can be removed only by strong horizontal winds.



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Page  6    
    
    
Reason (R): Inversion of air temperature restricts vertical mobility of wind.

In the context of the statements above, which of these is true?

a)  A and R both are true, and R is the correct explanation for A.
b)  A and R both are true, and R is the
NOT the correct explanation for A. c)  A is correct, R is incorrect.
d)  A and R both are incorrect.




28. Consider the following sequence of events.
1.   Convergence of cold and warm air
2.  Warm air rises above the cold air
3.  Cold air pushes warm air

For a cyclonic or frontal rain, the above activities should happen in which sequence?

a) 123 b) 213 c) 132 d)  321




29. Arrange the following planetary winds in order of their occurrence from North to South Pole.
1.   South-Westerlies
2.  North-East Trade winds
3.  North-Westerlies
4.  South-east trade winds

Choose the correct order from the codes below.

a) 1243 b) 1234 c)  3241
d)  None of the orders above is correct.


30. Consider the following statements.
1.   Winds in the Northern hemisphere are always deflected to their right.
2.  Anticyclones are more frequent in summer.
3.  Cyclones do not occur in temperate
zones.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




31. Consider the following statements about the Rubber plantation.
1.   It was first discovered in the
Amazon Basin.
2.  Brazil exports practically no natural rubber.
3.  Rubber has been transplanted in several temperate regions too.
4.  Thailand and Indonesia are leading producers of rubber.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  2 and 3 only b)  1 and 4 only
c)  1, 2 and 4 only d)  All of the above




32. The Aranyakas or the treatises of the forest
1.   present secret explanations of the rituals mentioned in Vedas
2.  have their origin in the philosophical discussions of the Brahmanas
3.  explain the meaning of Upanishads




http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Page  7    
    
    
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




33. As put in the Hindu Mahakavya (great epics), Ramayana and Mahabharata, which of the following are a part of Purushartha (meaning of human life)?
1.   Liberation (Moksha)
2.  Fulfilment of all desires (Kama)
3.  Worldly achievement (Artha)
4.  Righteousness (Dharma)

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  2 and 3 only b)  1 and 4 only
c)  1, 2 and 4 only
d)  All of the above


a)  2, 3 and 5 only b)  1, 4 and 5 only c)  1, 2 and 4 only d)  All of the above




35. All the Buddhist canonical literature is in Pali which includes Tipitaka (threefold basket). Choose the right matches among them with the subject they deal with.
1.   Vinaya Pitaka - Collection of the
speeches and dialogues of the
Buddha
2.  Sutta Pitaka - Contains the monastic rules of the Order of Buddhist monks
3.  Abhidhamma Pitaka - Elucidates
the various topics dealing with ethics, psychology or theory of knowledge

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.




34. The Puranas were written to illustrate and expound the truth of the Vedas. Out of these Mahapuranas became more popular. Which of the following subjects are dealt by Mahapuranas?
1.   Sarga, the original creation of the
universe
2.  Pratisarga, the periodical process of destruction and re-creation
3.  Manvantara, the different eras or cosmic cycles
4.  Surya Vamsha and Chandra Vamsa,
the histories of the solar and lunar dynasties of Gods and sages
5.  Vamshanucharita, the genealogies
of kings

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only d)  3 only




36. Consider the following statements about early Dravidian Literature.
1.   In Manimekalai (Tamil) there is an
elaborate exposition of the doctrines of Buddhism.
2.  Vaishnava bhakti literature was a
part of it.
3.  There was no place for subjective love poems or poetry in early Dravidian literature.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Page  8    
    
    


c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




37. Which of the following were advocated or being talked about by Nanak in
early Punjabi literature?
1.   Truth is supreme, but above truth is truthful living.
2.  Unchanging reality
3.  Cosmic law
4.  Meditation


a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only d)  3 only




40.Consider the following about Sufism.
1.   It was concerned with the mystical dimensions of Islam.
2.  It is a science whose objective is the reparation of the heart and turning it away from all else but God.
3.  It also advocated the practice of
Choose the correct answer using the codes
below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 4 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




38. The most powerful trend of medieval
Indian literature between 1000 and
1800 A.D. is devotional (bhakti) poetry. The dominating note of bhakti is
a)  ecstasy and total identity with God
b)  bliss in becoming the servant of
God
c)  detachment of worldly identities and service of God
d)  detachment of worldly identities and service of mankind




39. Which of the following were NOT advocated by the Bhakti movemement?
1.   There is God in every human being.
2.  Annihilation of the age-old caste system
3.  Conceptual erudition

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.
Dikhr – reading religious scriptures filled with the understanding of God’s grace.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




41. The practice of ‘Muraqaba’ in Sufism can be likened to the practices of what in other religions and faiths?
a)  Prayer to God b)  Meditation
c)  Dancing and whirling in the expression of God
d)  Religious pilgrimage to attain
liberation




42. Recently the ‘Social progress index’ has been in news that measure the all
round social development of a country.
It does NOT include
1.   Access to advance education.
2.  Tolerance and inclusion
3.  Women participation
4.  Personal safety


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Page  9    
    
    
Choose the correct answer from the codes given below.

a)  2 only b)  3 only
c)  3 and 4 only d)  1 and 4 only




43. Ministry of Textile has taken a decision to promote the use of geo-textiles in North-eastern belts of India. Consider the following statements about Geotechnical textile products.
1.   Geo-textiles are used most
commonly in the transportation market for construction of roadways.
2.  Using these products consumes more space in landfill projects.
3.  India is the second largest producer of this.
4.  It is useful in desert area road
connectivity.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  3 and 4 only c)  1 only
d)  3 only


44. Which of following is NOT concerned with the recommendations of the latest reports of the 20th Law Commission?
1.   Make it compulsory for parties to
declares all donations below a certain limit
2.  In Favor of compulsory voting.
3.  Ban independent candidates from contesting election.
4.  The disqualification decision for candidates concerning anti- defection law should be made by President and governor
respectively.


Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 4 only b)  2 only
c)  4 only d)  3 only


45. Which of the following are the features of the recently launched ‘Dhanush’ Missile?
1.   It is an air to air missile.
2.  It is a liquid propelled missile.
3.  It is capable to target both land based and sea based target.
4.  It cannot be used for inter- continental missile attacks.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 4 only b)  1 and 2 only
c)  3 and 4 only
d)  All of the above




46. Consider the following statements about the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA).
1.   It is an intergovernmental
organization.
2.  It has three governing bodies
(assembly, council, executives).
3.  India is a permanent member of it.
4.  It is an organ of United Nations.

Which of the above is NOT correct about
IRENA?

a)  1 and 4 only b)  3 only
c)  2 and 4 only d)  3 and 4 only

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  10    
    
    




47. Consider the following statements about bio-diversity.
1.   Buddha peacock butterfly is
endemic to East Asia.
2.  Malayan Green Banded peacock butterfly also discovered in west Bengal.
3.  Sarus crane is the official bird of
Uttarakhand.


organization for any of the purpose which it has to conduct.
4.  Its objective is to generate
employment in rural India.

Which of the above is NOT true about the
KVIC?

a)  2 and 3 only b)  1 only
c)  3 only
d)  1 and 2 only
Choose the correct answer using codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  2 only
d)  1 only




48. Consider the following statements about Green peace.
1.   It is a non-profit organization.
2.  Government of India has suspended the registration of Green peace India.
3.  It is regulated under FCRA 2010.

Choose the correct answer from the codes given below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




49. Consider the following statements about the Khadi and village industry cCmmission.
1.   It is an executive body.
2.  It comes under the ministry of micro, small and medium enterprise.
3.  The KVIC is authorized to
establish and maintain separate

50. Rail budget 2015 announced “Kayakulp” council. Consider the following about it.
1.   Its objective is to transform only customer service in Indian railways.
2.  Government officials will head this body.
3.  It will have representatives from rail trade unions as well.

Which of the above is correct?

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only d)  3 only




51. Supreme court has recently given a ruling over the growing cases of acid attacks on women. Consider the following with reference to it.
1.   State will be responsible to
provide compensation to the victim.
2.  Victim will be provided free
reconstruction surgery.
3.  Criminal action can be taken on the hospitals that discriminate with such victims.



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  11    
    
    


4.  State will provide special privileges for the livelihood of the
victim.


c)  A is correct, R is incorrect. d)  A and R both are incorrect.

Which of the above is NOT correct?

a)  1 and 3 only b)  3 only
c)  4 only
d)  2 and 4 only




52. Consider the following statements about two species – Chestnut breasted partridge and Telangana crab spider.
1.   Chestnut breasted partridge is
endemic to western Himalayas.
2.  Chestnut breasted partridge is
‘Endangered’ according to IUCN.
3.  Telangana crab spider do not construct webs.
4.  Telangana crab spider work as
bio-control agents against insects. Which of the above is NOT correct?
a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  4 only
d)  3 and 4 only



53. Consider the following statements: Assertion (A): Radar cannot be used to track
thing in water bodies.

Reason (R): Radar uses high electromagnetic frequency which is absorbed by water and thus cannot travel more.

In the context of the statements above, which of these is true?

a)  A and R both are true, and R is the correct explanation for A.
b)  A and R both are true, and R is the
NOT the correct explanation for A.

54. Consider the following with reference to the principle of Net neutrality that has been in news for long. As per the principle
1.   Free internet cannot be given.
2.  All traffic on internet should be treated equally.
3.  For the same service, users can
not be charged differently. Which of the above is correct?
a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




55. Consider the following statements about Project 75, a bilateral joint project.
1.   It is to develop submarine with
joint India and Germany collaboration.
2.  No production has been undertaken till date under the project.
3.  Vehicles designed under the
project will not be used for intelligence gathering and stealth capabilities.

Which of the above is true about Project 75?

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  None of the above


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  12    
    
    


56. Which of the following nations provide nuclear fuel to India for the purposes
of generating nuclear energy?
1.   Russia
2.  Kazakhstan
3.  Canada
4.  Australia
5.  USA


Choose the correct answer from the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 4 only b)  2 and 3 only
c)  All of the above were parts.
d)  None of the above were parts.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 5 only
b)  2, 4 and 5 only
c)  1, 3, 4 and 5 only d)  1, 2 and 3 only




57. Consider the following statements with regard to the terms of reference of the task force on Inter-linking of rivers set up by the Government of India.
1.   It will not take up Himalayan
rivers in the inter-linking project.
2.  Only intra-state rivers can be interlinked as per the government orders.
3.  Inter-linking work will be taken
under PPP mode of investment. Which of the above is correct?
a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  None of the above




58. Which of the following genres were NOT parts of the trend of the medieval literature?
1.   Bhakti
2.  Love ballads
3.  Heroic poetry
4.  Mystical poetry

59. The birth of writing and publishing of
‘novels’ in Indian literature is associated with the
a)  social reform-oriented movement of the 19th century
b)  writings of Amir Khusro and other
Medieval writers and poets c)  incoming of Christian
missionaries in India d)  early decades of post-
independence when freedom of
speech was granted




60.Novels were found to be the most appropriate medium to eulogize the intellectual and physical richness of the past, and reminded Indians about their obligations and rights. In this context, novels were written by
1.   Bankim Chandra Chattarjee
2.  Hari Narayan Apte
3.  Rabindranath Tagore

Choose the correct answer from the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  13    
    
    


61. Slowdown in the Indian economy is associated and aggravated by slowdown in which of these other economies?
1.   China
2.  Japan
3.  Europe
4.  Russia


Which of the above is/are true?

a)  1 only b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None




64. Which of the following changes have
Choose the correct answer from the codes
below.

a)  1, 2 and 3 only b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1, 3 and 4 only d)  2 and 4 only




62. Which of the following economic indicators have not grown since the onset of the recent economic slowdown in India?
1.   Gross capital formation as a
percentage of GDP
2.  Savings rate as a percentage of
GDP
3.  Per capita Net National Income

Choose the correct answer from the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




63. Consider the following about money and credit flow in India.
1.   With the recent actions of RBI, broad money has reduced over the last years as a percentage of GDP.
2.  Scheduled commercial bank credit has been reducing as a percentage of GDP since the economic slowdown in the recent years.
been made in the calculation of headline growth in India?
1.   Headline growth rate will now be measured by GDP at constant market prices instead of GDP at factor cost at constant prices.
2.  Sector-wise estimates of gross value added (GVA) will now be given at basic prices instead of factor cost.
3.  GDP growth data will be released
on a monthly basis for the information of investors.

Choose the correct answer from the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




65. The gap between domestic savings and domestic investment in economics is definitionally equal to the
a)  Current account balance
b)  Capital account balance c)  Domestic deficit
d)  Reserves of all the scheduled
commercial banks in India




66. Which of the following can be included in Gross Fixed Capital Formation (GFCF)?
1.   Dwellings


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  14    
    
    


2.  Cultivated biological resources
3.  Intellectual property products
4.  Machinery


a) 123 b) 312 c)  321
d)  132
Choose the correct answer from the codes
below.

a)  1 and 4 only b)  3 and 4 only
c)  1, 2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




67. The decline in inflation during the last financial year turned out to be much faster than was anticipated in the initial months of the year by the government. Which of these factors may have contributed to the same?
1.   Persistent decline in crude oil
prices
2.  Tight monetary policy
3.  Relative stability of rupee compared to other major currencies
4.  Base effect

Choose the correct answer from the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  3 and 4 only
c)  1, 2 and 3 only d)  All of the above






68. Arrange the following in decreasing order of their total value in Indian exports.
1.   Manufacturing goods
2.  Crude and petroleum products
(including coal)
3.  Agriculture and allied products

Choose the correct order from the codes below.
69. Consider the following statements about the performance of the external sector of India in the last one decade.
1.   Net capital flows have never been
higher than the Current Account
Deficit (CAD).
2.  India’s foreign exchange reserves have not increased (rather decreased).
3.  Among the major economies with
a CAD, India is the second largest foreign   exchange reserve holder after Brazil.

Choose the correct answer from the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  3 only
d)  1 only




70. With a zero Current account Deficit, which of the following can lead to an increase in the Foreign exchange reserves of India?
1.   Higher export of invisibles
2.  Higher portfolio investment
3.  Higher External Commercial
Borrowing

Choose the correct answer from the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  15    
    
    




71. Consider the following statements with regard to External Commercial Borrowings (ECBs).
1.   Only private sector can use ECBs
to raise resources from abroad.
2.  ECBs cannot be used for investment in stock market or speculation in real estate.
3.  An infrastructure project can be
fully funded by an ECB.
4.  A borrower cannot refinance its existing rupee loan through ECB.


Choose the correct answer from the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 b)  2 and 4 c)  1 and 3 d)  1 and 4




74. Consider the following sector-wise comparisons with regard to the Central Plan outlay in the last two annual budgets. Plan outlay for
1.   Energy is higher than that for

Choose the correct answer from the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2, 3 and 4 only c)  1, 3 and 4 only d)  2 and 4 only




72. India’s external debt stock can increase because of an increase in
1.   Foreign Direct Investment
2.  ECBs
3.  Non-resident Indian Deposits

Choose the correct answer from the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




73. Out of the four sources of taxation listed below, which two have contributed more to the total tax revenue over last half decade?
1.   Income Tax
2.  Custom Duty
3.  Service Tax
4.  Corporation tax
Industry and minerals.
2.  Industry and minerals is lower than that for transport.
3.  Social services is higher than that for energy.

Choose the correct answer from the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




75. The introduction of the GST would be
a significant step in the field of indirect tax reforms in India. Consider the following statements about it.
1.   GST would be a destination-based
tax as against the present concept of origin-           based tax.
2.  It would also be levied on inter- state supplies.
3.  Taxpayers with a turnover below a
certain threshold would be exempt from GST.
4.  GST will be levied only by the
Centre, and from there it will be appropriated to the states.

Choose the correct answer from the codes below.

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  16    
    
    


a)  1, 2 and 3 only b)  2 and 4 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  1 and 4 only


76. The legendary struggle which also became famous by the name of the
‘August Revolution’ in India was a)  Quit India movement
b)  Civil Disobedience Movement c)  Non-cooperation movement d)  Swadeshi Movement




77. Which of the following events/incidents were precursors to the Quit India movement?
1.   Failure of the Cripps’ Mission
2.  British evacuation (leaving their non-white subjects) from Malaya and Burma        because of Japanese invasion of Burma
3.  British raising import duty on various Indian manufactured
items


b)  2 and 4 only c)  1 and 3 only d)  2 and 3 only




79. Which of the following official appeals were made by the leadership of the
Quit India movement before launching the struggle?
1.   Government servants to resign from their posts
2.  Soldiers to leave their companies
3.  Princely states to declare that they have withdrawn from the suzerainty of the British
4.  Peasants to refuse paying the land
revenue

Choose the correct answer from the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only
b)  All of the above c)  1, 3 and 4 only d)  4 only

Choose the correct answer from the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




78. The Quit India movement
1.   was not ratified by Indian
National Congress
2.  was spearheaded by Gandhi
3.  started from Bombay.
4.  was aimed at getting dominion status for India

Choose the correct answer from the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 3 only


80.A significant feature of the Quit India Movement was the emergence of what came to be known as parallel governments in some parts of the country. These were
1.   Ballia in East U P
2.  Tamluk in the Midnapur district of Bengal
3.  Satara in Maharashtra

Choose the correct answer from the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  17    
    
    


81. Consider the following statements about the pre-Independence Indian National Army (INA).
1.   It was formed after the failure of
Quit India movement.
2.  The idea of the INA was first conceived in Malaya by Mohan Singh.
3.  The INA was raised by the
Japanese Army and supported by them till our     Independence.


3.  It was a non-violent movement based on Satyagraha and negotiation.

Choose the correct answer from the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above

Choose the correct answer from the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only d)  2 only




82. The failure of the ‘Imphal campaign’ quashed any hopes of the INA liberating the nation. The ‘Imphal campaign’ was
a)  Japanese armies’ attempt to
destroy the Allied forces at Imphal and invade India
b)  INA’s secret operation to invade India with the help of Burmese army
c)  British armies’attempt to destroy
the Axis forces at Imphal and invade Imphal
d)  None of the above




83. Consider the following statements about the Tebhaga movement.
1.   It was initiated by the Kisan Sabha
in Bengal.
2.  The demand of the movement was to reduce the share given to landlords.

84. The Warlis movement organized in
Western India was against
1.   Forest contractors
2.  Money lenders
3.  British Bureaucracy
4.  Rich farmers
5.  Landlords

Choose the correct answer from the codes below.

a)  2, 4 and 5 only b)  1 and 2 only
c)  3, 4 and 5 only
d)  All of the above




85. The British were using political control to subordinate the Indian economy
and society to the needs of the British
economy and society. Among them
‘Drain of wealth’ was caused by
1.   Plunder and taxation
2.  Employment of Englishmen in
India (Home charges)
3.  Investing British capital in India
4.  Free and unequal trade with India

Choose the correct answer from the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only
b)  All of the above c)  1, 3 and 4 only d)  4 only


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  18    
    
    








    
































































http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  19    
    
