                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   


1.   Solution: b)

Article 123 of the constitution gives legislative power to President. He can issue ordinances when Parliament is in recess i.e. not in session if there is urgent need to have a law on some urgent public matter. The promulgated ordinance has similar effect to an act of parliament. However, every ordinance must be laid and approved by both houses of the parliament within 6 weeks from the reassembling. If not
placed and approved by both houses of the parliament after reassembling it becomes
invalid or lapses.




2.   Solution: c)

WNTD is one of eight official global public health campaigns marked by the WHO.

The FCTC, one of the most quickly ratified treaties in United Nations history, is a supranational agreement that seeks "to protect present and future generations from the devastating health, social, environmental and economic consequences of tobacco consumption and exposure to tobacco smoke" by enacting a set of universal standards stating the dangers of tobacco and limiting its use in all forms worldwide.

Even though it talks about regulating the use of tobacco, it does not provide for a tobacco ban; neither about alternative livelihoods for farmers.





3.   Solution: a)

Uttar Pradesh Food Safety and Drug Administration (UP FDA) had recently asked Nestle India to withdraw a batch of Maggi noodles from the market after they had found that it contained high level of lead and Monosodium glutamate (MSG), a taste enhancer.


Monosodium glutamate is a kind of amino acid. It occurs naturally in many agricultural products. Monosodium glutamate is added artificially to packaged food to enhance flavour. Large doses of MSG can cause headaches and other feelings of discomfort collectively known as Chinese Restaurant Syndrome.





4.   Solution: a)


http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                              Page 1
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   


Recently, Nobel peace prize winning organisation OPCW (Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons) has achieved major milestone of destroying 90 per cent of the global chemical weapons stockpile.

OPCW promotes, administers and verifies the adherence to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction (CWC).

This convention outlaws the production, stockpiling, and use of chemical weapons and their precursors. 190 member-states have signed and ratified this convention including India. Six states- Angola, Egypt, Israel, Myanmar, North Korea and South Sudan are still outside the CWC.




5.   Solution: c)

AFSPA initially empowered only the Governors of the States and the Administrators of the Union Territories to declare areas in the concerned State or the Union
Territory as 'disturbed'.  But, since 1972 AFSPA can be enforced by the Central
government too.

The Act gives  the military special powers over  ‗disturbed areas‘  where it can use
force (without formal prosecution etc.) if it deems necessary.

The Act has received criticism from several sections for alleged concerns about human rights violations in the regions of its enforcement alleged to have happened.

Hence, the Tripura government has decided to withdraw the Armed Forces Special Powers Act (AFSPA), 1958 from the remaining areas of the state. Consent of military is not required to withdraw the act from disturbed areas.





6.   Solution: d)

The rate of disappearance will depend on how much greenhouse-gas emissions continue to rise and indirectly will affect temperature, snowfall and rainfall in this region. Increased temperatures due to global warming will not only increase the rates of snow and ice melt, but can also result in a change of precipitation from snow to rain at critical elevations, where glaciers are concentrated. It will greatly affect the
farming and hydropower generation downstream of the Himalayan peaks. While,



http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                              Page 2
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   


avalanches and earthquakes in this region also can breach the dams, causing catastrophic floods. It can also result in the creation and growth of lakes dammed by glacial debris.


Albedo is the fraction of solar energy (shortwave radiation) reflected from the Earth back into space. It is a measure of the reflectivity of the earth's surface. Ice, especially with snow on top of it, has a high albedo: most sunlight hitting the surface bounces back towards space.




7.   Solution: d)

The Foreign Investment Promotion Board (FIPB) is a national agency of Government of India, with the remit to consider and recommend foreign direct investment (FDI) which does not come under the automatic route. It provides a single window clearance for proposals on FDI in India.

It comprises of secretaries of different ministries with Secretary, Department of
Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance being the chairman.

In a significant move aimed at expediting flow of foreign investment into the
country, the Union Cabinet liberalised the FDI policy further by allowing the FIPB to clear proposals from overseas entities worth up to ₹30 billion, against the existing limit of ₹12 billion. Recommendations of FIPB for proposals up to ₹30 billion are approved by Minister of Finance. While recommendations  for proposals of more
than ₹3000 crore need to be approved by Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
(CCEA).




8.   Solution: d)

http://electronics.howstuffworks.com/blu-ray2.htm

Blu-ray discs are almost as thick as DVDs.




9.   Solution: c)

Poona Pact, (Sept. 24, 1932), agreement between Hindu leaders in India granting new rights to untouchables (low-caste Hindu groups). The pact, signed at Poona
(now Pune, Maharashtra), resulted from the communal award of Aug. 4, 1932, made


http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                              Page 3
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   


by the British government on the failure of the India parties to agree, which allotted seats in the various legislatures of India to the different communities. Mahatma Gandhi objected to the provision of separate electorates for the Scheduled (formerly
―untouchable‖) Castes, which in his view  separated them from the whole Hindu community. Though in prison, Gandhi announced a fast unto death, which he began on September 18.

Bhimrao Ramji Ambedkar, the untouchable leader, who  felt that  his group‘s special interests might be advanced by the government‘s system, resisted concessions until Gandhi was near death. He and the Hindu leaders then agreed to the pact, which withdrew separate electorates but gave increased representation to the Scheduled Castes for a 10-year period.




10. Solution: c)

They are extra-constitutional  in emergence. In other words, they are not mentioned in the Constitution. However, the Rules of Business provide for their establishme nt.

They are of two types—standing and ad hoc. They are set up by the Prime Minister according to the exigencies of the time and requirements of the situation.

They not only sort out issues and formulate proposals for the consideration of the
Cabinet, but also take decisions. However, the Cabinet can review their decisions.




11. Solution: a)

Triticale, Wheat-rye hybrid that has a high yield and rich protein content. The first cross was reported in 1875, the first fertile cross in 1888. The name triticale first appeared in scientific literature in 1935 and is attributed to Erich Tschermak von Seysenegg. In favourable environmental conditions its yield equals that of wheat; under poor conditions its yield exceeds that of wheat. Its flour is not very suitable for breadmaking but can be blended with wheat flour. Major producers are Russia, the U.S., and Australia.




12. Solution: a)

The most remarkable among Mauryan Art is the highly polished monolithic lion-
capital found at Sarnath, which is now the Emblem of the Government of India. It


http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                              Page 4
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   


represents four roaring lions back to back facing the four cardinal directions. The round abacus is decorated with four dharmachakras or wheels of law, alternating with an elephant, a bull, a horse and a lion, all carved with masterly skill. The ab acus is supported by a bell-shaped base consisting of a lotus with dharmachakra, which perhaps symbolized the victory of righteousness over physical force. The superb modelling of the figures executed in a realistic manner with a certain stylization, is invested with a great power and dignity, and reveals the aristocratic and
international nature of Mauryan art.




13. Solution: b)

Here, no definition is absolutely appropriate. UPSC will often give such options to confuse you.

Best approach would be to eliminate and select. Option A is a very general statement, and thus cannot be true.

Option C and D can be true for any of the sectors of the economy. So, option B is the most appropriate choice here.
Right definition would be - The primary sector of the economy is the sector of an economy making direct use of natural resources. This includes agriculture, forestry, fishing and mining. This is contrasted with the secondary sector, producing manufactured goods, and the tertiary sector, producing services.




14. Solution: a)

Renowned American mathematician and Nobel laureate John Nash passed away recently. He was renowned for works in game theory.

Game theory is the study of strategic decision making. Specifically, it is "the study of mathematical models of conflict and cooperation between intelligent rational decision-makers." An alternative term suggested "as a more descriptive name for the discipline" is interactive decision theory.

Game theory is mainly used in economics, political science, and psychology, as well as logic, computer science, and biology. The subject first addressed zero-sum games, such that one person's gains exactly equal net losses of the other participant or
participants. Today, however, game theory applies to a wide range of behavioral


http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                              Page 5
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   


relations, and has developed into an umbrella term for the logical side of decision science, including both humans and non-humans (e.g. computers, animals).






15. Solution: a)

During the past one year, the Ministry of Earth Sciences has provided agro- meteorological advisories through mobile phones to 7.1 million farmers in 505 districts, launched customized weather forecast service for the holy yatra to Amarnath Cave and commissioned a weather forecasting system at the heliport serving pilgrim going to Vaishnodevi.

In addition, a SMS-based disaster alert system for cyclones, storms and heavy rains was also developed for the nation and two mobile applications for android phones and tablets called India weather` and SAFAR-Air‘  has been  launched. India Weather is designed to give current day and four-days advance forecast of weather in 310 cities across the country, while Safar-Air provides air quality information for the metro cities in the country.




16. Solution: c)

After Alexander's invasion of India in 326 B.C., the Indo- Greek, Indo Scythian and Kushan kings ruled over its north-western territories and under their patronage emerged a distinct style of sculpture, popularly known as the Greco-Roman, Buddhist or Gandhara art. It was a product of the combination of Hellenistic, West Asiatic and native elements. Greek and Roman techniques, modified according to Indian requirements, were employed in fashioning the Gandhara sculpture which truly represents Indian culture in a Western garb. The subject-matter treated is predominantly Buddhist. Its area extended from Takshila in India to the Swat Valley in Pakistan and northwards to areas in Afghanistan.

The first century of the Christian era's revolutionary change, had far-reaching effects, not only on the art of India, but also on the artistic development of Buddhist




















Head of Buddha, Gandhara period, 2nd century A.D., Uttar Pradesh

http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                              Page 6
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   


countries of Asia. Buddha who was hitherto designated only by a symbol, was conceived in human form. His person was given some of the 32 suspicious bodily signs associated with the Mahapurushalakshana, such as the protuberance of the skull, the hair-knot, bindi between the eyebrows and elongated ears. This change came about as a result of the new changes that had crept into the religious outlook of Buddhism due to the influence of the Devotional School of Hindu Philosophy, requiring the
worship of personal gods. It must have exercised profound
influence on the religious approach of the masses towards Buddhism. The image becomes henceforth the main element of sculpture and worship. Possibly, the emergence of the image of Buddha in Gandhara and in Mathura was a parallel development. In each case, it was produced by the local artist craftsmen working in the local tradition. At Mathura it clearly emerges from the Yaksha tradition. The Gandhara image might seem to resemble Apollo in some extraneous forms and does look characteristically Greco- Roman in drapery, but even there most of the images represent Buddha as seated in the typically Indian Yogic posture, a feature completely unknown to the Hellenistic tradition of art.




17. Solution: a)

Enzymes are biological substances that help break down proteins. Basically they are natural catalysts for control of metabolism and growth. Enzymes can be produced in an artificial way and added to all kinds of biological processes in orer to control the rate in which chemical reactions occur.

A common use of enzymes is in washing powder, as washing clothes often involves removing biological dirt like sweat, blood or other human excrements. International rehabilitation and soil stabilisation services (IRASSS) has found a way to use enzymes to clean soil and water on a large scale, like cleaning golf courses and lakes.

Exotic fishes would only introduce more competition for resources in the lake. This may further affect the biodiversity of the lake.




http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                              Page 7
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   





18. Solution: d)

RBI lays down the working norms for banks in India.

To ensure that its policies and schemes are being operated correctly, RBI asks information from banks on periodic intervals.

To ensure that priority sector lending norms are not being violated, banks have to show amount of credit and customers.

Similarily, information on interest rate allows RBI to check whether banks are lending much below or much above the prescribed interest rates.

To enforce CRR and SLR norms, RBI asks information on deposits.




19. Solution: c)

The Three Jewels of Jainism

The aim of Jain life is to achieve liberation of the soul.

This is done by following the Jain ethical code, or to put it simply, living rightly by following the three jewels of Jain ethics.

There are three parts to this: right faith, right knowledge and right conduct. The first two are very closely connected.

Right faith - Samyak darshana

This doesn't mean believing what you're told, but means seeing (hearing, feeling, etc.) things properly, and avoiding preconceptions and superstitions that get in the way of seeing clearly.

Some books call samyak darshana "right perception". You can't achieve this unless you are determined to find the truth, and distinguish it from untruth.

Right knowledge - Samyak jnana

This means having an accurate and sufficient knowledge of the real  universe - this requires a true knowledge of the five (or six) substances and nine truths of the
universe - and having that knowledge with the right mental attitude.




http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                              Page 8
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   


One writer puts it like this: "if our character is flawed and our conscience is not clear, knowledge alone will not help us achieve composure and happiness".

Today this means having a proper knowledge of the Jainscriptures.

Some writers describe right knowledge as meaning having a pure  soul; a soul that is free from attachment and desire... others say that a person who has right knowledge will naturally free themselves from attachment and desire, and so achieve peace of mind.

Right conduct - Samyak charitra

This means living your life according to  Jain ethical rules, to avoid doing harm to living things and freeing yourself from attachment and other impure attitudes and thoughts.

Jains believe that a person who has right faith and right knowledge will be motivated and able to achieve right conduct.

Many Jains believe that a person without right faith and right knowledge cannot achieve right conduct - so it's no use following scripture and ritual for the wrong reasons (e.g. so that other people will think you are a good person). Not all Jains hold this view. (Source – BBC)




20. Solution: a)

As honey bees gather pollen and nectar for their survival, they pollinate crops such as apples, cranberries, melons and broccoli. Some crops, including blueberries and cherries, are 90-percent dependent on honey bee pollination; one crop, almonds, depends entirely on the honey bee for pollination at bloom time.



http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/united-states-environmental-body- proposes-temporary-pesticide-free-zones-protect-honeybees




21. Solution: c)

Pankhida, Rajasthan Sung by the peasants of Rajasthan while doing work in the fields, the peasants sing and speak while playing algoza and manjira. The literal
meaning of the word ‗Pankhida‘ is lover.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                              Page 9
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   


Lotia, Rajasthan ‗Lotia‘ is sung in the chaitra month during the festival - ‗Lotia‘. Women bring lotas (a vessel to fill water) and kalash (a vessel considered to be auspicious to fill water during worship) filled with water from ponds and wells. They decorate them with flowers and come home.




22. Solution: d)

Plant growth, as well as its physiological and developmental   processes are all affected negatively. These include the way plants form, timing of development and growth, distribution of plant nutrients and metabolism, etc . These changes can have important implications for plant competitive balance, animals that feed on these plants, plant diseases, and biogeochemical cycles.

Phytoplankton form the foundation of aquatic food webs. These usually grow closer to the surface of water, where there is enough sunlight. Changes in UV levels is known to affect the development and growth of phytoplankton, and naturally, the fish that feed on them. UV radiation is also know to have affect the development stages of of fish, shrimp, crab, amphibians and other animals. When this happens, animals in the upper food chain that feed on these tiny fishes are all affected.

The power of higher UL levels affect the natural balance of gasses (and greenhouse gases) in the biosphere: e.g., carbon dioxide (CO2), carbon monoxide (CO), carbonyl sulfide (COS) and ozone. Changes in UV levels can cause biosphere-atmosphere feedback resulting from the atmospheric buildup of these gases.

You can read more about this at  http://www.conserve-energy-future.com/causes- and-effects-of-ozone-hole.php




23. Solution: d)

The tall buildings within many urban areas provide multiple surfaces for the reflection and absorption of sunlight, increasing the efficiency with which urban areas are heated. This is called the "urban canyon effect". Another effect of buildings is the blocking of wind, which also inhibits cooling by convection and pollution from dissipating.

Read this properly in detail here http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Urban_heat_island#Causes




http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                           Page 10
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   


Implications - http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/heat-wave-death-toll-
nears-2000-andhra-telangana-0




24. Solution: b)

Unlike the things that were used as money earlier, modern currency is not made of precious metal such as gold, silver and copper. And unlike grain and cattle, they are neither of everyday use. The modern currency is without any use of its own.

It is accepted as a medium of exchange because the currency is authorised by the government of the country.




25. Solution: a)

Indian traders, especially from south India, have started importing wheat from Australia and other parts of world in the wake of poor yields in India and lower international price.

Officials in the agriculture ministry say the government is closely watching international wheat prices.

Read this article to understand the whole situation.

http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/will-india-s-wheat-imports-lead-global- food-crisis




26. Solution: c)

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sarojini_Naidu

27. Solution: b)

In conservation and energy economics, the rebound effect (or take-back effect) is the reduction in expected gains from new technologies that increase the efficiency
of resource use, because of behavioral or other systemic responses. These responses usually tend to offset the beneficial effects of the new technology or other measures
taken.






http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                           Page 11
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   


For instance, if a 5% improvement in vehicle fuel efficiency results in only a 2% drop in fuel use, there is a 60% rebound effect (since (5-2)⁄5 = 60%). The 'missing' 3% might have been consumed by driving faster or further than before.




28. Solution: c)

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Third_Battle_of_Panipat#Aftermath




29. Solution: c)

A recently released data by the Central Statistics Office shows that  India‘s economy grew by 7.3% during 2014-15.  Gross fixed capital formation – a barometer for investments – slowed for the second straight year.

The manufacturing sector grew by 7.1% against the 2013 -14 growth of 5.3%.

The prime drivers of the growth were the significantly stronger performance of
‗manufacturing‘, ‗electricity, gas, water supply and other utility services‘ and the
‗financial, real estate and professional services‘.

30. Solution: b)

An international consortium of researchers led by the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation at the University of Washington, in its recently released data, has said that the incidence of cancer has grown over the last decade in India although the rate  of mortality has fallen.  The study is named ―The Global Burden of Cancer
2013‖.























http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                           Page 12
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   




















































31. Solution: d)

The Kasturirangan panel was set up to study the Gadgil committee report on the Western Ghats. The Gadgil panel report had faced unanimous opposition from state governments for recommending that almost three-fourth of the hills, including plantations, cultivated lands and large habitations, be turned into a restricted development zone with an over-arching authority to regulate the region superseding
the elected authorities‘ role.






http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                           Page 13
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   


Read the recommendations  here  http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/37 -of- Western-Ghats-ecologically-sensitive-Kasturirangan-panel-
report/articleshow/19607237.cms

32. Solution: c)

Every loan agreement specifies an interest rate which the borrower must pay to the lender along with the repayment of the principal. In addition, lenders may demand collateral (security) against loans.

Collateral is an asset that the borrower owns (such as land, building, vehicle, livestocks, deposits with banks) and uses this as a guarantee to a lender until the loan is repaid.

If the borrower fails to repay the loan, the lender has the right to sell the asset or collateral to obtain payment. Property such as land titles, deposits with banks, livestock are some common examples of collateral used for borrowing.




33. Solution: c)

The Prime Minister, Shri Narendra Modi, has called for making Yoga a mass movement, connecting people and strengthening the bonds of humanity.

Hatha Yoga is known for the asanas or postures. Ha and tha, the sun and moon, refer to the two opposite currents that regulate all processes in our body.

The Hatha Yoga Pradipika names āsana as the first accessory and its benefits as the
attainment of steadiness, freedom from disease, and lightness of body.

Traditional Hatha Yoga consists of: Asanas (postures); Shat Karmas (six cleansing techniques, also known as Shat Kriyas); Pranayama (control of breathing with retention); Bandhas (locks) and Mudras (seals) for the regulation of Prana (life -force) and kundalini; and Samadhi (Union with God, realization of the Self, ecstasy, nirvana).

34. Solution: c)

Read the link carefully. The concept of car protection has been explained beautifully.

http://www.weather.com/storms/tornado/news/what-happens-when-lightning- hits-car-20140625





http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                           Page 14
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   


35. Solution: c)

When a protein in its native form, is subjected to physical change like change in temperature or chemical change like change in pH, the hydrogen bonds are disturbed.

Due to this, globules unfold and helix gets uncoiled and protein loses its biol ogical activity. This is called denaturation of protein.

The coagulation of egg white on boiling is a common example of denaturation. Another example is curdling of milk which is caused due to the formation of lactic acid by the bacteria present in milk.




36. Solution: c)

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Highway_3_(India)(old_numbering)

National Highway 3, or NH 3, commonly referred to as the Mumbai –Agra Highway or AB Road, is a major Indian National Highway that runs through the states of Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra in India.




37. Solution: d)

He is the guardian of powers and privileges of the members, the House as a whole and its committees. He is the principal spokesman of the House, and his decision in all Parliamentary matters is final. He is thus much more than merely the presiding officer of the Lok Sabha. In these capacities, he is vested with vast, varied and vital responsibilities and enjoys great honour, high dignity and supreme authority within the House.

He is the final interpreter of the provisions of (a) the Constitution of India, (b) the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business of Lok Sabha, and (c) the parliamentary precedents, within the House.

He appoints the chairman of all the parliamentary committees of the Lok Sabha and supervises their functioning. He himself is the chairman of the Business Advisory Committee, the Rules Committee and the General Purpose Committee.




38. Solution: d)


http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                           Page 15
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   


If high quantity of organic matter is added to water, all the available oxygen is used up. This causes oxygen dependent aquatic life to die.

Thus, anaerobic bacteria (which do not require oxygen) begin to break down the organic waste and produce chemicals that have a foul smell and are harmful to human health. Aerobic (oxygen requiring) bacteria degrade these organic wastes and keep the water depleted in dissolved oxygen.

They also produce carbon dioxide which can be released in the atmosphere. Hi gh organic matter may also contain nutrients supportive of eutrophication of the water body.




39. Solution: d)

http://www.thehindu.com/business/Economy/wholesale-price-index-based-
inflation-dips-to-record-low/article7105132.ece





































40. Solution: d)



http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                           Page 16
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   


There are several forms of dance-drama or folk theatre, such as the Nautanki of Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, the Bhavai of Gujarat, the irreverent Tamasha of Maharashtra , the Bengali Jatra, the spectacular Yakshagana of Karnataka and Theyyam of Kerala, all of which narrate legends of local heroes, kings and deities.




41. Solution: b)

India now measures GDP by market prices instead of factor costs, to take into account gross value addition in goods and services as well as indirect taxes. The base year has been shifted to 2011/12 from 2004/05 earlier.

The government‘s statistics department says  the new  method is more in line  with global practices and gives a better picture of economic activity.



http://www.livemint.com/Politics/xziKtmtOxBJntZb41p2hDL/India-GDP-seen- surging-74-in-data-that-has-puzzled-economi.html







42. Solution: d)

To cure acidity you would need to take a base. All options except antacid are acids. Amla is a citrous fruit.

Curd contains lactic acid. And spinach contains oxalic acid. All these acids occur in nature.



43. Solution: c)

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bankim_Chandra_Chattopadhyay







44. Solution: c)





http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                           Page 17
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   


Noncooperation movement, (September 1920–February 1922), unsuccessful attempt, organized by Mohandas Gandhi, to induce the British government of India to grant self-government, or swaraj, to India. It arose from the outcry over the massacre at Amritsar in April 1919, when the British killed several hundred Indians, and from later  indignation at the government‘s alleged failure to take  adequate action against those responsible. Gandhi strengthened the movement by supporting (on nonviolent terms) the contemporaneous  Muslim campaign against the dismemberment of Turkey after World War I.

The movement was to be nonviolent and to consist of the resignations of titles; the boycott of government educational institutions, the courts, government service, foreign goods, and elections; and the eventual refusal to pay taxes. Noncooperation was agreed to by the Indian National Congress at Calcutta (now Kolkata) in September 1920 and launched that December. In 1921 the government, confronted with a united Indian front for the first time, was visibly shaken, but a revolt by the Muslim Moplahs of Kerala (southwestern India) in August 1921 and a number of violent outbreaks alarmed moderate opinion. After an angry mob murdered police officers at Chauri Chaura (February 1922), Gandhi himself called off the movement; the next month he was arrested without incident. The movement marks the transition of Indian nationalism from a middle-class to a mass basis.




45. Solution: d)

The CAG is appointed by the president of India by a warrant under his hand and seal. The recommendation is passed by the Council of Ministers.

Recently, The Supreme Court rejected a plea seeking to quash appointment of Shashi
Kant Sharma as the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG) on the grounds of conflict of interest.

Read this important article.

http://www.ibnlive.com/news/india/cag-appointment-2-966864.html














http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                           Page 18
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   







46. Solution: c)

It is a quasi-judicial body since it decides and disposes complaints relating to the RTI Act.

It does not do delegated legislation because that would mean it is framing rules and regulations. It only enforces the existing rules and regulations pertaining to the RTI act.

It is also an administrative body as it provides information services to citizens of
India.




47. Solution: b)

Since the

Chief Minister is the head of the council of ministers, his resignation or death automatically dissolves the council of ministers. The resignation or death of any
other minister, on the other hand, merely creates a vacancy, which the Chief Minister may or may not like to fill.

Even though the ministers may be appointed from any of the houses, only by the dissolution of the assembly does the council of minister dissolves. The Legislative council is a permanent body is never dissolved.




48. Solution: c)

Satyagraha, ( Sanskrit and Hindi: ―holding onto  truth‖) concept introduced in the early 20th century by Mahatma Gandhi to designate a determined but nonviolent resistance to evil. Gandhi‘s satyagraha became a major tool in the Indian struggle against British imperialism and has since been adopted by protest groups in other countries. According to this philosophy, satyagrahis—practitioners of satyagraha— achieve correct insight into the real nature of an evil situation by observing a nonviolence of the mind, by seeking truth in a spirit of peace and love, and by undergoing a rigorous process of self-scrutiny. In so doing, the satyagrahi
encounters truth in the absolute.



http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                           Page 19
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   


By refusing to submit to the wrong or to cooperate with it in any way, the satyagrahi asserts that truth. Throughout the confrontation with evil, the satyagrahi must adhere to nonviolence, for to employ violence would be to lose correct insight. Satyagrahis always warn their opponents of their intentions; satyagraha forbids any tactic suggesting the use  of secrecy to one‘s advantage. Satyagraha includes more than civil disobedience. Its full range of application extends from the details of correct daily living to the construction of alternative political and economic institutions. Satyagraha seeks to conquer through conversion: in the end, there is neither defeat nor victory but rather a new harmony.




49. Solution: b)

Recently, a Muslim MBA grad was denied a job in a diamond firm in Mumbai. The question has been framed in that regard only. http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/Adani-hires-MBA-grad-who-was-
denied-job-for-being-a-Muslim/articleshow/47486173.cms




50. Solution: a)

Such a resolution must be supported by two-thirds of the members present and voting. The resolution remains in force for one year; it can be renewed any number of times but not exceeding one year at a time. The laws cease to have effect on the expiration of six months after the resolution has ceased to be in force.

This provision does not restrict the power of a state legislature to make laws on the same matter. But, in case of inconsistency between a state law and a parliamentary law, the latter is to prevail.




51. Solution: c)

Gandhi felt an irresistible attraction to a life of simplicity, manual labour, and austerity. In 1904—after reading John Ruskin‘s Unto  This Last, a critique of capitalism—he set up a farm at Phoenix near Durban where he and his friends could live by the sweat of their brow. Six years later another colony grew up under Gandhi‘s fostering care near  Johannesburg; it was  named Tolstoy Farm  for the Russian writer and moralist, whom Gandhi admired and corresponded with. Those
two settlements were the precursors of the more-famous ashrams (religious retreats)



http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                           Page 20
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   


in India, at Sabarmati near Ahmedabad (Ahmadabad) and at Sevagram near
Wardha. (Source: Britannica)







52. Solution: d)




































53. Solution: c)

Take the weight of the person in kg. Then take the height in metres.

Divide the weight by the square of the height. If this figure is less than 18.5 then the person would be considered undernourished.  However, if this BMI is more than 25 , then a person is overweight.

Do remember that this criterion is not applicable to growing children.




54.  Solutions: d)



http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                           Page 21
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   


Round Table Conference, (1930–32), in Indian history, a series of meetings in three sessions called by the British government to consider the future constitution of India. The conference resulted from a review of the Government of India Act of 1919, undertaken in 1927 by the Simon Commission, whose report was published in 1930. The conference was held in London.

The first session (Nov. 12, 1930–Jan. 19, 1931) had 73 representatives, from all Indian states and all parties except the Indian National Congress, which was waging a civil disobedience campaign against the government. Its principal achievement was an insistence on parliamentarianism—an acceptance by all, including the princes, of the federal principle—and on dominion status as the goal of constitutional development. The second session (September–December 1931) was attended by Mahatma Gandhi as the Congress representative; it failed to reach agreement, either constitutionally or on communal representation. The third session (Nov. 17–Dec. 24, 1932) was shorter and less important, with neither the Congress nor the British Labour Party attending. The result of these deliberations was the Government of India Act, 1935, establishing provincial autonomy and also a federal system that was never implemented.




55. Solution: d)

For the growth of the tertiary sector in India, there can be many reasons.

First, in any country several services such as hospitals, educational institutions, post and telegraph services, police stations, courts, village administrative offices, municipal corporations, defence, transport, banks, insurance companies, etc. are required. These can be considered as basic services. In a developing country the government has to take responsibility for the provision of these services.

Second, the development of agriculture and industry leads to the development of services such as transport, trade, storage and the like, as we have al ready seen. Greater the development of the primary and secondary sectors, more would be the demand for such services.

Third, as income levels rise, certain sections of people start demanding many more services like eating out, tourism, shopping, private hospitals, private schools, professional training etc. You can see this change quite sharply in cities, especially in big cities.

Fourth, over the past decade or so, certain new services such as those based on information and communication technology have become important and essential.



http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                           Page 22
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   





56. Solution: a)

Consider a firm which has employed more than required number of labour.

Each labour is doing some work but no one is fully employed. This is the situation of underemployment, where people are apparently working but all of them are made
to work less than their potential.

This kind of underemployment  is hidden in contrast to someone who does not have a job and is clearly visible as unemployed. Hence, it is also called disguised unemployment.

Over employment is the exact opposite of this situation. Workers are doing overtime work here and producing more than they can in an ideal case. They are even ready
to sacrifice their income for some leisure.




57. Solution: b)

The majority of the provisions in the Constitution need to be amended by a special majority of the Parliament, that is, a majority (that is, more than 50 per cent) of the total membership of each House and a majority of two-thirds of the members of each House present and voting.

Those provisions of the Constitution which are related to the federal structure of the polity can be amended by a special majority of the Parliament and also with the consent of half of the state legislatures by a simple majority.




58. Solution: b)

Gallium nitride is used in Blue LED whereas gallium phosphide is used in preparing
Red and Green LED.

http://www.popsci.com/article/technology/why-blue-led-worth-nobel-prize




59. Solution: b)

The Godavari River has a drainage area of 312,812 km2 (120,777 sq mi), which is
nearly one-tenth of the area of India and is greater than the areas of England and


http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                           Page 23
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   


Ireland put together. Major tributaries of the river include the Purna (South), Pravara, Indravati, Manjira River, Bindusara River, Sabari River, Wainganga, and Wardha River.






60. Solution: a)






























The various types of loans can be conveniently grouped as formal sector loans and informal sector loans. Among the former are loans from banks and cooperatives. The informal lenders include moneylenders, traders, employers, relatives and friends,
etc.

So, formal credit is more than the informal credit.




61. Solution: a)

The provisions of the act can be grouped into two categories—compulsory and voluntary. The compulsory (mandatory or obligatory) provisions of the act have to be included in the state laws creating the new panchayati raj system. The voluntary provisions, on the other hand, may be included at the discretion of the states. Thus
the voluntary pr-ovisions of the act ensure the right of the states to take local factors


http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                           Page 24
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   


like geographical, politico–administrative and others, into consideration while adopting the new panchayati raj system.









62. Solution: c)

Lucknow Pact 1916, IndiaREAD VIEW HISTORY EDIT FEEDBACK Lucknow Pact, (December 1916), agreement made by the Indian National Congress headed by Maratha leader Bal Gangadhar Tilak and the All-India Muslim League led by Muhammad Ali Jinnah; it was adopted by the Congress at its Lucknow session on December 29 and by the league on Dec. 31, 1916. The meeting at Lucknow marked the reunion of the moderate and radical wings of the Congress. The pact dealt both with the structure of the government of India and with the relation of the Hindu and Muslim communities.

On the former count, the proposals were an advance on Gopal Krishna Gokhale‘s
―political testament.‖ Four-fifths of the provincial and central legislatures were to be elected on a broad franchise, and half the executive council members, including those of the central executive council, were to be Indians elected by the councils themselves. Except for the provision for the central executive, these proposals were largely embodied in the Government of India Act of 1919. The Congress also agreed to separate electorates for Muslims in provincial council elections and for weightage in their favour (beyond the proportions indicated by population) in all provinces except the Punjab and Bengal, where they gave some ground to the Hindu and Sikh minorities. This pact paved the way for Hindu-Muslim cooperation in the Khilafat movement and Mohandas Gandhiji‘s noncooperation movement from  1920.




63. Solution: d)

The tribal areas in the four states of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram have been constituted as autonomous districts. But, they do not fall outside the executive authority of the state concerned. The district and regional councils within their territorial jurisdictions can constitute village councils or courts for trial of suits and cases between the tribes. They hear appeals from them.

The jurisdiction of high court over these suits and cases is specified by the governor.



http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                           Page 25
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   





64. Solution: d)

When you  buy  garments, you  will find information on ‗instructions for washing‘. When we buy medicines, on the packets, you might find ‗directions for proper use‘ and information relating to side effects and risks associated with usage of that medicine.

Rules have been made so that the manufacturer displays this information. It is because consumers have the right to be informed about the particulars of goods and services that they purchase. Consumers can then complain and ask for compensation or replacement if the product proves to be defective in any manner.




65. Solution: b)

It is given by the World Food Prize Foundation.

http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/74242/Norman-Ernest-Borlaug




66. Solution: d)

Interests received can be inside the country (i.e., internal lending) or outside the country (i.e., external lending). It means this income might be in both domestic and foreign currencies.

Fiscal services also generate incomes for the government, i.e., currency printing, stamp printing, coinage and medals minting, etc.

General Services also earn money for the government as the power distribution, irrigation, banking, insurance, community services, etc.

Fees, Penalties and Fines received by the government also form a part of non-tax revenue receipt.




67. Solution: c)

Uniform civil code in India is the debate to replace the personal laws based on the
scriptures and customs of each major religious community in the country with a



http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                           Page 26
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   


common set governing every citizen. These laws are distinguished from public law and cover marriage, divorce, inheritance, adoption and maintenance.

The laws already apply similarly for both men and women. In specific cases of property inheritance etc., a uniform civil code will have no effect. However, there will be a common law for all the communities in India.









68. Solution: d)

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dachigam_National_Park




69. Solution: b)

Cooking results in the loss of certain nutrients. Many useful proteins and considerable amounts of minerals are lost if e xcess water is used during cooking and is then thrown away.

Vitamin C gets easily destroyed by heat during cooking.

Repeated washing and peeling off of the skin also lead to loss of nutrients.




70. Solution: a)

Usually crops require a lot of nitrogen to make proteins. After the harvest, the soil becomes deficient in nitrogen. Though nitrogen gas is available in plenty in the air, plants cannot use it in the manner they can use carbon dioxide. They need nitrogen in a soluble form.

The bacterium called Rhizobium can take atmospheric nitrogen and convert it into a soluble form. But Rhizobium cannot make its own food. So it lives in the roots of gram, peas, moong beans and other legumes and provides them with nitrogen. Most of the pulses (dals) are obtained from leguminous plants. In return, the plants
provide food and shelter to the bacteria. They have a symbiotic relationship.






http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                           Page 27
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   


71. Solution: d)

Unlike the SC, in the appointment to HC judges, the Governor of the state is also consulted.

HCs can issue writs for legal rights as well as fundamental rights. The SC can issue writs only for enforcing fundamental rights.

Both can interpret the constitution, but the version of the SC will prevail over the
HCs.

Both can review central as well as state laws. Even here the view of the SC will prevail over HCs.




72. Solution: c)

Khilafat movement, force that arose in India in the early 20th century as a result of Muslim fears for the integrity of Islam. These fears were aroused by Italian (1911) and Balkan (1912–13) attacks on Turkey—whose sultan, as caliph, was the religious
head of the worldwide Muslim community—and  by Turkish defeats in World War I. They were intensified by the Treaty of Sèvres (August 1920), which not only
detached all non-Turkish regions from the empire but also gave parts of the Turkish homeland to Greece and other non-Muslim powers.

A campaign in defense of the caliph was launched, led in India by the brothers Shaukat and Muḥammad ʿAlī and by Abul Kalam Azad. The leaders joined forces with Mahatma Gandhi‘s noncooperation movement for Indian freedom, promising nonviolence in return for his support of the Khilafat movement. In 1920 the latter movement was marred by the ḥijrat, or exodus, from India to Afghanistan of about
18,000 Muslim peasants, who felt that India was an apostate land. It was also
tarnished by the Muslim Moplah rebellion in south India (Malabar) in 1921, the excesses of which deeply stirred Hindu India. Gandhi‘s suspension of his movement and his arrest in March 1922 weakened the Khilafat movement still further. It was further undermined when Mustafa Kemal Atatürk drove the Greeks from western Asia Minor in 1922 and deposed the Turkish sultan in the same year; i t finally
collapsed when he abolished the caliphate altogether in 1924.










http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                           Page 28
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   


























73. Solution: a)

The winds would have flown in the north-south direction from north to south, or from south to north. A change in direction is however, caused by the rotation of the earth which results in the generation of the coriolis force.






























74. Solution: c)





http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                           Page 29
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   


Some toilets use earthworms to decompose faecal matter and kitchen organic waste. A design of this toilet in which humans excreta is treated by earthworms has been tested in India.

It has been found to be a novel, low water-use toilet for safe processing of human waste. The operation of the toilet is very simple and hygienic. The human excreta is completely converted to vermi cakes — a resource much needed for soil.

There is no heating element and the system is not intended to operate above 35 °C, to protect the worms.




75. Solution: a)

Earthworms and microbes present in the soil are friends of the farmer since they further turn and loosen the soil and add humus to it.

In addition, dead plants and animals get decomposed by soil organisms. In this way, various nutrients held in the dead organisms are released back into the soil. These nutrients are again absorbed by plants.






76. Solution: a)





























http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                           Page 30
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   


In this diagram, all the factors that can possibly affect the transmission of the EM
waves are given.









77. Solution: d)

Hard water contains calcium and magnesium ions. These ions form insoluble calcium and magnesium soaps respectively when sodium or potassium soaps are dissolved in hard water.

These insoluble soaps separate as scum in water and are useless as cleansing agent. In fact these are hinderance to good washing, because the precipitate adheres onto the fibre of the cloth as gummy mass. Hair washed with hard water looks dull because of this sticky precipitate. Dye does not absorb evenly on cloth washed with soap using hard water, because of this gummy mass.

78. Solution: a)

The rate of biomass production is called productivity. It can be divided into gross primary productivity (GPP) and net primary productivity (NPP). Gross primary productivity of an ecosystem is the rate of production of organic matter during photosynthesis. A considerable amount of GPP is utilised by plants in respiration.

Gross primary productivity minus respiration losses (R), is the net primary productivity (NPP).

Net primary productivity is the available biomass for the consumption to heterotrophs (herbiviores and decomposers).

Secondary productivity is defined as the rate of formation of new organic matter by consumers.




79. Solution: c)

For the purpose of holding direct elections to the Lok Sabha, each state is divided into territorial constituencies. In this respect, the Constitution makes the following
two provisions:




http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                           Page 31
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   


    Each state is allotted a number of seats in the Lok Sabha in such a manner that the ratio between that number and its population is the same for all states.
This provision does not apply to a state having a population of less than six millions.
    Each state is divided into territorial constituencies in such a manner that the
ratio between the population of each constituency and the number of seats allotted to it is the same throughout the state.




80. Solution: d)

For a list (and some basic info) on all critically endangered animal species of India, please refer to this document prepared by the MoEF. Its very comprehensive.

http://www.moef.nic.in/downloads/public- information/critically_endangered_booklet.pdf

For fishes/birds/reptiles  etc. refer to http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_endangered_animals_in_India#Critically_en
dangered

81. Solution: c)

The trophic level represents a functional level, not a species as such. A given species may occupy more than one trophic level in the same ecosystem at the same time; for example, a sparrow is a primary consumer when it eats seeds, fruits, peas, and a secondary consumer when it eats insects, worms etc.

In most ecosystems, all the pyramids, of number, of energy and biomass are upright, i.e., producers are more in number and biomass than the herbivores, and herbivores are more in number and biomass than the carnivores. Also energy at a lower trophic level is always more than at a higher level.

There are exceptions to this generalisation: The pyramid of biomass in sea is generally inverted because the biomass of fishes far exceeds that of phytoplankton.




82. Solution: a)








http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                           Page 32
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   


The most typical and the most well known building in Indo – Islamic is Panch Mahal, the highest and the most impressive structure, called the palace of five storeys. It is based on the Hindu system of trabeate structure, consisting of pillar, architrave, and brackets, with the only exception of the topmost domed pavilion, purposefully thrown out of the centre that crowns the entire building. The tower was perhaps used for recreation by the emperor
and members of the royal household. The idea behind this impressive structure of diminishing storeys, one on top of the other, consisting of open, terraces in front of the covered areas, was comfort, shade and airy open pillared verandahs provided by perforated railings, constructed with an eye to providing shade and fresh air, to the
inhabitants seated on the cool floors.

The Diwan-i-Khas or Hall of Private Audience, is of a unique design. It is a square chamber with three openings on each side and a richly carved column in the centre supporting a magnificent flower shaped capital. Thorough ventilation is provided by placing on all sides perforated windows opposite each other on every wall. The charming balcony supported
by a circular top capital, runs round the halls
whole length of the 4 sides on the first floor level, supported by brackets. It is believed that the central place was occupied by the Emperor's throne while his Ministers sat at the corners or on the peripheral passage.

The Turkish Sultana's house consists of a small chamber surrounded by a verandah. It is beautifully carved both on the outside and inside; particularly remarkable being the wide
dado carved with panels, portraying jungle




Panch Mahal, Fatehpur Sikri, Agra, Uttar Pradesh


http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                           Page 33
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   


scenes with animals, birds and trees. It is the most ornamented building in a "gigantic jewel casket" says Fergusson.
















83. Solution: b)

The individual transitional communities are termed seral stages or seral communities.

In the successive seral stages there is a change in the diversity of species of organisms, increase in the number of species and organisms as well as an increase in the total biomass.

The present day communities in the world have come to be because of succession that has occurred over millions of years since life started on earth. Actually succession and evolution would have been parallel processes at that time.




84. Solution: c)

Moreover, when rocks are weathered, minute amounts of these phosphates dissolve in soil solution and are absorbed by the roots of the plants.

Herbivores and other animals obtain this element from plants. The waste products and the dead organisms are decomposed by phosphate-solubilising bacteria releasing phosphorus.

So, unlike carbon cycle, there is no respiratory release of phosphorus into atmosphere.




85. Solution: d)




http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                           Page 34
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   


Healthy ecosystems are the base for a wide range of economic, environmental and aesthetic goods and services. The products of ecosystem processes are named as ecosystem services, for example, healthy forest ecosystems purify air and water, mitigate droughts and floods, cycle nutrients, generate fertile soils, provide wildlife habitat, maintain biodiversity, pollinate crops, provide storage site for carbon and also provide aesthetic, cultural and spiritual values.

Though value of such services of biodiversity is difficult to determine, it seems reasonable to think that biodiversity should carry a hefty price tag.






86.  Solution: d)

Biological magnification often refers to the process whereby certain substances such as pesticides or heavy metals move up the food chain, work their way into rivers or lakes, and are eaten by aquatic organisms such as fish, which in turn are eaten by large birds, animals or humans. The substances become concentrated in tissues or internal organs as they move up the chain.

Bio-accumulants are substances that increase in concentration in living organisms as they take in contaminated air, water, or food because the substances are very slowly metabolized or excreted.

The following is an example showing how bio-magnification takes place in nature: An anchovy eats zoo-plankton that have tiny amounts of mercury that the zoo- plankton has picked up from the water throughout the anchovies lifespan. A tuna eats many of these anchovies over its life, accumulating the mercury in each of those anchovies into its body. If the mercury stunts the growth of the anchovies, that tuna is required to eat more little fish to stay alive. Because there are more little fish being eaten, the mercury content is magnified




87. Solution: b)

Purchasing power parity is used worldwide to compare the income levels in different countries. PPP thus makes it easy to understand and interpret the data of each country.

Let's say that a pair of shoes costs Rs 2500 in India. Then it should cost $50 in
America when the exchange rate is 50 between the dollar and the rupee.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                           Page 35
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   


The theory aims to determine the adjustments needed to be made in the exchange rates of two currencies to make them at par with the purchasing power of each other.




88. Solution: d)

It is known that every individual has unique fingerprints. These occur at the tips of the fingers and have been used for identification for a long time but these can be altered by surgery.

A sequence of bases on DNA is also unique for a person and information regarding this is called DNA fingerprinting. It is same for every cell and cannot be altered by any known treatment. DNA fingerprinting is now also used in forensic laboratories for identification of criminals.






89. Solution: c)

Above the troposphere, between 10 and 50 km above sea level lies stratosphere. Troposphere is a turbulent, dusty zone containing air, much water vapour and clouds. This is the region of strong air movement and cloud formation. The stratosphere, on the other hand, contains dinitrogen, dioxygen, ozone and little water vapour.

Atmospheric pollution is generally studied as tropospheric and stratospheric (also because of the presence of ozone) pollution.









90. Solution: c)

Just as the glass  in a greenhouse holds the sun‘s  warmth inside, atmosphere traps the sun‘s  heat  near  the earth‘s surface and keeps it warm. This is called natural greenhouse effect because it maintains the temperature and makes the earth perfect for life.

In a greenhouse, visible light passes through the transparent glass and heats up the soil and the plants. The warm soil and plants emit infrared radiations. Since glass is

http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                           Page 36
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   


opaque to infrared (heat) radiations, it partly reflects and partly absorbs these radiations. This mechanism keeps the energy of the sun trapped in the greenhouse.




91. Solution: c)

The air around the city of Agra, where the Taj Mahal is located, contains fairly high levels of sulphur and nitrogen oxides. This caused heavy acid rains.

The Government of India announced an action plan that aimed at clearing the air in the ‘Taj Trapezium’– an area that includes the towns of Agra, Firozabad, Mathura and Bharatpur. Under this plan more than 2000 polluting industries lying inside the trapezium would switch over to the use of natural gas or liquefied petroleum gas instead of coal or oil. A new natural gas pipeline would bring more than half a million cubic metres of natural gas a day to this area.

People living in the city will also be encouraged to use liquefied petroleum gas in place of coal, kerosene or firewood. Vehicles plying on highways i n the vicinity of Taj would be encouraged to use low sulphur content diesel.




92. Solution: a)

The word smog is derived from smoke and fog.

This is the most common example of air pollution that occurs in many cities throughout the world.

Photochemical smog occurs in warm, dry and sunny climate. The main components of the photochemical smog result from the action of sunlight on unsaturated hydrocarbons and nitrogen oxides produced by automobiles and factories. Photochemical smog has high concentration of oxidising agents and is, therefore, called as oxidising smog.




93. Solution: d)

Many techniques are used to control or reduce the formation of photochemical
smog. If we control the primary precursors of photochemical smog, such as NO2 and hydrocarbons, the secondary precursors such as ozone and PAN, the photochemical
smog will automatically be reduced.



http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                           Page 37
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   


Usually catalytic converters are used in the automobiles, which prevent the release of nitrogen oxide and hydrocarbons to the atmosphere. Certain plants e.g., Pinus, Juniparus, Quercus, Pyrus and Vitis can metabolise nitrogen oxide and therefore, their plantation could help in this matter.




94.  Solution: a)

A patent is an exclusive right granted for an invention, which is a product or a process that provides, in general, a new way of doing something, or offers a new technical solution to a problem.

To get a patent, technical information about the invention must be disclosed to the public in a patent application.

In principle, the patent owner has the exclusive right to prevent or stop others from commercially exploiting the patented invention. In other words, patent protection means that the invention cannot be commercially made, used, distributed, imported or sold by others without the patent owner's consent.




95. Solution: d)

The Constitution of India establishes a federal system of government. It contains all the usual features of a federation, viz., two government, division of powers, written Constitution, supremacy of Constitution, rigidity of Constitution, independent judiciary and bicameralism.

However, the Indian Constitution also contains a large number of unitary or non- federal features, viz., a strong Centre, single Constitution, single citizenship, flexibility of Constitution, integrated judiciary, appointment of state governor by the Centre, all-India services, emergency provisions, and so on.

But, all these do not mean that state governments draw power from Central government or are subservient to the Union government. The Union government is ultimately responsible for the overall development of the nation; its unity, territorial integrity, and security. Hence, it has been given more powers than the state governments.




96. Solution: a)


http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                           Page 38
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   


Plants absorb mineral nutrients and water from the soil. Not all the water absorbed is utilised by the plant. The water evaporates through the stomata present on the surface of the leaves by the process of transpiration.

The evaporation of water from leaves generates a suction pull (the same that you produce when you suck water through a straw) which can pull water to great heights in the tall trees. Transpiration also cools the plant.




97. Solution: a)

The Mission has been conceptualized and evolved keeping in view the ever increasing computing demand of the scientific and academic community in the country, international technology trends and roadmaps of leading countries in the area, strategic importance and emergence of supercomputing as a benchmark for Scientific & Technological advancements. Two key departments of the Government of India, DeitY and DST will be implementing the mission jointly through two leading organizations. These are the Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC) and the Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Bangalore.

The Mission envisages empowering our national academic and R&D institutions spread over the country by installing a vast supercomputing grid comprising of
more than 70 high-performance computing facilities. These supercomputers will also be networked on the National Supercomputing grid over the National Knowledge Network (NKN). The NKN is another programme of the government which
connects academic institutions and R&D labs over a high speed network. Academic and R&D institutions as well as key user departments/ministries would participate by using these facilities and develop applications of national relevance. The Mission also includes development of highly professional High Performance Computing (HPC) aware human resource for meeting challenges of development of these applications.









98. Solution: a)







http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                           Page 39
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   


Women writers like Ghosha, Lopamudra, Gargi, Maitreyi, Apala, Romasha Brahmavadini, etc., right from the days of the Vedas (6000 B.C. – 4000 B.C.), focused on the image of women in mainstream Sanskrit literature.






99. Solution: a)

The Supreme Court has been consistently in news for its heightened activism since last few years. While this question may seem very factual, but UPSC is very unpredictable and such questions can be very easily expected in the examination.

Moreover, Regulating Act of 1773 is of great constitutional importance as (a) it was the first step taken by the British Government to control and regulate the affairs of the East India Company in India; (b) it recognised, for the first time, the political and administrative functions of the Company; and (c) it laid the foundations of central administration in India.




100.           Solution: b)

The Dhamekh stupa at Sarnath is an imposing cylindrical structure (ht. 43.5 m., dia at base 28.3 m.) of the Gupta age, partly built of stone and partly of brick. Its stone basement has eight projecting faces with large niches for statuary and is further adorned with delicately-carved floral and geometrical patterns. Making the holy spot of the enlightenment of the Master, this site is looked upon with, greatest sanctity and became a flourishing Buddhist establishment with numerous temples, stupas and monasteries. According to tradition a large number of shrines and memorials were created at the site to commemorate the incidents before and after enlightenment.

The main brick built shrine known as the Mahabodhi temple which appears to have been originally erected in circa 2nd century A.D. is encumbered with heavy renovation, the four corner-towers being an arbitrary
addition of circa 14th century A.D. Its central tower,






















Dhamekh Stupa at
Sarnath,
Utter Pradesh


http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                           Page 40
                   Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Test –  26 Solutions                   


standing on a high plinth, is about 55m. high and is a straight-edged pyramid of seven storeys, by pilasters
and chaitya niches.






















http://www.insightsonindia.com                            INSIGHTS                                                           Page 41
