                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  2 SOLUTIONS                     





1.   Solution: b)

http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/34
0951/Lilatilakam

The first literary works in Malayalam, dated to about the twelfth century, are directly indebted to Sanskrit.  Interestingly  enough,  a  fourteenth- century  text,  the  Lilatilakam,  dealing  with grammar and poetics, was composed in Manipravalam – literally, ―diamonds  and  corals‖ referring to the two languages, Sanskrit and the regional (Malayalam) language.

2.   Solution: a)
A patent  is  a  set  of exclusive  rights granted  by
a sovereign state to an inventor or assignee for a limited period of time in exchange for detailed public disclosure of an invention. An invention is a solution to a specific technological problem and is a product    or    a    process.    Patents    are    a    form of intellectual property.
The procedure for granting patents, requirements placed on the patentee, and the extent of the exclusive rights vary widely between countries according to national laws and international agreements.
Under        the World        Trade        Organization's (WTO) Agreement  on  Trade-Related  Aspects  of Intellectual   Property   Rights   (not   international laws), patents should be available in WTO member states  for  any  invention,  in  all  fields  of technology, and   the term   of   protection available should       be       a       minimum       of       twenty years. Nevertheless, there are variations on what is patentable subject matter from country to country.

3.   Solution: d)
Actual   resources   are   those   resources   whose
quantity is known. These resources are being used in the present. The rich deposits of coal in Ruhr region  of  Germany  and  petroleum  in  the  West Asia, the dark soils of the Deccan plateau in Maharashtra are all actual resources.
Potential resources are those whose entire quantity may not be known and these are not being used at present.  These  resources  could  be  used  in  the future. The level of technology we have at present may not be advanced enough to easily utilise these resources. The uranium found in Ladakh is an example of potential resource that could be used in the future. High speed winds were a potential resource two hundred years ago. Today they are an actual resource and wind farms generate energy using windmills like in Netherlands.

4.   Solution: d)
Resource   distribution   refers   to   the   geographic
occurrence or spatial arrangement of resources on earth. In other words, where resources are located. Any one place may be rich in the resources people desire and poor in others.
Low   latitudes   (latitudes   close   to   the equator) receive   more   of   the   sun's   energy   and   much precipitation,   while   higher   latitudes   (latitudes closer to the poles) receive less of the sun's energy and    too    little    precipitation.    The    temperate deciduous forest biome provides a more moderate climate,   along   with   fertile   soil,   timber,   and abundant wildlife. The plains offers flat landscapes and  fertile  soil  for  growing  crops,  while  steep mountains and dry deserts are more challenging. Metallic minerals are most abundant in areas with strong tectonic activity, while fossil fuels are found in rocks formed by deposition (sedimentary rocks). These  are  just  a  few  of  the  differences  in  the environment  that   result   from  different  natural conditions.  As  a  result,  resources  are  distributed unevenly across the globe.

5.   Solution: d)
Some Principles of Sustainable Development:
    Respect and care for all forms of life
    Improve the quality of human life
    Conserve the earth‘s vitality and diversity
    Minimise the depletion of natural resources
    Change   personal   attitude   and   practices toward the environment
    Enable communities to care for their own environment.


http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                            Page 1
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  2 SOLUTIONS                     


6.   Solution: d)














7.   Solution: a)
Refer                                                                              to
http://www.fao.org/nr/land/degradation/en/

8.   Solution:  c)
     Keeps feet clean, allowing access to garden even when damp
     Provides a "finished" look to the garden Organic mulches also improve the condition of the soil.  As  these  mulches  slowly  decompose,  they provide organic matter which helps keep the soil loose.  This  improves  root  growth,  increases  the infiltration of water, and also improves the water- holding  capacity  of  the soil.  Organic  matter is a source  of  plant  nutrients  and  provides  an  ideal environment for earthworms and other beneficial soil organisms.
While inorganic mulches have their place in certain landscapes, they lack the soil improving properties of organic mulches. Inorganic mulches, because of their permanence, may be difficult to remove if you decide to change your garden plans at a later date. Therefore, this tip sheet is limited to the use of organic mulches



10. Solution: b)









9.   Solution: d)
Mulching is one of the simplest and most beneficial
practices  you  can  use  in  the  garden.  Mulch  is simply  a  protective  layer  of  a  material  that  is spread on top of the soil. Mulches can either be organic  --  such  as  grass  clippings,  straw,  bark chips, and similar materials -- or inorganic -- such as stones, brick chips, and plastic. Both organic and inorganic mulches have numerous benefits.
     Protects the soil from erosion
     Reduces  compaction  from  the  impact  of heavy rains
     Conserves moisture, reducing the need for frequent waterings
     Maintains a more even soil temperature
     Prevents weed growth
     Keeps fruits and vegetables clean
The Gonds lived in a vast forested region called Gondwana  –  or  ―country inhabited  by  Gonds‖. They practised shifting cultivation. The large Gond tribe was further divided into many smaller clans. Each clan had its own raja or rai. About the time that the power of the Delhi Sultans was declining, a few large Gond kingdoms were beginning to dominate  the  smaller  Gond  chiefs.  The  Akbar Nama, a  history  of  Akbar‘s   reign,   mentions  the Gond kingdom of Garha Katanga that had 70,000 villages.

Garha Katanga was a  rich state. It  earned  much wealth by trapping and exporting wild elephants to other kingdoms. When the Mughals defeated the Gonds,  they  captured  a  huge  booty  of  precious coins and elephants.

11. Solution: d)
Contour barriers: Stones, grass, soil are used to build
barriers along contours. Trenches are made in front of the barriers to collect water.



http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                            Page 2
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  2 SOLUTIONS                     


Intercropping: Different crops are grown in alternate rows and are sown at different times to protect the soil from rain wash.
Refer to this too http://www.icimod.org/?q=10412

12. Solution: a)
Others techniques have been discussed in the previous
questions.
Contour   ploughing:   Ploughing   parallel   to   the
contours of a hill slope to form a natural barrier for water to flow down the slope.
Shelter belts: In the coastal and dry regions, rows of trees are planted to check the wind movement to protect soil cover.

13. Solution: d)
Forest and other vegetation cover slow the surface
runoff and replenish underground water. Water harvesting   is   another   method   to   save   surface runoff.  Water  is  used  for  irrigating  fields.  The canals should be properly lined to minimise losses by water seepage. Sprinklers effectively irrigate the area by checking water losses through seepage and evaporation. In dry regions with high rates of evaporation, drip or trickle irrigation is very useful. The valuable water resource can therefore be conserved  by  adopting  these  means  of conservation.
Read more at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Surface_runoff#Mit igation_and_treatment

14. Solution: d)
Refer                                                                              to
http://envfor.nic.in/division/international- conventions    for    details    about    each    of    the convetions.  They  are  important  and  should  be covered a in a little detail. There was a question on such conventions this year.

15. Solution: b)
Biosphere    reserves    are    sites    established    by
countries  and  recognized  under  UNESCO's Man and the Biosphere (MAB) Programme to promote sustainable  development  based  on  local community efforts and sound science.
As  places  that  seek  to  reconcile  conservation  of biological and cultural diversity and economic and social development through partnerships between people  and  nature,  they  are  ideal  to  test  and demonstrate innovative approaches to sustainable development from local to international scales. Biosphere reserves are thus globally considered as:
     sites of excellence where new and optimal practices to manage nature and human activities are tested and demonstrated;
     tools   to   help   countries   implement   the results of the World Summit on Sustainable Development and,           in           particular, the Convention on Biological Diversity and its Ecosystem Approach;
     learning    sites    for    the UN    Decade    on
Education for Sustainable Development. After their designation, biosphere reserves remain under  national  sovereign  jurisdiction,  yet  they share    their   experience    and   ideas   nationally, regionally  and  internationally  within  the  World Network of Biosphere Reserves (WNBR).
There are currently 631 biosphere reserves in 119 countries all over the world.

16. Solution: d)
Refer  to  the  ―Distribution  of  minerals‖ section  in
Class 8th Geo NCERT.
Australia produces nearly 23% of the total uranium ore in the world !!!



17. Solution: a)

In fact by the fifteenth century the Bengali group Of dialects came to be united by a common literary language based on the spoken language of the western part  of the  region, now known  as West Bengal.  Thus,  although  Bengali  is  derived  from Sanskrit, it passed through several stages of evolution.  Also,  a  wide  range  of  non-Sanskrit words, derived from a variety of sources including tribal languages, Persian, and European languages, have become part of modern Bengali.

Early Bengali literature may be divided into two categories – one indebted to Sanskrit and the other

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                            Page 3
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  2 SOLUTIONS                     


independent of it. The first includes translations of the Sanskrit epics, the Mangalakavyas (literally auspicious poems, dealing with local deities) and bhakti literature such as the biographies of Chaitanyadeva, the leader of the Vaishnava bhakti movement.

18. Solution:  d)
North America may be divided into at least five
major physiographic regions.
Canadian Shield
This  is  a  geologically  stable  area  of  rock  dating
between 2.5 and 4 Gya that occupies most of the northeastern quadrant, including Greenland. Appalachian Mountains
The Appalachians are an old and eroded system
that  formed  about  300  Ma  and  extends  from the Gaspé Peninsula to Alabama.
Atlantic Coastal Plain
The  plain  is  a  belt  of  lowlands  widening  to  the
south  that  extends  from  south New  England to
Mexico.
Interior Lowlands
The  lowlands  extend  down  the  middle  of  the
continent from the Mackenzie Valley to the Atlantic Coastal Plain, and include the Great Plains on the west   and   the   agriculturally   productive Interior Plains on the east.
North American Cordillera
The cordillera is a complex belt of mountains and
associated plateaus and basins some of which were formed as recently as 100–65 Ma, during the Cretaceous. The cordillera extend from Alaska into Mexico   and  includes  two orogenic   belts —  the Pacific   Margin   on   the   west   and   the   Rocky Mountains on the east — separated by a system of intermontane plateaus and basins.

19. Solution: d)
Explanation for Q17 and 18 are together.

20. Solution: c)
Iron: India has deposits of high grade iron ore. The
mineral is found mainly in Jharkhand, Orissa, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Goa, Maharashtra and Karnataka.
Bauxite: Major bauxite producing areas are Jharkhand, Orissa, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu.
Mica: Mica deposits mainly occur in Jharkhand, Bihar, Andhra Pradesh and Rajasthan. India has the largest reserves of mica in the world – in Kodarma, Jharkhand.
Copper:   It   is   mainly   produced   in   Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh.
Manganese: India‘s manganese deposits lie in Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Orissa, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh.
Limestone:  Major  limestone  producing  states  in
India   are   Bihar,   Jharkhand,   Orissa,   Madhya Pradesh,   Chhattisgarh,   Rajasthan,   Gujarat   and Tamil Nadu.
Gold: Kolar in Karnataka has deposits of gold in India. These mines are among the deepest in the world which makes mining of this ore a very expensive process.
Salt: It is obtained from seas, lakes and rocks. India is   one   of   the   world‘s  leading  producers   and exporters of salt.

21. Solution: d)
Petroleum is found between the layers of rocks and
is drilled from oil fields located in off-shore and coastal areas. This is then sent to refineries which process the crude oil and produce a variety of products like diesel, petrol, kerosene, wax, plastics and lubricants. Petroleum and its derivatives are called Black Gold as they are very valuable.
A  rise  in  price  of  Petroleum  will  affect  all  the
product industries related to it.

22. Solution: a)
Natural gas is a fossil fuel formed when layers of
buried plants, gases, and animals are exposed to intense heat and pressure over thousands of years. Natural       gas       is       a hydrocarbon gas mixture consisting  primarily  of methane,  but  commonly includes        varying        amounts        of        other higher alkanes and    even    a    lesser    percentage of carbon dioxide, nitrogen, and hydrogen sulfide Natural  gas  is  found  in  deep  underground  rock formations  or associated  with  other hydrocarbon

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                            Page 4
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  2 SOLUTIONS                     


reservoirs        in coal        beds and        as methane clathrates. Petroleum is another resource and fossil fuel found in close proximity to, and with natural gas.
CNG is made by compressing natural gas (which is mainly composed of methane, CH4).
On the other hand, LPG includes mixes that are primarily propane (C3H8), primarily butane (C4H10) and,   most   commonly,   mixes   including   both propane and butane.



23. Solution: b)

There were several great monarchs – all near contemporaries — in different parts of the world in the sixteenth century.

These  included  Queen  Elizabeth  I  (1558-1603)  of
England, Akbar‘s  (14  October  1542  –  27  October
1605) contemporary.. Elizabeth was the last ruler of a  dynasty known as  the  Tudors. Elizabeth‘s rule was   marked   by   several   conflicts   –   foremost amongst these were conflicts between the Roman Catholic Church and the Protestants, who were attempting to reform the Church. Elizabeth sided with the latter, and tried to establish the independence of the Church of England from Roman control, even as she adopted several practices of the Roman Church. She came into conflict with Philip II, the powerful ruler of Spain, and defeated a Spanish effort to attack England. Under her patronage English sailors harassed the Spanish fleet and made it difficult for them to control the wealth of the Americas. She was a great patron  of  the  arts  and  supported  the  famous English playwright William Shakespeare. A poet named Edmund Spenser wrote a long epic poem called The Faerie Queene in her praise.

24. Solution: b)
In this schematic diagram of a nuclear reactor:
    Fission (nuclear energy gives rise to heat i.e. thermal energy)
    The   heat   produces   fast   moving   high pressure steam i.e. thermal energy to kinetic energy
    The steam moves the turbine i.e. kinetic to electrical energy

25. Solution: b)
Energy  generated  from  tides  is  called  tidal
energy. Tidal energy can be harnessed by building dams at narrow openings of the sea. During high tide the energy of the tides is used to turn the turbine installed in the dam to produce electricity. Russia, France and the Gulf of Kachchh in India have huge tidal mill farms.

26. Solution: b)
Organic farming is a form of agriculture that relies
on     techniques     such     as crop     rotation, green manure, compost,    and biological    pest    control. Depending  on  whose definition is  used,  organic farming   uses   fertilizers   and   pesticides   (which include herbicides, insecticides and fungicides)     if they       are       considered natural (such       as bone meal from animals or pyrethrin from flowers), but it  excludes  or  strictly  limits  the  use  of  various methods                    (including                    synthetic petrochemical fertilizers and pesticides; plant growth regulators such as hormones; antibiotic use in            livestock;            genetically            modified organisms; human                               sewage sludge; and nanomaterials.)                  for                  reasons including                                                 sustainability, openness, independence, health, and safety.

27. Solution: d)
In   commercial   farming   crops   are   grown   and animals are reared for sale in market. The area cultivated and the amount of capital used is large.
Most of the work is done by machines. Commercial farming includes commercial grain farming, mixed farming and plantation agriculture.





http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                            Page 5
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  2 SOLUTIONS                     


28. Solution: a)
Refer                                                                              to
http://www.agriinfo.in/?page=topic&superid=1&
topicid=652 for a comprehensive understanding.

29. Solution: d)
Rice is the major food crop of the world. It is the
staple diet of the tropical and sub-tropical regions. Rice needs high temperature, high humidity and rainfall. It grows best in alluvial clayey soil, which can retain water. China leads in the production of rice followed by India, Japan, Sri Lanka and Egypt. In favourable climatic conditions as in West Bengal and  Bangladesh  two  to  three  crops  a  year  are grown.

30. Solution: b)
Wheat requires moderate temperature and rainfall
during growing season and bright sunshine at the time  of  harvest.  It  thrives  best  in  well  drained loamy soil. Wheat is grown extensively in USA, Canada, Argentina, Russia, Ukraine, Australia and India. In India it is grown in winter.

31. Solution: d)
Refer to:
The  Section  IV  on  environmental  conditions  in https://www.hort.purdue.edu/newcrop/afcm/mi llet.html http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/madurai
/Millet-cultivation-comes-to-farmers- rescue/articleshow/18457171.cms

32. Solution: c)
Self-explanatory.



33. Solution: c)

By the mid-eighteenth century the Kangra artists developed a style which breathed a new spirit into miniature painting. The source of inspiration was the Vaishnavite  traditions.  Soft  colours  including cool blues and greens, and a lyrical treatment of themes distinguished Kangra painting.

34. Solution: d)
Jute was also known as the ‗Golden Fibre‘. It grows well on alluvial soil and requires high temperature, heavy rainfall and humid climate. This crop is grown in the tropical areas. India and Bangladesh are the leading producers of Jute.

35. Solution: d)
Joint sector industries are owned and operated by the state and individuals or a group of individuals. Maruti Udyog Limited is an example of joint sector
industry. Co-operative sector industries are owned and operated by the producers or suppliers of raw materials, workers or both. Anand Milk Union Limited and Sudha Dairy are a success stories of a co-operative venture.

36. Solution: c)
The textile industry can be divided on the basis of
raw materials used in them. Fibres are the raw material of textile industry. Fibres can be natural or man-made. Natural fibres are obtained from wool, silk,   cotton,   linen   and  jute.   Man   made   fibres include nylon, polyester, acrylic and rayon.

37. Solution: c)
The   first   successful   modern   textile   mill   was
established in Mumbai in 1854. The warm, moist climate, port for importing machinery, availability of raw material and skilled labour resulted in rapid expansion of the industry in the region.
Initially this industry flourished in the states of Maharashtra and Gujarat because of favourable humid climate. But today, humidity can be created artificially, and raw cotton is a pure and not weight losing raw material, so this industry has spread to other parts of India. Weight losing raw material is the one in which the usable part of the raw material is a minor part of the raw material. So, the waste is more. If the waste is more, it is futile to transport the whole raw material over large distances. It can be instead processed on site. This then results in the growth of industries in local area only. Since cotton is not a weight losing material, it does not matter whether it is processed on site or off-site. Coimbatore,     Kanpur,     Chennai,     Ahmedabad,

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                            Page 6
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  2 SOLUTIONS                     


Mumbai,   Kolkata,   Ludhiana,   Pondicherry   and
Panipat are some of the other important centres.

38. Solution: c)
Rates of population growth vary across the world.
Although, the world‘s total population is rising rapidly, not all countries are experiencing this growth.
Some countries like Kenya have high population
growth rates. They had both high birth rates and death rates. This is a sign of low human development.
Now, with improving health care, death rates have fallen, but birth rates still remain high leading to high growth rates. This is a sign of medium level of human development.
In other countries like United Kingdom, population growth is slowing because of both low death and low birth rates. This is a sign of high human development.

39. Solution: c)
Refer to the section  on ‗Population Composition‘ in
Chapter 6- Class 8th Geo NCERT.

40. Solution: d)
Britain does have a written constitution. It is still a
democratic monarchy.
Syria has a written constitution. It is an autocracy.
A  constitution  is  the  mere  embodiment  of  the
political philosophy of a nation.

41. Solution: d)
Societal ideals like fraternity, harmony, justice etc.
are enshrined in the Preamble and DPSP.
Nature  of  society  is  to  be  secular,  liberal  and
socialist. It is mentioned in the Preamble, DPSP and
Fundamental Rights.
Political system is republic democratic mentioned in the constitution in the Preamble.

42. Solution: d)
Self-explanatory.    These    constitute    the    ‗basic
structure‘ of the Indian constitution. The ‗basic structure‘ doctrine was propounded in the Kesavananda Bharti case in 1973.
43. Solution: d)
State governments are not mere agents of Central
government. They derive their authority from the Indian constitution. They are not subordinate to the Centre. Instead, the Centre is more powerful than the state governments to maintain the unity and integrity of the Indian union.

44. Solution: a)

The Paik system was a type of corvee labor system on            which            the Ahom            kingdom of medieval Assam was   based.   The   origin   of   the word paik is unknown and it is believed that the system  is  based  on  the South-East  Asian legacy the Ahoms brought with them in 1228. The mature structure     was     designed     by Momai     Tamuli Borbarua in 1609. The system continued to evolve over time to meet the needs of the Ahom state and in   time   began   to   accumulate   contradictions. Scholars believe that a major reason for the collapse of the Ahom kingdom was that the Paik system had outlived itself by the 18th century.

Every  male  in  the  Ahom  kingdom  between  the ages of fifteen and fifty who was not a noble, a priest, a high caste or a slave was a paik. According to Guha (1991), about 90% of the population belonged to this class at the time of Rudra Singha, around 1714. The top landed aristocracy was about
1% and the rest constituted the servile class.

45. Solution: d)
The state does discriminate among religions. The
jains  were  recently  given  minority  status nationally. They will be eligible for several incentives which Hindus may not get officially. Moreover, there is a different set of laws for almost every   religion.   Sardars   are   allowed   to   carry kirpans; and allowed not to wear helmet while driving. Normal citizens are not.
The state does intervene in religious affairs when it is necessary. For e.g. the Central government has overtaken the management of most important shrines over India like Vaishno Devi, Amarnath etc. Banning   untouchability   in   Hinduism   can   be another example.



http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                            Page 7
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  2 SOLUTIONS                     


46. Solution: b)
The Vice-President presides over the Raja Sabha.
Rest all Presiding officers are elected.



47. Solution: c)
Self-explanatory. Even though President does not
attend the Parliamentary sessions, his nod is required for a bill to become an Act. Hence, he is considered an integral part of the Parliament.

48. Solution: d)
The  executive  can  make  laws  via  the  ordinance
route as mentioned in the Article 123 of the constitution.

49. Solution: c)
Normally, the Rajya Sabha is as powerful as the
Lok  Sabha  when  passing  the  legislations.  If  the Rajya Sabha rejects the bill passed by Lok Sabha then the President has to call for a joint sitting of both the houses.

50. Solution: a)
They are elected only by the Legislative assembly.



51. Solution: c)

Surat  in  Gujarat  was  the  emporium  of  western trade   during   the   Mughal   period   along   with Cambay (present- day Khambat) and somewhat later, Ahmedabad. Surat was the gateway for trade with West Asia via the Gulf of Ormuz. Surat has also been called the gate to Mecca because many pilgrim ships set sail from here.

The city was cosmopolitan and people of all castes and creeds lived there. In the seventeenth century the Portuguese, Dutch and English had their factories and warehouses at Surat. According to the English chronicler Ovington who wrote an account of the port in 1689, on average a hundred ships of different countries could be found anchored at the port at any given time.
There were also several retail and wholesale shops selling cotton textiles. The textiles of Surat were famous for their gold lace borders (zari) and had a market in West Asia, Africa and Europe. The state built  numerous  rest-houses  to  take  care  of  the needs of people from all over the world who came to the city. There were magnificent buildings and innumerable pleasure parks. The Kathiawad seths or mahajans (moneychangers) had huge banking houses at Surat. It is noteworthy that the Surat hundis were honoured in the far-off markets of Cairo in Egypt, Basra in Iraq and Antwerp in Belgium.

However, Surat began to decline towards the end of the seventeenth century. This was because of many factors: the loss of markets and productivity because  of  the  decline  of  the  Mughal  Empire, control of the sea routes by the Portuguese and competition from Bombay (present-day Mumbai) where the English East India Company shifted its headquarters in 1668. Today, Surat is a bustling commercial centre.

52. Solution: d)
It starts from question hour and zero hour follows
it. General matters can be raised by any MP in the zero hour. So, the opposition is allowed to raise matters.
Question hour is a very important way of controlling the executive by keeping them accountable for their  deeds  and  misdeeds  before the house.

53. Solution: c)
Judicial  review is  adopted  in  the  Constitution  of
India from judicial review in the United States. In the  Indian  constitution,  Judicial  review  is  dealt with under Article 13. Judicial Review refers that the Constitution is the supreme power of the nation and all laws are under its supremacy. Article 13 states that:
1.   All  pre-constitutional  laws,  if  in  part  or
completely in conflict with the Constitution, shall have all conflicting provisions deemed ineffective until an amendment to the Constitution   ends   the   conflict.   In   such

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                            Page 8
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  2 SOLUTIONS                     


situation  the  provision  of  that  law  will again  come  into  force,  if  it  is  compatible with  the constitution  as amended.  This is called the Doctrine of Eclipse.
2.   In   a   similar   manner,   laws   made   after adoption of the Constitution by the Constituent Assembly must be compatible with  the  constitution,  otherwise  the  laws and  amendments  will  be  deemed  to  be void ab initio.
3.   In  such  situations,  the  Supreme  Court  or High Court interprets the laws to decide if they  are  in  conformity  with  the Constitution. If such an interpretation is not possible   because   of   inconsistency,   and where a separation is possible, the provision that is inconsistent with constitution is considered to be void. In addition to article
13, articles 32, 226 and 227 provide a constitutional basis to judicial review in India.

54. Solution: c)
Self-explanatory.



55. Solution: a)

Nomadic pastoralists moved over long distances with their animals. They lived on milk and other pastoral products. They also exchanged wool, ghee, etc., with settled agriculturists for grain, cloth, utensils and other products.

They bought and sold these goods as they moved from one place to another, transporting them on their   animals.   The   Banjaras   were   the   most important   trader-   nomads.   Their   caravan   was called tanda. Sultan Alauddin Khalji used the Banjaras to transport grain to the city markets.

56. Solution: d)
Judiciary is independent of the Government based on the doctrine of separation of powers.
While all courts uphold the law, only the SC and
HCs are authorized to enforce fundamental rights.
57. Solution: a)
It was not mentioned in the constitution of India
neither any law enacted by Parliament. It is a result of Judicial activism. PIL is an important topic. Read properly about it here http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public_interest_litig ation_in_India



58. Solution: c)
Article 22 of the constitution says that the right to
be defended is a fundamental right.
Article 39A (DPSP) places the duty on the state as mentioned in statements 2.

59. Solution: c)
This  is  a  very  good  article  to  understand  the
criminal  justice  system  as  a  whole.  Please  go through  it  http://www.victimsofcrime.org/help- for-crime-victims/get-help-bulletins-for-crime- victims/the-criminal-justice-system
It covers the explanation for next question too.



60. Solution: d)
Explanation same as that of the previous question.

61. Solution: a)
The police merely forms an opinion based on its
investigation. It is reflected in the charge sheet. It cannot decide whether a person is guilty or not, and then punish him. This is left to the courts.

62. Solution: d)

63. Solution: d)
In  recognition  of  this,  the  constitution  provides
religious and cultural rights to the minorities and provides for provisions which discriminate positively in favour of these minorities. For e.g. minority scholarships, govt. non-interference in minority run institutions etc.
64. Solution: d)
Article 15,16 and 17 abolish untouchability; provide
for equal opportunity in matters of public employment;    and    prohibit    discrimination    on



http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                            Page 9
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  2 SOLUTIONS                     


grounds of caste, religion, sex or place of birth respectively.
All three stand in consonance with the above provisions.

65. Solution: b)

Under a number of able leaders in the eighteenth century, the Sikhs organized themselves into a number of bands called jathas, and later on misls. Their combined forces were known as the grand army (dal khalsa). The entire body used to meet at Amritsar at the time of Baisakhi and Diwali to take collective   decisions known as  ―resolutions of  the Guru (gurmatas)‖. A system called  rakhi  was introduced, offering protection to cultivators on the payment of a tax of 20 per cent of the produce.



66. Solution: d)
It is a very important act. Please read it in detail
here http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Scheduled_Tri bes_and_Other_Traditional_Forest_Dwellers_(Reco gnition_of_Forest_Rights)_Act,_2006



67. Solution: a)



68. Solution: d)
The Constitution of India recognises the right to
water as being a part of the Right to Life under Article 21. This means that it is the right of every person, whether rich or poor, to have sufficient amounts of water to fulfil his/her daily needs at a price that he/she can afford. In other words, there should  be  universal  access  to  water.  There  have been several court cases in which both the High Courts and the Supreme Court have held that the right  to  safe  drinking  water  is  a  Fundamental Right.

69. Solution: a)
While   all   details   of   revenue   expenditure   and
receipts are mentioned in the budget, an account of capital  receipts  is  not  mentioned  fully   in  the
budget. This is one area of financial administration where the executive is not responsible to the legislature.

70. Solution: b)

While  Akbar  was  at  Fatehpur  Sikri  during  the
1570s he started discussions on religion with the ulama, Brahmanas, Jesuit priests who were Roman Catholics, and Zoroastrians. These discussions took place in the ibadat khana. He was interested in the religion and social customs of different people. It made him realise that religious scholars who emphasised ritual and dogma were often dogma bigots. Their bigots teachings created divisions and disharmony amongst his subjects. This eventually led Akbar to the idea of sulh-i kul  or  ―universal peace‖. This idea  of tolerance did not discriminate between people of different religions in his realm. Instead it focused on a system of ethics – honesty, justice,  peace  –  that  was  universally  applicable. Abul Fazl helped Akbar in framing a vision of governance around this idea of sulh-i kul. This principle of governance was followed by Jahangir and Shah Jahan as well.

71. Solution: c)
Through making, enforcing and upholding laws such as Minimum wages Act, the government can control  the  activities  of  individuals  or  private
companies so as to ensure social justice. Many of these laws have their basis in the Fundamental Rights guaranteed by the Indian Constitution. For instance, the Right against Exploitation says that no one can be forced to work for low wages or under bondage. Similarly, the Constitution lays down ―no child  below  the  age  of  14  shall  be  employed  to work   in   any   factory   or   mines   or   any   other hazardous employment.‖

72. Solution: d)
Graphene   is   a   2D   (two-dimensional)   material
comprising of sheets of carbon atoms. It is amongst the strongest, most lightweight and flexible materials identified, and has the capacity to revolutionize        industries        from healthcare to electronics.  Graphene  is  more  elastic  than  usual

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 10
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  2 SOLUTIONS                     


ceramic  substitutes  like  Indium-Tin  oxide  (ITO) and more transparent than metal films. Graphene can be processed from solution bringing characteristic benefits of using more effective printed and roll-to-roll manufacturing methods. Andre      Geim      and      Konstantin      Novoselov of Russia won the Nobel Prize 2010 for research on graphene.
Researchers  at  the  Cavendish  Laboratory  of  the
Cambridge University for the very first time have developed a grapheme-based flexible screen. The advancement is important because it will lead to the development of next-generation high-tech wearable and foldable electronic devices in future.

73. Solution: c)
CO2, Nitrous Oxide and Methane will have an
growing   influence   on   the   ozone   layer. What
happens to the ozone layer in the second half of the
21st century will mostly be determined by the concentrations of CO2, methane and nitrous oxide
– the 3 key long-lived greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. In general, CO2 and methane lead to increase  global  ozone  levels.  By contrast,  nitrous oxide, a by-product of food production, is both a strong greenhouse gas and an ozone depleting gas, and  is  expected  to  become  more  significant  in future ozone depletion.

74. Solution: c)
The Union Ministry of Science & Technology also
announced KIRAN    (Knowledge,    Involvement, Research, Advancement through Nurturing) for women scientists –A unique advertising scheme to bring about, as far as possible, gender equality in the field of science and technology.
Objectives:-
1.   To    increase    the    number    of    women
researchers in India.
2.   Provide   Research   grants   particularly   to those female researchers and technologists who had to take a break in career owing to household reasons.
3.   Bring  about,  as  far  as  achievable,  gender parity in the field of science and technology.
The scholarships will be provided under three categories-
1.   For those women linked in research work in basic or applied sciences with any central or state level organization or university
2. For those women scientists involved in research and application of innovative solutions for several social problems
3. For  those  researchers  who  are  self- employed.
Under the scheme, the Union Ministry of Science &
Technology will build leadership positions for women. Such a scheme would be beneficial for women who face unavoidable interruptions in their careers owing to numerous reasons.

75. Solution: c)
The Central Board of Excise and Customs (CBEC)
has warned its offices at ports about smuggling of ozone-depleting materials as there has been a fresh surge in efforts to unlawfully ship R-22 gas, which is used in refrigerants and air-conditioners (ACs). The department of revenue intelligence has recognized  fresh  ways  of  smuggling  these  items into the country viz. R-22 gas cylinders were found to be hidden in shipments where the importer had stated shipments of furniture, kitchen cabinets, photocopiers,fruits, etc.
R-22 gas (Chloro-di-fluoro-methane) is permitted to
be  imported  in India but  is  licensed.  Given  the rising market for fridges and air-conditioners, the demand is greater than licensed supply.
In some nations, use of the R22 will will be banned by 2015, while manufacturers were banded from using it in products launched after 2004. R-22 has been predominantly phased out in new equipment in  the  US  under  the Montreal  Protocol,  and  has been substituted by other refrigerants with lower ozone depletion ability such as Propane (R-290), Pentafluoroethane etc.
R-22 is
    A Hydro-Chloro-Fluoro-Carbon (HCFC)
     Colorless gas
     Mostly used as a propellant and refrigerant
     Has Ozone Depletion Potential (ODP) and High Global Warming Potential (GWP) – a powerful   greenhouse   gas   with   a   GWP of 1810  (i.e.  1810  times  as  powerful  as carbon dioxide)

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 11
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  2 SOLUTIONS                     



76. Solution: d)
Although   inscriptions,   coins   and   architecture
provide a lot of information, especially valuable are
―histories‖,  tarikh  (singular) / tawarikh  (plural), written in Persian, the language of administration under the Delhi Sultans.
The   authors   of   tawarikh   were   learned   men:
secretaries,   administrators,   poets   and   courtiers, who both recounted events and advised rulers on governance,  emphasising  the  importance  of  just rule.
Keep the following additional details in mind: (1) the  authors  of  tawarikh  lived  in  cities  (mainly Delhi) and hardly ever in villages. (2) They often wrote their histories for Sultans in the hope of rich rewards. (3) These authors advised rulers on the need to preserve an ―ideal‖ social  order based  on birthright and gender distinctions. Their ideas were not shared by everybody.



77. Solution: c)
The new  government‘s next  giant  drive  to free up service delivery from the hold of the lower bureaucracy will be in the form of a „digital cloud‟ for every Indian.
Now, Certificates issued by the Govt.: Education,
residential, medical records, birth certificates, etc. will  be  saved  in  separate „digital  lockers‟ and  a communication  protocol  will  be  established  for Govt Departments to access them without actually having to see the hard copy.
The idea is very simple. Tt is not desired that copies of certificates issued by the government itself to be carried   everywhere   by   people   to   government offices for several services, e.g. if a student is applying for a government college and has studied in a government-aided school, his birth certificate, identity details and educational certificates, school- leaving details, et al should be available to Govt. institutes   where   he   is   applying.   Likewise   his medical records, etc.

78. Solution: a)
India launched “The                  Green                  Bus
project” in Nagpur with   the   launch   of   its   first
ethanol-run, environment-friendly public bus. The bus  will  emit  carbon  dioxide  as  low  as 15%  to
90% and  its  emissions  will  be  monitored  by  the Union government, Maharashtra state government and Nagpur Municipal Corporation.
The     buses     are     manufactured     by Swedish company Scania  Commercial  Vehicle  India  Ltd. Scania has additionally introduced an engine in consonance with Bharat Stage 5 Norms, a step toward further reducing the emissions.

79. Solution: a)
The World Health Organisation               (WHO) has
approved the use of drug ZMapp to combat Ebola spread as the death count surged.
The current outbreak of Ebola is seen as the most
terrible since the discovery of Ebola Virus. At present, there is no cure for Ebola. Recently, Mapp Biopharmaceutical offered the drug ZMapp to two US doctors who got affected with the Ebola disease. The drug uses a novel method of passive immunization to  treat Ebola  disease by  inserting genetically   altered   Ebola   protein   into   tobacco leaves.   However,   it   has   been   tested   only   on monkeys so far and it was to be tested on human volunteers in 2015. The abrupt outbreak of Ebola hastened the development.



80. Solution: d)
Refer to http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pulayar
The  community was  related to Modi‘s  recent  visit to   Kerala.   It   is   a   dalit   community.   Hence, important.



81. Solution: d)
As  per  a  latest  research  financed  by  the  Union
government  and  headed  by  noted  marine scientist Abhijit        Mitra,        the        Sunderban‘s huge mangrove    forest    is    rapidly    losing    its capacity to absorb carbon dioxide, one of the main greenhouse gases, from the atmosphere due to increase in the salinity of water, unchecked deforestation and pollution.
As per the study, the mangrove forest, marsh grass, phytoplanktons,    molluscus    and    other    coastal

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 12
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  2 SOLUTIONS                     


vegetation  in  the  largest  delta  on  earth  are  the natural  absorbers  of  carbon  dioxide  (CO2).  The locked  carbon  in  the  plants  is  known  as  “Blue Carbons”. The   absorption   of   CO2 is   a   process which plays a role in reduction of the warming of the earth and other bad effects of climate change. The   study   titled “Blue    Carbon   Estimation    in Coastal Zone of Eastern India – Sunderbans” was submitted   to   the   government   in   2013.   The researchers  who  conducted  the  study  expressed concerns,      especially      towards      the      central Sunderbans, one of the three zones into which the forest  was  divided  for  the  study,  the  other  two being western and eastern.
The situation, especially in the central part, is quite alarming. The capacity of the mangrove forest, especially   the   Byne   species,   to   absorb   carbon dioxide has declined significantly. This will affect the whole ecosystem of the area.
The main causes of such an alarming situation in the Sunderbans,  a UNESCO  world  heritage  site, are increased salinity in water and human activities like shrimp farming, kiln industries and deforestation.
     Sharp increase in the salinity of water in Matla River: The mangroves thrive on fresh water,  but  due  to lack of  fresh  water the height of mangroves has reduced significantly, bringing down its capacity to absorb carbons. Due to deposition of silt at the confluence of the Vidyadhari and Matla rivers, fresh water is unable to enter the Matla river resulting into rise in its salinity.
     Human    incursion in    these    areas    for activities like shrimp farming, setting up of brick  kiln  industry  and  deforestation has added to the problem.

82. Solution: a)

As the Delhi Sultans brought the hinterland of the cities under their control, they forced the landed chieftains — the samanta aristocrats — and rich landlords  to  accept  their  authority.  Under Alauddin Khalji the state brought the assessment and  collection  of  land  revenue  under  its  own control. The rights of the local  chieftains to levy
taxes were cancelled and they were also forced to pay  taxes.  The  Sultan‘s  administrators  measured the land and kept careful accounts. Some of the old chieftains and landlords served the Sultanate as revenue collectors and assessors. There were three types of taxes – (1) on cultivation called kharaj and amounting to  about 50 per  cent  of  the  peasant‘s produce, (2) on cattle and (3) on houses.

83. Solution: a)
Since this is an initiative for the youth, for you, we
would request you to visit the website directly and know what is in store for you. Your participation is needed for Good Governance. Please visit http://mygov.nic.in/

84. Solution: b)
Both  Nouveau and  Al  Idrisi  never visited  India.
Both were cartographers, but Nouveau drew more accurate map of India, but it was 600 years after Al Idrisi drew his map of the Indian Ocean.
On the other hand, statement three is correct.

For More: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guillaume_Delisle http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Muhammad_al- Idrisi
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minhaj-i-Siraj

85. Solution: d)
Today  we  understand ―Hindustan‖,as ―India‖, the modern nation state. When the term was used in the  thirteenth  century  by  Minhaj-I  Siraj,  a chronicler who wrote in Persian, he meant the areas of Punjab, Haryana and the lands between the Ganga and Yamuna. He used the term in a political sense for lands that were a part of the dominions of the Delhi Sultan. The areas included in this term shifted with the extent of the Sultanate but the term never included south India within it. By contrast, in the early sixteenth century Babur used Hindustan to  describe  the  geography,  the  fauna  and  the culture of the inhabitants of the subcontinent. As we will see later in the chapter, this was somewhat similar  to  the  way  the  fourteenth-century  poet Amir  Khusrau used  the  word ―Hind‖. While  the idea  of  a  geographical  and  cultural  entity  like

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 13
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  2 SOLUTIONS                     


―India‖ did  exist, the term  Hindustan did  not carry the political and national meanings which we associate with it today.

86. Solution: a)
Statement  one  is  correct.  Other  two  schools  of
thought are: Hanbali and Maliki.
The Shafi'i school is the dominant school of jurisprudence          amongst          Muslims          in the Hejaz region of Saudi Arabia, Yemen, Syria, the Palestinian
territories, Jordan, Egypt, Djibouti, Eritrea, Somalia, Ethiopia, Indonesia, Malaysia, Brunei,      the North Caucasus, Kurdistan and    Maldives.    It    is    also practised by large communities in Saudi Arabia (in the Tihamah and Asir), Kuwait, Iraq,      the Swahili Coast, South Africa, Thailand, Vietnam, Cambodia, the Philippines, Sri
Lanka, Kazakhstan (by Chechens)       and       parts of India (by Mappila).

87. Solution: a)
The Vishwakarma (Cave   10)   is   the   only chaitya
griha amongst  the  Buddhist  group  of  caves  at Ellora. It is locally known as Vishwakarma or Sutar ka jhopda "carpenter's hut". It follows the pattern of construction  of  Caves  19  and  26  of Ajanta.  On stylistic grounds, the date of construction of this cave is assigned to 700 A.D. The chaitya once had a high screen wall, which is ruined at present. At the front is a rock-cut court, which is entered through a flight of steps. On either side are pillared porticos with chambers in their back walls. These were probably intended to have subsidiary shrines but not        completed.        The        pillared verandah of the chaitya has a small shrine at either end and a single cell in the far end of the back wall. The corridor  columns  have  massive  squarish  shafts and ghata-pallava (vase  and  foliage)  capitals.  The main hall is apsidal on plan and is divided into a central   nave   and   side   aisles   by   28   octagonal columns with plain bracket capitals. In the apsidal end of the chaitya hall is a stupa on the face of which  a  colossal  3.30  m  high  seated  Buddha in vyakhyana mudra (teaching posture) is carved. A large Bodhi tree is carved at the back. The hall has a
vaulted roof in which ribs have been carved in the rock imitating the wooden ones.

88. Solution: a)
Brahmanas    often    received    land    grants    or
brahmadeya. As a result, a large number of Brahmana settlements emerged in the Kaveri valley as in other parts of south India. Each brahmadeya was looked after by an assembly or sabha of prominent  Brahmana  landholders.  These assemblies worked very efficiently. Their decisions were recorded in detail in inscriptions, often on the stone walls of temples. Associations of traders known as nagarams also occasionally performed administrative functions in towns.
Inscriptions    from    Uttaramerur    in    Chingleput
district, Tamil Nadu, provide details of the way in which the sabha was organised. The sabha had separate committees to look after irrigation works, gardens, temples, etc. Names of those eligible to be members  of  these  committees  were  written  on small tickets of palm leaf and kept in an earthenware pot, from which a young boy was asked to pick the tickets, one by one for each committee.
Additional information: http://insightsonindia.com/2009/10/27/brahmad eya-devadana-and-agrahara-land-grants/

89. Solution: c)

The Qutb minar is made of red sandstone covered with intricate carvings and verses from the Qur'an.

The minar comprises several superposed flanged and cylindrical shafts,                                   separated by balconies carried on Muqarnas corbels.

The first three storeys are made of red sandstone; the fourth and fifth storeys are of marble and sandstone. At the foot of the tower is the Quwwat- ul-Islam Mosque, the first mosque to be built in India.

The    nearby    7    metres    high Iron    Pillar is    a metallurgical    curiosity,    standing    in    the Qutb complex. The pillar has Brahmic inscriptions on it that predate the Islamic minar.



http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 14
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  2 SOLUTIONS                     


The minar tilts just over 60 cm from the vertical, which is considered to be within safe limits, although experts have stated that monitoring is needed in case rainwater seepage further weakens the foundation.

In 1802, the cupola on the top was thrown down and the whole pillar was damaged by an earthquake. It was repaired by Major R. Smith of the Royal Engineers who restored the Qutub Minar in   1823   replacing   the cupola with   a   Bengali- stylechhatri which was later removed by Governor General, Lord Hardinge in 1848, as it looked out of place, and now stands in the outer lawns of the complex, popularly known as Smith's Folly.
the kingdom. Since they were totally dependent upon their master, the Sultan could trust and rely upon them.

91. Solution: c)

The   Mughals   were   descendants   of   two   great lineages of  rulers. From  their  mother‘s side  they were  descendants  of  Genghis  Khan  (died  1227), ruler of the Mongol tribes, China and Central Asia. From  their  father‘s side they  were  the successors of Timur (died 1404), the ruler of Iran, Iraq and modern-day  Turkey.  However,  the  Mughals  did not like to be called Mughal or Mongol. This was because  Genghis  Khan‘s  memory was  associated with the massacre of innumerable people. It was also linked with the Uzbegs, their Mongol competitors. On the other hand, the Mughals were proud of their Timurid ancestry, not least of all because their great ancestor had captured Delhi in
1398. They celebrated their genealogy pictorially,
each  ruler  getting  a  picture  made  of  Timur  and
himself.




















90. Solution: a)

The consolidation of a kingdom as vast as the Delhi Sultanate needed reliable governors and administrators. Rather than appointing aristocrats and landed chieftains as governors, the early Delhi Sultans, especially Iltutmish, favoured their special slaves purchased for military service, called bandagan in Persian. They were carefully trained to man some of the most important political offices in
92. Solution: c)
Generally, metallic minerals are found in igneous
and metamorphic rock formations that form large plateaus. Iron-ore in north Sweden, copper and nickel deposits in Ontario, Canada, iron, nickel, chromites and platinum in South Africa are examples of minerals found in igneous and metamorphic rocks. Sedimentary rock formations of plains and young fold mountains contain non- metallic  minerals  like  limestone.  Limestone deposits of Caucasus region of France, manganese deposits of Georgia and Ukraine and phosphate beds of Algeria are some examples. Mineral fuels such as coal and petroleum are also found in the sedimentary strata.

93. Solution: c)

While  Akbar  was  at  Fatehpur  Sikri  during  the
1570s he started discussions on religion with the ulama, Brahmanas, Jesuit priests who were Roman Catholics, and Zoroastrians. These discussions took

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 15
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  2 SOLUTIONS                     


place in the ibadat khana. He was interested in the religion and social customs of different people. It made him realise that religious scholars who emphasised ritual and dogma were often dogma bigots. Their bigots teachings created divisions and disharmony amongst his subjects. This eventually led Akbar to the idea of sulh-i kul  or  ―universal peace‖. This idea  of tolerance did  not  discriminate between people of different religions in his realm. Instead it focused on a system of ethics – honesty, justice,  peace  –  that  was  universally  applicable. Abul Fazl helped Akbar in framing a vision of governance around this idea of sulh-i kul. This principle of governance was followed by Jahangir and Shah Jahan as well.

94. Solution: c)

Between the seventh and tenth centuries architects started adding more rooms, doors and windows to buildings. Roofs, doors and windows were still made by placing a horizontal beam across two vertical  columns,  a  style  of  architecture  called
―trabeate‖ or ―corbelled‖. Between  the  eighth and thirteenth centuries the trabeate style was used in the construction of temples, mosques, tombs and in buildings attached to large stepped-wells (baolis)

95. Solution: b)

The state depended on local bankers and mahajans for  loans.  It  sold  the  right  to  collect  tax  to  the highest  bidders.  These   ―revenue  farmers‖ (ijaradars) agreed to pay the state a fixed sum of money. Local bankers guaranteed the payment of this contracted amount to the state. In turn, the revenue-farmers were give considerable freedom in the assessment and collection of taxes. These developments allowed new social groups, like moneylenders and bankers, to influence the management of the state‘s revenue system, something which had not occurred in the past.



96. Solution: d)
Mars Orbiter Mission is India's first interplanetary
mission   to   planet   Mars   with   an   orbiter   craft
designed to orbit Mars in an elliptical orbit. The Mission is primarily technological mission considering the critical mission operations and stringent  requirements  on  propulsion  and  other bus systems of spacecraft.
Mission                                                         Objectives

One  of  the  main  objectives  of  the  first  Indian mission to Mars is to develop the technologies required for design, planning, management and operations      of      an     interplanetary      mission.

Following are the major objectives of the mission:

A. Technological Objectives:
     Design  and  realisation  of  a  Mars  orbiter
with  a  capability  to  survive  and  perform
Earth  bound  manoeuvres,  cruise  phase  of
300  days,  Mars  orbit  insertion  /  capture, and on-orbit phase around Mars.
  Deep space communication, navigation, mission planning and management.
     Incorporate autonomous features to handle contingency situations.
B.                         Scientific                         Objectives:

 Exploration of Mars surface features, morphology, mineralogy and Martian atmosphere by indigenous scientific instruments.

97. Solution: d)

The  term  kathak  is  derived  from  katha,  a  word used in Sanskrit and other languages for story. The kathaks wer originally a caste of story-tellers in temples of north India, who embellished their performances with gestures and songs. Kathak began evolving into a distinct mode of dance in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries with the spread of the bhakti movement. The legends of Radha- Krishna were enacted in folk plays called rasa lila, which combined folk dance with the basic gestures of the kathak story-tellers.

Under the Mughal emperors and their nobles, Kathak  was  performed  in  the  court,  where  it

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 16
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  2 SOLUTIONS                     


acquired its present features and developed into a form  of  dance  with  a  distinctive  style. Subsequently, it developed in two traditions or gharanas: one in the courts of Rajasthan (Jaipur) and the other in Lucknow. Under the patronage of Wajid Ali Shah, the last Nawab of Awadh, it grew into a major art form.

Kathak,  like  several  other cultural  practices,  was viewed with disfavour by most British administrators in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. However, it survived and continued to be performed by courtesans, and was recognised as one of six ―classical‖ forms  of dance  in the country after independence.



98. Solution: d)
Right   to   education   under   Article   21A   is   a
fundamental right via 86th constitutional amendment.
Right to a pollution free environment is a part of
Right to life under Article 21 as interpreted by the
Supreme Court.
Right  to  safeguard  heritage  of  minorities  is  a cultural  right  guaranteed  under  the  constitution. The recent episode where tribes in Odisha – Niyamgiri hills- were asked to abandon their religious and sacred Niyamgiri raja hill; and where the   court   stayed   it,   is   an   example   of   the enforcement of this right.

99. Solution: a)
Above   diagram   shows   thorium   reserves   (in tonnes).
Refer to the introduction of the article. You need not go into details. Just an overview is required. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thorium_fuel_cycle



100.            Solution: d)

Thanjavur is  also  an  example  of  a  temple  town. Temple towns represent a very important pattern of   urbanisation,   the   process   by   which   cities develop.   Temples   were   often   central   to   the economy and society. Rulers built temples to demonstrate their devotion to various deities. They also endowed temples with grants of land and money to carry out elaborate rituals, feed pilgrims and priests and celebrate festivals. Pilgrims who flocked to the temples also made donations.

Temple authorities used their wealth to finance trade and banking. Gradually a large number of priests, workers, artisans, traders, etc. settled near the temple to cater to its needs and those of the pilgrims. Thus grew temple towns. Towns emerged around temples such as those of Bhillasvamin (Bhilsaor  Vidisha  in  Madhya  Pradesh),  and Somnath in Gujarat. Other important temple towns included   Kanchipuram   and   Madurai   in   Tamil Nadu, and Tirupati in Andhra Pradesh. Pilgrimage centres also slowly developed into townships. Vrindavan (Uttar Pradesh) and Tiruvannamalai (Tamil Nadu) are examples of two such towns.




















http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 17
