




    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    





1.  Solution: d)

This recent article is The Hindu is the most comprehensive article written on INO by Kalam and
Srijan Pal Singh. It will address all aspects of Neutrino related studies too. Its an important topic for this year Prelims.
http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/lead/going-all-out-for-neutrino-research/article7322627.ece




2.  Solution: c)

Neutrinos are the information bearers of the universe — which are almost never lost in their path. India’s effort in studying neutrinos at INO may help us unravel the deepest mystery of the universe — why there is more matter than antimatter in the universe.

Neutrinos are the least harmful of all elementary particles, as they almost never react with solid bodies. The mean free path for iron, or the average distance a neutrino will travel in say an iron rod, before interacting with an atom, is about 1 light year. Needless to say, with the human body being less than 2 metres in height, any harmful effect of neutrino is near impossible.

Also, people tend to confuse the “neutrino” for the “neutron”. This has also led to the confusion that neutrinos can be weaponised, which is far from the truth. The neutron bomb, which many discuss, is dangerous but has nothing to do with harmless neutrinos and is made based on a technology around the neutrons, particles which are much heavier.




3.  Solution: a)

The h-index is an index that attempts to measure both the productivity and citation impact of
the published body of work of a scientist or scholar. The index is based on the set of the scientist's
most cited papers and the number of citations that they have received in other publications. The index can also be applied to the productivity and impact of a scholarly journal as well as a group of
scientists, such as a department or university or country. The index was suggested in 2005 by Jorge E. Hirsch, a physicist at UCSD, as a tool for determining theoretical physicists' relative quality and is sometimes called the Hirsch index or Hirsch number.

http://www.saharasamay.com/nation-news/676542754/c-n-r-rao-s-first-indian-scientist-reach-h- index.html

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Page  1    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    


4.  Solution: d)

GAGAN was jointly developed by the ISRO and Airports Authority of India (AAI) for the advancement of air navigation. It is an indigenous navigational guide system developed on the lines of GPS system
of the US. Presently, GAGAN signal is broadcasted through two Geostationary Earth Orbit (GEO)
satellites-GSAT8 and GSAT10.


Recently, ISRO has announced to provide navigational support to Indian Railways through GPS Aided Geo Augmented Navigation (GAGAN) system. The navigational support along with space technology-based tools will be provided to Indian Railways for unmanned level crossings safety.

By using GAGAN software system, a train will get to know the location of any unmanned level crossing by a warning signal. Once this warning signal is given, the train’s hooter will automatically start when it comes near an unmanned crossing.




5.  Solution: b)


NOWCAST weather alert system will provide free SMS service alerts on extreme weather conditions (ex-hailstorm) to over one crore registered farmers on their mobile phones. The free SMS alerts will be sent in Hindi, English and regional languages as per farmers’ request. It will be issued to farmers whose mobile phones are already registered on the government’s mKisan portal.


Under this initiative, the extreme weather data originated from IMD will be updated on mKisan portal using a web service. Later, from mKisan portal the warnings regarding extreme weather conditions will be automatically transmitted by SMS to farmers located at district and block level. Insurance Web-Portal (www.farmer.gov.in/insurance) will be used to create awareness and encourage farmers to insure their crops by taking advantage of existing schemes.





6.  Solution: d)

Agricultural Insurance in India is covered by “National Crop Insurance Programme” by merging three schemes viz. Modified National Agricultural insurance Scheme (MNAIS), Weather Based Crop insurance Scheme (WBCIS) and Coconut Palm Insurance Scheme (CPIS).

These three schemes now serve as components of the NCIP. The FIIS and CCIS were discontinued before 2000.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Page  2    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    
Also, read this very insightful article on agricultural insurance related issues in India.

http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/2015-04-26/news/61542788_1_crop-insurance- scheme-insurance-fraud-kisan-credit-card




7.  Solution: d)

Broadly, the National Crop Insurance Scheme in India covers three stages of crop production.

•   First stage is of planting or sowing, if the crop was prevented from planting / sowing due to deficit rainfalls and adverse seasonal conditions.
•   Second stage is to cover standing crops which got damaged due to unpreventable risks such as drought, flood, Inundation, Pests, Landslides, Natural Fire, Storms, Cyclones etc.
•   Third stage is the time period of two weeks after harvesting when the crops are allowed to dry in field and something wrong happens which destroys the crop such as cyclonic rains/ hailstorms etc.

There are some key differences between its sub-schemes - Modified National Agricultural insurance
Scheme (MNAIS) and Weather Based Crop insurance Scheme (WBCIS).

•   MNAIS specifically indemnifies the cultivator against shortfall in crop yield, WBCIS
indemnifies against the crop loss due to adverse weather incidences.

•   MNAIS is on Individual approach, where claim assessment is made for every individual insured farmer who has suffered a loss. WBCIS is on area approach where sum assured is pre- defined.




8. Solution: c)

Election Commission of India (ECI) has suspended recognition of the PA Sangma-led National
People’s Party (NPP) which was a recognized state party in Meghalaya.

ECI decision in this regard comes in line with Supreme Court’s judgement in the case of Common Cause Vs Union of India and others. In this judgement SC had made compulsion for all political parties to file their election expenditure statement within 75 days of assembly elections and 90 days of Lok Sabha elections.

The de-recognition of a party does not mean its banned.





http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Page  3    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    
9.  Solution: a)

The new type of thinnest bulb can be used as broadband light emitter. It can also be integrated into chips which will pave the way towards the realisation of atomically flexible, thin and transparent displays. It will also help to boost graphene-based on-chip high speed optical communications.


















Graphene

Graphene has many extraordinary properties. It is about 200 times stronger than steel by weight, conducts heat and electricity with great efficiency and is nearly transparent.

The global market for graphene is reported to have reached $9 million by 2014 with most sales in the semiconductor, electronics, battery energy and composites industries.




10.     Solution: a)

Charles Correa recently passed away. He was India’s greatest contemporary architect.
He was Chief Architect for Navi Mumbai along with Shirish Patel and Pravina Mehta from 1970–75. He also had served as first Chairman of the National Commission on Urbanization and was appointed
by then Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi in 1985.

He is founder of Mumbai’s Urban Design Research Institute (established in 1984) dedicated to protect the environment and improve lives of urban communities.





11. Solution: a)

A commemoration of the 200th anniversary of the Battle of Waterloo was held in Belgium.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Page  4    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    
In this battle around ninety thousand French troops led by Napoleon Bonaparte were defeated which had ended their quest of conquering major parts this region. The battle was fought on 18 June 1815 (Sunday) near Waterloo i.e. in present-day Belgium, then part of the United Kingdom of the Netherlands.

French army was defeated by the armies of the Seventh Coalition, comprising Anglo-allied army and
Prussian arm led by the Duke of Wellington and Field Marshal Bluecher.

After the defeat in this war, Napoleon was exiled to the island of Saint Helena in the South Atlantic Ocean, where he died in 1821. The battle had played important role in redrawing the map of Europe and maintaining the peace in this continent for almost a century until the World War I (started in
1914) tore it apart again.




12.Solution: d)

The project was launched in Rajjipur village of Panchkula district of state in collaboration with Indian School of Business (ISB). VMP is the first of its kind initiative in Haryana under which villages in the state would be mentored by leading educational institutions, corporate houses and other organizations.

It will be launched in a phased manner in 5 villages each of the 22 districts in the state. In case of Rajjipur village of Panchkula district, faculty and students of ISB will visit the village. They will present a street play on the theme of Continuing girl education, sanitation, hygiene and nutrition and also conduct a counseling session, health camps engaging with the school kids and village residents.




13.Solution: b)

President of Tanzania is on a five-day tour to India from 17 June to 21 June 2015.

India and Tanzania have inked various agreements including for cooperation in the field of statistics, hydrography, agricultural science and tourism. Among them this deserves mention:

•   Loan agreement to operationalise the LoC: Loan agreement on LOC for US 268.35 million dollars for extension of Lake Victoria pipeline project
•   Agreement for appointing the former as PMC: The agreement will pave way for preparing
Detailed Project Report (DPR) for Lake Victoria pipeline project.



14.Solution: c)


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Page  5    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    
http://www.financialexpress.com/article/economy/companies/jharkhand-cm-raghubar-das-bans-
thermocol-plates/87593/

At the same time it will ensure that the plates used for mass consumption are environment friendly.

Even though its a state related matter, it was covered in national dailies and UPSC likes to give such twisters. Be prepared for all.






15. Solution: a)

United Kingdom (UK) recently celebrated 800 years of signing of Magna Carta on 15 June 2015. The celebrations were for the 8 century year old historic document which had laid foundation for modern democratic society.

The document had written promises between King John and his subjects mentioning that the king
will govern England and deal with its people according to the customs of feudal law. Magna Carta had laid the first steps towards parliamentary democracy and the principle supremacy of law i.e. no one is above the law.

It also laid the principle of balance of power between the governed and government. Its influence can be seen in other documents across the world including the UN Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and on US Constitution and Bill of Rights.

In case of India, its influence also can be seen on Part III of constitution which contains fundamental rights, described as the magna carta of India which has been derived inspiration from Bill of Rights.




16.Solution: b)

http://www.livemint.com/Politics/RRzx6QaPMv5QHdIsHBNEQM/RBIs-action-on-BaselIII-norms- draws-praise.html

LCR is basically highly liquid assets held by financial institutions in order to meet short-term obligations

The liquidity coverage ratio is an important part of the Basel Accords, as they define how much liquid assets have to be held by financial institutions. Because banks are required to hold a certain level of
highly-liquid assets, they are less able to lend out short-term debt.




http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Page  6    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    


17. Solution: b)

A clause in the CLND Act empowers the operator the Right to Recourse and allows it to sue the suppliers in case of any accident. This was seen as a major hindrance to the growth of the nuclear industry. These concerns led to the formation of the nuclear insurance pool.

Benefits of INIP

•   To deal with management of cover to both operators and suppliers on behalf of all direct insurance companies participating in the pool.
•   INIP will offer policies on the nuclear operators liability insurance policy and a nuclear suppliers’ special contingency (against right to recourse) insurance policy.




18.Solution: c)

The committee has suggested measures for restructuring the Railway Board and its departments so that policy making is separated from day-to-day operations.

•   Establishment of an independent regulator Railway Regulatory Authority of India (RRAI) with a separate budget and to be independent of the Ministry.
•   RRAI will decide on tariffs to revamp the cash-strapped railways.

•   The panel says that the Regulator will work under the policy framed by the Ministry, while the present Railway Board will become a board of Indian Railways — the government-run operator
— alone. The Regulator can recommend fare revisions but these will not be binding on the Railway Ministry leaving scope, presumably, for the political dispensation of the day to take a call.

•   Railway Budget should be phased out with gross budgetary support to Indian Railways.

•   There is need to improve the internal resource generation and explore varied methods of financing but also to improve utilisation of available resources.
•   No privatisation of Indian Railway but allowed participation of private sector in the railway projects.
•   Separation of activities like running of hospitals, schools, real estate development, catering, manufacturing of locomotives, coaches and wagons from the core business of running trains.




19.Solution: b)

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Page  7    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    
One Rank One Pension aims at dispensing the same amount of pension for each rank, with similar length of service, and with the benefits of future enhancements passed on to past retirees of the Indian army.

For example, a Subedar who has retired from the army in 1979 is supposed to get the same pension as a Subedar who has retired in 2013, with the same number of years of service.

OROP will benefit more than 20 lakh ex-servicemen, and about six lakh war widows.




20.     Solution: a)

The question has been made in light of the International Yoga day. Some of the previous tests cover other aspects.

Yoga Philosophy is one of the six systems of Hindu Philosophy which exist in India. Unlike so many other philosophies of the world, it is a philosophy that is wholly practical. Yoga is an exact science based on certain immutable Laws of Nature.

There are four main forms of Yoga, according to one school of thought, namely Mantra Yoga, Hatha Yoga, Laya Yoga and Raja Yoga; Kundalini Yoga is really Laya Yoga. There is another classification: Jnana Yoga, Raja Yoga, Laya Yoga, Hatha Yoga and Mantra Yoga.

Yoga is a science that teaches us the method of joining the individual soul and the Supreme Soul. It is the merging of the individual will with the Cosmic or Universal Will.

Yoga is that state of Absolute Peace wherein there is neither imagination nor thought. Yoga is control of mind and its modifications. Yoga teaches us how to control the modifications of the mind and attain liberation.




21.Solution:  c)

Augmented reality (AR) is a live direct or indirect view of a physical, real-world environment whose elements are augmented (or supplemented) by computer-generated sensory input such as sound, video, graphics or GPS data.

It is related to a more general concept called mediated reality, in which a view of reality is modified
(possibly even diminished rather than augmented), by a computer. As a result, the technology functions by enhancing one’s current perception of reality.





http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Page  8    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    
By contrast, virtual reality replaces the real world with a simulated one. Augmentation is conventionally in real-time and in semantic context with environmental elements, such as sports scores on TV during a match.

With the help of advanced AR technology (e.g. adding computer vision and object recognition) the information about the surrounding real world of the user becomes interactive and digitally manipulable. Artificial information about the environment and its objects can be overlaid on the real world



22.     Solution: c)

ASCI is a self-regulatory voluntary non-governmental organization (NGO) of the advertising industry in India. Its aim is to maintain and enhance the public’s confidence in advertising. It was established in 1985 by three main constituents of advertising industry viz advertisers, advertising agencies and media.

It has recently launched an initiative (mobile application) that will provide consumers/users platform to report complaint services for misleading advertisements on a mobile apart from ASCI’s online complaint facility. It is India’s first consumer complaint mobile app.




23.     Solution: b)

The Preamble reveals four ingredients or components:

•   Nature of Indian State: It declares India to be of a sovereign, socialist, secular democratic and republican polity.
•   Source of authority of the Constitution: The Preamble states that the Constitution derives its authority from the people of India.
•   Objectives of the Constitution: It specifies justice, liberty, equality and fraternity as the objectives.
•   Date of adoption of the Constitution: It stipulates November 26, 1949 as the date.






24.     Solution: d)

An amendment of the Constitution can be initiated only by the introduction of a bill for the purpose in either House of Parliament and not in the state legislatures.



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Page  9    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    
The bill must be passed in each House by a special majority, that is, a majority (that is, more than 50 per cent) of the total membership of the House and a majority of two-thirds of the members of the House present and voting.

Each House must pass the bill separately. In case of a disagreement between the two Houses, there is no provision for holding a joint sitting of the two Houses for the purpose of deliberation and passage of the bill. The bill ends.




25.     Solution: d)

The parliamentary system is based on the principle of cooperation and co-ordination between the legislative and executive organs while the presidential system is based on the doctrine of separation of powers between the two organs. The features of parliamentary government in India are:

•   Presence of nominal and real executives;
•   Majority party rule,
•   Collective responsibility of the executive to the legislature,
•   Membership of the ministers in the legislature,
•   Leadership of the prime minister or the chief minister,
•   Dissolution of the lower House (Lok Sabha or Assembly).




26.     Solution: b)

Just scan through some of the provisions. This issue has been in news for sometime about giving
Hindu migrants from Bangladesh and Pakistan Indian citizenship.

http://indiancitizenshiponline.nic.in/acquisition1.htm

http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/govt-set-to-grant-citizenship-to-hindu-immigrants-from- bangladesh/article7190826.ece




27.     Solution: a)

The compulsory (obligatory or mandatory) and voluntary (discretionary or optional) provisions (features) of the 73rd Constitutional Amendment Act (1992) as in the Part IX of the Constitution are separately given for the states.

Some of the voluntary provisions are:


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  10    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    


•   Giving representation to members of the Parliament (both the Houses) and the state legislature
(both the Houses) in the panchayats at different levels falling within their constituencies.
•   Providing reservation of seats (both members and chairpersons) for backward classes in panchayats at any level.
•   Granting powers and authority to the panchayats to enable them to function as institutions of self-government (in brief, making them autonomous bodies).
•   Devolution of powers and responsibilities upon panchayats to prepare plans for economic development and social justice; and to perform some or all of the 29 functions listed in the
Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution.




28.     Solution: b)

Political scientists have classified governments into unitary and federal on the basis of the nature of relations between the national government and the regional governments.

By definition, a unitary government is one in which all the powers are vested in the national government and the regional governments, if at all exist, derive their authority from the national government. A federal government, on the other hand, is one in which powers are divided between the national government and the regional governments by the Constitution itself and both operate in their respective jurisdictions independently. Britain, France, Japan, China, Italy, Belgium, Norway, Sweden, Spain and so on have the unitary model of government while the US, Switzerland, Australia, Canada, Russia, Brazil, Argentina and so on have the federal model of government.

In a federal model, the national government is known as the Federal government or the Central government or the Union government and the regional government is known as the state government or the provincial government.

29.     Solution: d)

Constitution specifies the structure, organisation, powers and functions of both the Central and state governments and prescribes the limits within which they must operate. Thus, it avoids the misunderstandings and disagreements between the two.

All the laws made in India are codified separate from the constitution and maintained in a law book. They need not be a part of the constitution.

Even in the UK where there is no written constitution, people enjoy several fundamental rights. However, only because our fundamental rights are written in the constitution, it is difficult to amend
and change them as per the wishes of the political executive.




http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  11    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    
30.     Solution: c)

Option C is more preferable to option B because the former is more complete and correct.

Proportional representation essentially means representation that is proportionate to some factor e.g. population here.
The system of proportional representation aims at removing the defects of territorial representation. Under this system, all sections of the people get representation in proportion to their number. Even
the smallest section of the population gets its due share of representation in the legislature.




31.Solution: b)

As provided by the Constitution, the Speaker of the last Lok Sabha vacates his office immediately before the first meeting of the newly- elected Lok Sabha. Therefore, the President appoints a member of the Lok Sabha as the Speaker Pro Tem. Usually the senior most member is selected for this. The President himself administers oath to the Speaker Pro Tem.

The Speaker Pro Tem has all the powers of the Speaker. He presides over the first sitting of the newly- elected Lok Sabha. His main duty is to administer oath to the new members. He also enables the House to elect the new Speaker.

When the new Speaker is elected by the House, the office of the Speaker Pro Tem ceases to exist. Hence, this office is a temporary office, existing for a few days.




32.     Solution: d)

Article 113 of the constitution says that no new expenditure can be sanctioned unless asked for by the executive government. It means that no other branch of the government has the authority to sanction public expenditure.

Article 117 of the constitution says that no other branch of the government can ask for a new tax other than the executive.

But even if the executive wants to impose a new tax, it cannot be done without the authorization of the legislature.




33.     Solution: b)


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  12    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    
Every government budget is on an annual basis.

Therefore, the "rule of lapse" will apply at the end of the year, i.e., if the voted expenditure (by the Parliament) is not spent by the end of the financial year (i.e., March 31), then the unspent balance would lapse.

Observance of the rule of lapse has led to a heavy "rush of expenditure" towards the close of the financial year.




34.     Solution: d)

Since legislative division is made in 7th schedule – Union, State and Concurrent list, the state legislatures are bound to their allocated subjects.

Both the Supreme and High courts can review the acts of the state legislatures and declare them null and void if they are ultra vires the constitution or any fundamental rights.

The Governor has every right to reserve state bill for President in certain cases. The president may or may not sign the bills in which case they lapse.

The governor can also exercise his veto powers over state enactments. He can also delay a bill.

35.     Solution: b)

Article 3 lays down two conditions in the event of state’s reorganization: one, a bill contemplating the above changes can be introduced in the Parliament only with the prior recommendation of the President; and two, before recommending the bill, the President has to refer the same to the state legislature concerned for expressing its views within a specified period.

The Constitution lays down a special procedure for the passing of money bills in the Parliament. A money bill can only be introduced in the Lok Sabha and that too on the recommendation of the president. Every such bill is considered to be a government bill and can be introduced only by a minister.




36.     Solution: c)

The western cyclonic disturbances are weather phenomena of the winter months brought in by the westerly flow from the Mediterranean region.

They usually influence the weather of the north and north-western regions of India. Tropical cyclones occur during the monsoon as well as in October - November, and are part of the easterly flow.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  13    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    
These disturbances affect the coastal regions of the country. The disasters caused by them on Orissa and Andhra Pradesh coast are notable.




37.     Solution: a)

The following are considered to be the stages in the development of planets:

•   The stars are localised lumps of gas within a nebula. The gravitational force within the lumps leads to the formation of a core to the gas cloud and a huge rotating disc of gas and dust develops around the gas core.
•   In the next stage, the gas cloud starts getting condensed and the matter around the core develops into small-rounded objects. These small-rounded objects by the process of cohesion develop into what is called planetesimals. Larger bodies start forming by collision, and gravitational attraction causes the material to stick together. Planetesimals are a large number of smaller bodies.
•   In the final stage, these large number of small planetesimals accrete to form a fewer large bodies in the form of planets.
38. Solution: d)

Weathering processes are responsible for breaking down the rocks into smaller fragments and preparing the way for formation of not only regolith and soils, but also erosion and mass movements. Biomes and biodiversity is basically a result of forests (vegetation) and forests depend upon the depth of weathering mantles.

Erosion cannot be significant if the rocks are not weathered. That means, weathering aids mass wasting, erosion and reduction of relief and changes in landforms are a consequence of erosion. Weathering is an important process in the formation of soils.

Weathering of rocks and deposits helps in the enrichment and concentrations of certain valuable ores of iron, manganese, aluminium, copper etc., which are of great importance for the national economy.

When rocks undergo weathering, some materials are removed through chemical or physical leaching by groundwater and thereby the concentration of remaining (valuable) materials increases. Without such a weathering taking place, the concentration of the same valuable material may not be sufficient and economically viable to exploit, process and refine. This is what is called enrichment.




39.     Solution: d)

As the geomorphic agents are capable of erosion and deposition, two sets — Erosional or destructional and depositional or constructional — of landforms are produced by them.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  14    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    
Many varieties of landforms develop by the action of each of the geomorphic agents depending upon especially the type and structure i.e. folds, faults, joints, fractures, hardness and softness, permeability and impermeability, etc. come under structure of rocks. There are some other independent controls like (i) stability of sea level; (ii) tectonic stability of landmasses; (iii) climate, which influence the evolution of landforms.

Any disturbance in any of these three controlling factors can upset the systematic and sequential stages in the development and evolution of landforms. Moreover, geomorphic regimes i.e. running water; groundwater, glaciers, waves, and winds also affect landforms on earth.




40.     Solution: a)

An ordinary clock loses time in summer. This is because the length of the pendulum increases by the expansion of the metal due to the additional heat. Since the pendulum clock depends on the length of the pendulum for accuracy of the time, its time period is denoted by 2π √ (l/g) where l is the length of the pendulum and g is value of the gravity. So, its time period increases and the clock slows down and gets late.

So Hari will arrive late for the meeting.




41.Solution: d)

Surface Waves are the principle waves used in AM, FM and TV broadcast. Objects such as buildings, hills, ground conductivity, etc. have a significant impact on their strength.












Space waves are also used. The other name of space wave propagation is line of sight propagation. There are some limitations of space wave propagation.

1.   These waves are limited to the curvature of the earth.

2.  These waves have line of sight propagation, means their propagation is along the line of sight distance.



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  15    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    
The line of sight distance is that exact distance at which both the sender and receiver antenna are in sight of each other. So, from the above line it is clear that if we want to increase the transmission distance then this can be done by simply extending the heights of both the sender as well as the receiver antenna. This type of propagation is used basically in radar and television communication.

The frequency range for television signals is nearly 80 to 200MHz. These waves are not reflected by the ionosphere of the earth. The property of following the earth’s curvature is also missing in these waves. So, for the propagation of television signal, geostationary satellites are used. The satellites complete the task of reflecting television signals towards earth. If we need greater transmission then we have to build extremely tall antennas.




42.     Solution: d)

Mulch is simply a protective layer of a material that is spread on top of the soil. Mulches can either be organic -- such as grass clippings, straw, bark chips, and similar materials -- or inorganic -- such as stones, brick chips, and plastic.

Organic mulches also improve the condition of the soil. As these mulches slowly decompose, they provide organic matter which helps keep the soil loose. This improves root growth, increases the infiltration of water, and also improves the water-holding capacity of the soil. Organic matter is a source of plant nutrients and provides an ideal environment for earthworms and other beneficial soil organisms.




43.     Solution: c)

In tropical and subtropical forests, trees shed their leaves at the onset of the dry season. Trees that lose all of their leaves for part of the year are known as deciduous trees.

Most deciduous trees have broad leaves that are susceptible to being damaged during cold or dry weather. In contrast, most evergreen trees either live in warm, wet climates or they have weather- resistant needles for leaves. However, there are exceptions in nature, such as tamarack trees that shed their needles every autumn and live oaks that retain their broad leaves for the entire year even in relatively cool climates.

Shedding leaves helps trees to conserve water and energy.




44.     Solution: c)



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  16    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    
A comet tail and coma are illuminated by the Sun and may become visible from Earth when a comet passes through the inner Solar System.

Separate tails are formed of dust and gases, becoming visible with through different phenomena; the dust reflects sunlight directly and the gases glow from ionisation.


















The bright white tail is called the dust tail because it is made of the dust coming off the nucleus as the comet heats up near the Sun. The dust tail doesn't actually glow with its own light. The dust grains reflect the Sunlight, making the tail look very bright.

Most comets are too faint to be visible without the aid of a telescope, but a few each decade become bright enough to be visible to the naked eye.




45.     Solution: a)

Out-breeding is the breeding of the unrelated animals, which may be between individuals of the same breed but having no common ancestors for 4-6 generations (out-crossing) or between different breeds (cross-breeding) or different species (inter-specific hybridisation).

In this method, superior males of one breed are mated with superior females of another breed. Cross- breeding allows the desirable qualities of two different breeds to be combined.

Controlled breeding experiments are carried out using artificial insemination




46.     Solution: a)

Fortification is the practice of deliberately increasing the content of an essential micronutrient, i.e. vitamins and minerals (including trace elements) in a food, so as to improve the nutritional quality of the food supply and provide a public health benefit with minimal risk to health.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  17    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    
Biofortification is the process by which the nutritional quality of food crops is improved through biological means such as conventional plant breeding. Biofortification differs from conventional fortification in that biofortification aims to increase nutrient levels in crops during plant growth rather than through manual means during processing of the crops. Biofortification may therefore present a way to reach populations where supplementation and conventional fortification activities may be difficult to implement and/or limited.

Examples of biofortification projects include:

•    iron-biofortification of rice, beans, sweet potato, cassava and legumes;

•    zinc-biofortification of wheat, rice, beans, sweet potato and maize;

•    provitamin A carotenoid-biofortification of sweet potato, maize and cassava; and

•    amino acid and protein-biofortification of sourghum and cassava.




47.     Solution: d)

The Chandrayaan-2 is an ISRO mission aimed at placing an orbiter around the moon and sending a lander and a rover to its surface in 2017-18.

Here is the mission overview http://isp.justthe80.com/moon-exploration/chandrayaan---2#TOC- Mission-Overview

Unlike Chandrayaan-1's lunar probe, which impacted the Moon's surface, the lander will make a soft landing.  It will use a rover to explore its surface.

Initially, the lander was slated to be developed by Russia in collaboration with India. When Russia stated its inability provide the lander to meet even the revised time frame of 2015, Indian officials decided to develop the lander independently.




48.     Solution: c)

From the seals, terracotta figurines and copper tablets we get an idea on the religious life of the Harappans. The chief male deity was Pasupati, (proto-Siva) represented in seals as sitting in a yogic posture with three faces and two horns. Trees and animals were also worshipped by the Harappans. They believed in ghosts and evil forces and used amulets as protection against them.

The chief female deity was the Mother Goddess represented in terracotta figurines. In latter times, Linga worship was prevalent.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  18    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    


49.     Solution: b)

In the Rig Vedic or early Vedic period, the basic unit of political organization was kula or family. Several families joined together on the basis of their kinship to form a village or grama. The leader of grama was known as gramani. A group of villages constituted a larger unit called visu. It was headed by vishayapati. The highest political unit was called jana or tribe.

There were several tribal kingdoms during the Rig Vedic period such as Bharatas, Matsyas, Yadus and Purus. The head of the kingdom was called as rajan or king. The Rig Vedic polity was normally monarchical and the succession was hereditary. The king was assisted by purohita or priest and senani or commander of the army in his administration.




50.     Solution: d)

Buddha did not involve himself in fruitless controversies regarding metaphysical questions like god, soul, karma, rebirth, etc., and concerned himself with the practical problems confronting man.

Buddha neither accepts god nor rejects the existence of god. He laid great emphasis on the law of karma. He argued that the condition of man in this life depends upon his own deeds in present life.

He taught that the soul does not exist. However, he emphasized Ahimsa. By his love for human beings and all living creatures, he endeared himself to all.




51. Solution: d)

The system of small independent states came to an end with Alexander’s invasion. The immediate effect of Alexander’s invasion was that it encouraged political unification of north India under the Mauryas.

Alexander’s invasion had also paved the way for direct contact between India and Greece. The routes opened by him and his naval explorations increased the existing facilities for trade between India and West Asia.

However, his aim of annexing the northwestern India to his empire was not fulfilled due his premature death. His authority in the Indus valley was a short-lived one because of the expansion of
Mauryan Empire under Chandragupta Maurya.





http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  19    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    
52.     Solution: a)


















In order to eliminate the effect of altitude on pressure, it is measured at any station after being reduced to sea level for purposes of comparison. The sea level pressure distribution is shown on weather maps.

The figure above (from NCERT) shows the patterns of isobars corresponding to pressure systems. Low pressure system is enclosed by one or more isobars with the lowest pressure in the centre.

High-pressure system is also enclosed by one or more isobars with the highest pressure in the centre.




53.     Solution: d)

It refers to the process by which the RBI takes away money from the banking system to neutralise the fresh money that enters the system.

Suppose the RBI decides to buy US dollars (USD) from the market. Now, the money held by the RBI does not form part of the banking system. So, if the RBI releases rupees from its coffers to buy dollars, the money supply in the banking system increases. That can be a problem leading to inflation.

If you need more explanation and details go to http://www.thehindubusinessline.com/iw/2003/02/02/stories/2003020201001400.htm

54.     Solution: d)

Opportunity cost is the cost that you pay the loss of other alternatives when one alternative is chosen.

In statement 1, no matter what the entrepreneur chooses, he has to suffer the same loss or profit. In other words, both the options are same.

In statement 2, no matter what the labourer chooses, his benefit from both the activities is the same.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  20    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    


55.     Solution: d)

Redistribution of income and redistribution of wealth are respectively the transfer of income and of wealth (including physical property) from some individuals to others by means of a social mechanism such as taxation, monetary policies, welfare, land
reform, charity, confiscation,divorce or tort law.

Wealth redistribution can be implemented through land reform that transfers ownership of land from one category of people to another, or through inheritance taxes or direct wealth taxes.




56.     Solution: d)

High public debt is not a problem when it is being used for creation of infrastructure, employment and other productive areas.

Inflation is needed for any economy to grow because inflation suggests that the demand for goods has outstripped the supply. In this case more production is required which leads to higher growth.

A positive trade balance has little relation with a criterion of development. USA has a large trade deficit, yet is is a developed country. However, having a positive trade balance is good for the economy because it means we are competitive in the world export market.




57.Solution: d)

Foreign investment does not generate black money. It only circulates the existing black money supply.

Tax avoidance is not exactly illegal. It basically means to bypass tax laws and rules to reduce the tax burden on an individual or firm. The issue of GAAR is one of issues related with it.

On the other hand, tax evasion is the illegal evasion of taxes by individuals, corporations and trusts. Tax evasion often entails taxpayers deliberately misrepresenting the true state of their affairs to the tax authorities to reduce their tax liability and includes dishonest tax reporting, such as declaring less income, profits or gains than the amounts actually earned, or overstating deductions. Tax evasion is an activity commonly associated with the informal economy.




58.     Solution: a)



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  21    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    
Grants from foreign nations are preferred only when the government does not want to increase the money supply and inflation by infusion of fresh money from abroad.

Borrowing from sovereigns nations also suffers from this defect.

Public borrowing will keep the money supply constant allowing the government to finance its deficit as well as tackle inflation.

Printing fresh currency is highly inflationary as it increases the money supply without adding anything to the production process.




59.     Solution: d)

The Southern Birdwing (Troides minos) is a large & Swallowtail butterfly endemic to Peninsular
India. With a wingspan of 140–190 mm, it is the largest butterfly of India, found in southern India.













Southern Birdwing

Blue Mormon (Papilio polymnestor) is the second largest butterfly species in terms of size, after the southern birdwing (Troides minos).

Maharashtra has officially declared Blue Mormon species as State butterfly as part of state symbols. With this, Maharashtra became the first State in the country to have a State butterfly.













Blue mormon



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  22    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    
It is only found (endemic to) in Sri Lanka, Western Ghats of Maharashtra, South India and coastal belts of the country.

Kerala Government has declared June 22 as ‘Snake Bird Day’ in a bid to protect the endangered species which is also known as Indian darter.

It is water bird which is also known as Indian darter (Anhinga melanogaster). It has large slender long-necked water bird and is mostly black with silver wing markings. As per IUCN Red List of Threatened Species, Snake Bird is classified as Near Threatened species.



60.     Solution: b)

China has opened 2nd land border crossing in Tibet via Nathu La, Sikkim to allow the Indian pilgrims for Kailash-Mansarovar yatra. The new route is in addition and alternative to the existing Lipulekh Pass route located in Uttarakhand which was only route earlier. This route was damaged in the devastating Uttarakhand floods in 2013.

Nathu La is a mountain pass in the Himalayas. It connects the Indian state of Sikkim with China's Tibet Autonomous Region. The pass, at 4,310 m (14,140 ft) above mean sea level, forms a part of an offshoot of the ancient Silk Road. Nathu means "listening ears" and La means "pass" in Tibetan. On the Indian side, the pass is 54 km (34 mi) east of Gangtok, the capital of Indian state of Sikkim. Only citizens of India can visit the pass, and then only after obtaining a permit in Gangtok.

Nathu La is one of the second open trading border posts between China and India; the next is Shipkila in Himachal Pradesh and Lipulekh (or Lipulech) in Nepal is also an other way. Sealed by India after the 1962 Sino-Indian War, Nathu La was re-opened in 2006 following numerous bilateral trade agreements.




61.Solution: d)

The District courts are subordinate courts that work under the authority of the High court and
Supreme Court. Immediate control is exerted by the HC, and final control by the SC.

The HCs are responsible for appointment, postings, transfers and general administration of the district courts.

The district courts are free from interference by the state or central executive.




62.     Solution: d)


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  23    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    
Classical Sufi scholars have defined Sufism as "a science whose objective is the reparation of the heart and turning it away from all else but God". Alternatively, in the words of the Darqawi Sufi
teacher Ahmad ibn Ajiba, "a science through which one can know how to travel into the presence of
the Divine, purify one's inner self from filth, and beautify it with a variety of praiseworthy traits".

Classical Sufis were characterised by their attachment to dhikr, (a practice of repeating the names of God, often performed after prayers) and asceticism. Sufism gained adherents among a number of Muslims as a reaction against the worldliness of the early Umayyad Caliphate (661–750 CE). Sufis have spanned several continents and cultures over a millennium, originally expressing their beliefs in Arabic, before spreading into Persian, Turkish, Indian languages and a dozen other languages.




63.     Solution: c)

Paul Crutzen pointed out that emissions of nitrous oxide (N2O), a stable, long-lived gas produced by soil bacteria, from the Earth's surface could affect the amount of nitric oxide (NO) in the stratosphere. Crutzen showed that nitrous oxide lives long enough to reach the stratosphere, where it is converted into NO.

Crutzen then noted that increasing use of fertilizers might have led to an increase in nitrous oxide emissions over the natural background, which would in turn result in an increase in the amount of NO in the stratosphere. Thus human activity could have an impact on the stratospheric ozone layer. In the following year,

Crutzen and (independently) Harold Johnston suggested that NO emissions from supersonic passenger aircraft, which would fly in the lower stratosphere, could also deplete the ozone layer. Then, more recently in 1995 David W. Fahey, an atmospheric scientist at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, found that the drop in ozone would be from 1 to 2% if a fleet of 500 supersonic passenger aircraft were operated.

You can also refer to this very good source about ozone depletion http://www.ozonedepletion.info/education/part3/ozonesources.html




64.     Solution: d)

Trimurti is considered the most important sculpture of Elephanta and is described as a ‘masterpiece of Gupta-Chalukyan art’. It is placed at the back of the cave facing the entrance, on the north-south axis and is also known as Maheshmurti or Trimurti Sadashiva. The three-headed image of Shiva is of a height of 20 ft and represents Panchamukha Shiva. Creation, destruction and protection are the
three essential aspects that are represented by the three heads of Shiva.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  24    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    
The Mahayana Buddhism advocated the worship of the image of the Buddha and of the Bodhisattvas. This brought it nearer to Hindu idol worship. Most interestingly, the Gupta period saw the emergence of the image of the Buddha as Bhagavan. Hinduism, in its unlimited liberalism, came to accept Buddha as a God of the Hindus. Buddha came to be worshipped as an incarnation of Vishnu.




65.     Solution: d)

The dew formation is more when the sky is clear and less when it is cloudy.

When the sky is clear and the trees and plants are cooler at nights, there is more evaporation of water and hence more dew formation.

But when it is cloudy, trees and plants do not get cool in the night and hence there is less dew formation. As the sun raises high in the sky, these dew drops evaporate into air.




66.     Solution: c)

The NITI Aayog comprises the following:

1.   Prime Minister of India as the Chairperson

2.  Governing Council comprising the Chief Ministers of all the States and union territories with legislature and lieutenant governors of other Union Territories

3.  Regional Councils

4.  Experts, specialists and practitioners with relevant domain knowledge as special invitees nominated by the Prime Minister

5.  Full-time organizational framework (in addition to Prime Minister as the Chairperson)
comprising

1.   Vice-Chairperson: Arvind Panagariya

2.  Members: Two (2) Full-time: economist Bibek Debroy and former DRDO chief V.K.
Saraswat

3.  Part-time members: Maximum of two from leading universities research organizations and other relevant institutions in an ex-officio capacity. Part-time members will be on a
rotational basis




http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  25    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    


4.  Ex Officio members: Maximum of four members of the Union Council of Ministers to be nominated by the Prime Minister

5.  Chief Executive Officer: To be appointed by the Prime Minister for a fixed tenure, in the rank of Secretary to the Government of India. Sindhushree Khullar appointed as the Chief Executive Officer.

6.  Secretariat as deemed necessary




67.     Solution: a)

Panchayats (Extension to Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 or PESA is a law enacted by the Government of India to cover the "Scheduled areas", which are not covered in the 73rd amendment or Panchayati Raj Act of the Indian Constitution. It was enacted on 24 December 1996 to enable Gram Sabhas to self govern their natural resources.

How much self-governance will be allowed depends on the state legislative assemblies. For e.g. in some states like Jharkhand, Gram Sabhas under scheduled areas do not have the power to stop land alienation, while in some other states they do.




68.     Solution: c)

Grafting describes any of a number of techniques in which a section of a stem with leaf buds is inserted into the stock of a tree. The upper part of the graft (the scion) becomes the top of the plant, the lower portion (the understock) becomes the root system or part of the trunk. Although grafting usually refers to joining only two plants, it may be a combination of several. A third plant added between two others becomes the trunk or a portion of it. This is called an interstem.

Why grafting?

Some cultivars (varieties) of plants do not come true from seeds. The seed from a Haralson apple will produce an apple tree, but it will not produce a Haralson apple tree. In other words, fruit trees cannot be reproduced "true" to the original cultivar from seed. They can only be reproduced by grafting. Grafting (top working), is a way to change a large tree from old to a new variety. It is also a method of using a root system better adapted to soil or climate than that produced naturally by an ungrafted plant. By using special understocks or interstems, grafting is a way to produce dwarf plants.




69.     Solution: a)


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  26    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    
'Rectilinear propagation' is a wave property which states waves propagate (move or spread out) in straight lines. This property applies to both transverse and longitudinal waves as well
as electromagnetic waves (light). Even though a wave front may be bent (e.g., the waves created by a
rock hitting a pond) the individual waves are moving in straight lines.

This can be proven by setting up an experiment in which you align three cardboard squares with a small hole in the centre of each. You then set up a light behind the cardboard and look through all three holes from the other side to see the light. If you moved any one of the cardboard squares even a tiny bit, you would no longer be able to see the light. This proves that waves travel in straight lines
and this helps to explain how humans see things, among other uses. It has a number of applications in real-life as well.




70.     Solution: b)

The Sangam Age constitutes an important chapter in the history of South India. According to Tamil legends, there existed three Sangams (Academy of Tamil poets) in ancient Tamil Nadu popularly called Muchchangam. These Sangams flourished under the royal patronage of the Pandyas.

The first Sangam, held at Then Madurai, was attended by gods and legendary sages but no literary work of this Sangam was available. The second Sangam was held at Kapadapuram but the all the literary works had perished except Tolkappiyam.

The third Sangam at Madurai was founded by Mudathirumaran. It was attended by a large number of poets who produced voluminous literature but only a few had survived.




71. Solution: a)

In the second battle of Tarain Rajputs lost to the Muslim invaders. The first Muslim kingdom was thus firmly established in India at Ajmer and a new era in the history of India began.

After his brilliant victory over Prithiviraj at Tarain, Muhammad Ghori returned to Ghazni leaving behind his favourite general Qutb-uddin Aibak to make further conquests in India. Aibak consolidated his position in India by occupying places like Delhi and Meerut.

In 1193 he prepared the ground for another invasion by Muhammad Ghori. This invasion was directed against the Gahadavala ruler Jayachandra. Muhammad routed Jayachandra’s forces. Kanauj was occupied by the Muslims after the battle of Chandawar. Thus, the battles of Tarain and Chandawar
had a very important role in starting the Turkish rule in India.




http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  27    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    
72.     Solution: a)

Astronomers have named a newly discovered galaxy as CR7 (COSMOS Redshift 7) after Portuguese footballer Cristiano Ronaldo.

CR7 is three times brighter compared to Himiko galaxy which was earlier thought be as brightest distant galaxy known to mankind. It is part of the early universe which contains the first generation of stars i.e. known as Population III stars.

CR7 belongs to the age of the ancient Universe which existed 800 million years after the Big Bang. This period is known as reionization period.

Population III stars are first generation of stars which are born out of the primordial material of the Big Bang. It is believed that Population III stars are several hundred or even a thousand times more massive than our Sun and it is more blazing hot, transient, exploding as supernovae after only about 2 million years ago.




73.     Solution: c)

Tropical wet and dry climate occurs north and south of tropical wet type climate regions. It borders with dry climate on the western part of the continent.

Such climate is extensively found to the north and south of the Amazon forest in Brazil and adjoining parts of Bolivia and Paraguay in South America, Sudan and south of Central Africa.

The annual rainfall in this climate is considerably less than that in Af and Am climate types and is variable also. The wet season is shorter and the dry season is longer with the drought being more severe. Temperature is high throughout the year and diurnal ranges of temperature are the greatest in the dry season. Deciduous forest and tree-shredded grasslands occur in this climate.




74.     Solution: d)

Mahatma Gandhi on Satyagraha

‘It is said of “passive resistance” that it is the weapon of the weak, but the power which is the subject of this article can be used only by the strong. This power is not passive resistance; indeed it calls for intense activity. The movement in South Africa was not passive but active …

‘ Satyagraha is not physical force. A satyagrahi does not inflict pain on the adversary; he does not seek his destruction … In the use of satyagraha, there is no ill-will whatever.



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  28    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    
‘ Satyagraha is pure soul-force. Truth is the very substance of the soul. That is why this force is called satyagraha. The soul is informed with knowledge. In it burns the flame of love. … Nonviolence is the supreme dharma …

‘It is certain that India cannot rival Britain or Europe in force of arms. The British worship the war- god and they can all of them become, as they are becoming, bearers of arms. The hundreds of millions in India can never carry arms. They have made the religion of non-violence their own ...’




75.Solution: a)

When the Simon Commission arrived in India in 1928, it was greeted with the slogan ‘Go back Simon’. All parties, including the Congress and the Muslim League, participated in the demonstrations.

In an effort to win them over, the viceroy, Lord Irwin, announced in October 1929, a vague offer of
‘dominion status’ for India in an unspecified future, and a Round Table Conference to discuss a future constitution. This did not satisfy the Congress leaders. The radicals within the Congress, led by Jawaharlal Nehru and Subhas Chandra Bose, became more assertive.

The liberals and moderates, who were proposing a constitutional system within the framework of
British dominion, gradually lost their influence. In December 1929, under the presidency of
Jawaharlal Nehru, the Lahore Congress formalised the demand of ‘Purna Swaraj’ or full independence for India.

76.     Solution: d)

Parthana Samaj, a Hindu reform society was established in Bombay in the 1860s. In purpose it is similar to, but not affiliated with, the more widespread Brahmo Samaj and had its greatest sphere of influence in and around India’s Maharashtra state.

The aim of the society is the promulgation of theistic worship and social reform, and its early goals were opposition to the caste system, the introduction of widow remarriage, the encouragement of female education, and the abolition of child marriage.

You can read more at http://www.importantindia.com/11130/prarthana-samaj/




77.Solution: d)

http://www.newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/Partition_of_Bengal_(1905)#Partition

Partition sparked a major political crisis along religious lines. Hindu resistance exploded as the
Indian National Congress began the Swadeshi movement that included boycotting British goods and

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  29    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    
public institutions, meetings and processions, forming committees, propaganda through press, and diplomatic pressure. Moreover, revolutionary terrorism was also on the rise. The British needed to control all this.

Because of the protests and terrorism, British had to finally annul the partition in 1911.

On the other hand, the Muslims in East Bengal hoped that a separate region would give them more control over education and employment, hence, they opposed those movements.




78.     Solution: a)

It was the first Russian Revolution, in 1905, that fired up the imagination of Indian revolutionaries. Mohandas Gandhi regarded it as “the greatest event of the present century” and “a great lesson to us”. India was also switching to this “Russian remedy against tyranny,” Gandhi said.

The revolution made a big impact also on the minds of Indian revolutionaries who, unlike the
‘Moderates’ and the ‘Extremists’ of the Congress party, intended to get absolute independence by adopting revolutionary methods as practised by Russians.

The Indian Sociologist said in its December 1907 issue: “Any agitation in India must be carried out secretly and the only methods which can bring the English to their senses are the Russian methods vigorously and incessantly applied until the English relax their tyranny and are driven out of the country.”

You can read more at http://in.rbth.com/blogs/2013/08/15/i- day_russias_role_in_the_indian_freedom_movement_28461.html




79.     Solution: c)

Towards the end of 1921, peasant discontent surfaced again in the districts of Hardoi, Bahraich and
Sitapur (UP), with grievances relating to:

•   High rents- 50 per cent higher than the recorded rates;
•   Oppression of thikadars in charge of revenue collection; and
•   Practice of share-rents.

The meetings of the Eka or the Unity Movement involved a symbolic religious ritual in which the assembled peasants vowed that they would

•    Pay only the recorded rent but would pay it on time;
•    Not leave when evicted;

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  30    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    


•    Refuse to do forced labour;
•    Give no help to criminals;
•    Abide by panchayat decisions.

The grassroot leadership of the Eka Movement came from Madari Pasi and other low-caste leaders, and many small zamindars.

Congress and Khilafat leaders provided the initial thrust to the peasant grievances and the movement grew under the name Eka or unity movement. With grass-root leadership not in favour of non- violence taking over the movement, the authorities succeeded in bringing it to an end. The Kisan movements were also over shadowed by the Non-Cooperation Movement in UP. By March 1922, severe repression by authorities brought the movement to an end.






80.     Solution: c)

The major factors of soil formation are the nature of the parent rock and climatic factors. Other factors are the topography, role of organic material and time taken for the composition of soil formation. All these differ from place to place.

























81.Solution: b)

This question is straight from those corner boxes of NCERT. Here is how to identify several type of rocks.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  31    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    


•    Bright blue to green: suspect a copper mineral. Dull greens are usually not copper greens, nor are blues that have a violet cast.

•    Earth tones are almost always due to iron, either as a principal ingredient or as an impurity or surface coating.

•    Bright yellow, orange or red: suspect one of the non-metallic sulfides, then one of the transition metal radicals (chromate, vanadate, etc.). A few oxides are also brightly colored. Some uranium minerals are bright yellow or yellow-green.

•    Pink: if hard, suspect potassium feldspar. The common manganese minerals rhodonite (silicate) and rhodochrosite (carbonate) are also pink, and manganese can stain other minerals pink as well. Some lithium silicates are also pink or lavender.

•    Black or dark green: if hard, suspect a ferromagnesian silicate

•    Pea green, especially in granite or a metamorphic rock: epidote. Almost always.




82.     Solution: a)

Kanin peninsula belongs to Europe. Guiana highlands are a part of South America. The other two are important mineral zones in North America.
The mineral deposits in North America are located in three zones: the Canadian region north of the Great Lakes, the Appalachian region and the mountain ranges of the west. Iron ore, nickel, gold, uranium and copper are mined in the Canadian Shield Region, coal in the Appalachians region. Western Cordilleras have vast deposits of copper, lead, zinc, gold and silver.




83.     Solution: a)

Millets are coarse grains and can be grown on less fertile and sandy soils. It is a hardy crop that needs low rainfall and high to moderate temperature and adequate rainfall. Jowar, bajra and ragi are grown in India. Other countries are Nigeria, China and Niger.

Maize requires moderate temperature, rainfall and lots of sunshine. It needs well-drained fertile soils. Maize is grown in North America, Brazil, China, Russia, Canada, India, and Mexico.




84.     Solution: a)


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  32    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    
Besides the longitudinal divisions, the Himalayas have been divided on the basis of regions from west to east. These divisions have been demarcated by river valleys. For example, the part of Himalayas lying between Indus and Satluj has been traditionally known as Punjab Himalaya but it is also known regionally as Kashmir and Himachal Himalaya from west to east respectively. The part of the Himalayas lying between Satluj and Kali rivers is known as Kumaon Himalayas. The Kali and Tista rivers demarcate the Nepal Himalayas and the part lying between Tista and Dihang rivers is known as Assam Himalayas.




85.     Solution: d)

Rainfall decreases from east to west in Northern plains because of the effect of the North-east monsoon which decreases from east to west. Also, rainfall in the western India is blocked by Aravali mountains.

In Coastal areas, both sea and land breeze regulate and moderate temperature throughout the day. The diurnal ranges are also lesser.

On the contrary, seasonal contrasts are more in the interior due to continentality. Hot air from land circulates increasing the temperature in surrounding areas as well.




86.     Solution: a)

The target is to provide nearly 20 million houses over seven years. The components of the scheme are as follows:
§           Slum rehabilitation of Slum Dwellers with participation of private developers using land as a resource;

§           Promotion of affordable housing for weaker section through credit linked subsidy;

§           Affordable housing in partnership with Public & Private sectors and

§           Subsidy for beneficiary-led individual house construction or enhancement.




87.     Solution: a)

Regulating the online sale of medicines has become a priority for India’s drug regulators. The government is considering launching a pilot project to regulate their sale in a state equipped with proper regulation mechanism.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  33    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    
Also, there are a number of issues associated with regulation. Read the article to understand them
http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/regulate-online-sale-drugs-india-say-experts









88.     Solution: d)

Vaisheshika school is known for its insights in naturalism, and it is a form of atomism in natural philosophy.

It postulated that all objects in the physical universe are reducible toparamāṇu (atoms), and one's experiences are derived from the interplay of substance (a function of atoms, their number and their spatial arrangements), quality, activity, commonness, particularity and inherence.

The school proposed that atoms are indivisible and eternal, can neither be created nor destroyed, and that each one possesses its own distinct viśeṣa (individuality). Knowledge and liberation was achievable by complete understanding of the world of experience, according to Vaiśeṣika school of Hinduism.




89.     Solution: a)

The rotation of the earth about its axis affects the direction of the wind. This force is called the Coriolis force after the French physicist who described it in 1844. It deflects the wind to the right direction in the northern hemisphere and to the left in the southern hemisphere.

The deflection is more when the wind velocity is high. The Coriolis force is directly proportional to the angle of latitude. It is maximum at the poles and is absent at the equator.

The Coriolis force acts perpendicular to the pressure gradient force. The pressure gradient force is perpendicular to an isobar. The higher the pressure gradient force, the more is the velocity of the wind and the larger is the deflection in the direction of wind.




90.     Solution: d)

Domestic borrowers have little connection with Rupee’s exchange rate.

Exporters will benefit because a depreciated currency will make Indian products cheaper and thus more competitive in International market.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  34    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    
FIIs will suffer. Consider if they invested $20 in Indian shares which amounted to Rs. 1000 of investment at Rs. 50 per dollar exchange rate. Now, suppose if their stock value goes up to Rs. 1200. They should ideally get $24 in return if the rupee-dollar exchange rate remains constant.

However, if rupee falls to 60 per dollar, they are again getting back $20 on $20 invested.




91.Solution: d)

India's dependence on the Gulf nations is 61 per cent. This is definitely not good if crisis events start unfolding in gulf nations as they do.

Moreover, diversifying will not allow any exporting nation to act as a monopoly with India. Hence
India can bargain better and harder with nations.
Read these two articles for a clearer understanding of India’s oil import strategy. http://www.livemint.com/Politics/dtqX201kKrlYSwlaNuuH5N/India-plans-to-diversify-oil-
imports.html

http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/2014-07-23/news/51932083_1_crude-oil-imports-oil- minister-dharmendra-pradhan-gas-production




92.     Solution: a)



























http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  35    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    
























93.     Solution: d)

If interest rates are high, the returns on money investments in banks are high for depositors and investors. So, instead of buying more government bonds they would prefer having a large deposit.

When money supply in the economy reduces, central bank needs to pump more money by buying bonds from the market.

Selling bonds would only reduce even the present money supply in the market.




94.     Solution: d)

In the context of temple design, Shilpa Shastras were manuals for sculpture and Hindu iconography, prescribing among other things, the proportions of a sculptured figure, composition, principles, meaning, as well as rules of architecture.

Sixty-four techniques for such arts or crafts, sometimes called bāhya-kalā "external or practical arts", are traditionally enumerated, including carpentry, architecture, jewellery, farriery, acting, dancing, music, medicine, poetry etc., besides sixty-fourabhyantara-kalā or "secret arts"' which include mostly "erotic arts" such as kissing, embracing, etc. (Monier-Williams s.v. śilpa).

While Shilpa and Vaastu Shastras are related, Shilpa Shastras deal with arts and crafts such as forming statues, icons, stone murals, painting, carpentry, pottery, jewelry, dying, textiles and
others. Vastu Shastras deal with building architecture - building houses, forts, temples, apartments,
village and town layout, etc.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  36    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    


95.     Solution: b)

Takeout financing is an accepted international practice of releasing long-term funds
for financing infrastructure projects. It can be used to effectively address Asset-Liability mismatch of commercial banks arising out of financing infrastructure projects and also to free up capital for financing new projects.

http://www.business-standard.com/article/finance/rbi-relaxes-takeout-financing-norms-for- existing-infra-loans-114080701324_1.html




96.     Solution: a)

It is an unconventional monetary policy in which a central bank purchases government securities or other securities from the market in order to lower interest rates and increase the money supply. Quantitative easing increases the money supply by flooding financial institutions with capital in an effort to promote increased lending and liquidity. Quantitative easing is considered when short-term interest rates are at or approaching zero, and does not involve the printing of new banknotes.
Read this article to understand this concept comprehensively. http://www.economist.com/blogs/economist-explains/2015/03/economist-explains-5




97.     Solution: a)

It is not that countries which are endowed with a bounty of natural wealth – minerals or forests or the most fertile lands – are naturally the richest countries. In fact the resource rich Africa and Latin America have some of the poorest countries in the world, whereas many prosperous countries have scarcely any natural wealth.

There was a time when possession of natural resources was the most important consideration but even then the resource had to be transformed through a production process.

The economic wealth, or well-being, of a country thus does not necessarily depend on the mere possession of resources; the point is how these resources are used in generating a flow of production and how, as a consequence, income and wealth are generated from that process.




98.     Solution: a)

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  37    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    
Of the final goods, we can distinguish between consumption goods and capital goods. Goods like food and clothing, and services like recreation that are consumed when purchased by their ultimate consumers are called consumption goods or consumer goods. (This also includes services which are consumed but for convenience we may refer to them as consumer goods.)

Then there are other goods that are of durable character which are used in the production process. These are tools, implements and machines. While they make production of other commodities feasible, they themselves don’t get transformed in the production process.

They are also final goods yet they are not final goods to be ultimately consumed. Unlike the final goods that we have considered above, they are the crucial backbone of any production process, in aiding and enabling the production to take place. These goods form a part of capital, one of the crucial factors of production in which a productive enterprise has invested, and they continue to enable the production process to go on for continuous cycles of production.




99.     Solution: a)

It is essentially wage, interest, rent, and profit payment for the services of scarce resources, or the factors of production (labour, capital, land, and entrepreneurship), in return for productive services.

Factor payments are frequently categorized according to the services of the productive resource. Wages are paid for the services of labour, interest is the payment for the services of capital, rent is the services for land, and profit is the factor payment to entrepreneurship.

In the circular flow of an economy, these are payments made by the business sector for factor services purchased from the household sector through the financial markets.




100.   Solution: b)

The Directive Principles are like the instrument of instructions, which were issued to the Governor- General and to the Governors of the colonies of India by the British Government under the Government of India Act of 1935. What is called Directive Principles is merely another name for the instrument of instructions. The only difference now is that they are instructions to the legislature and the executive.

The phrase ‘Directive Principles of State Policy’ denotes the ideals that the State should keep in mind while formulating policies and enacting laws.






http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  38    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    28    SOLUTIONS    



    




























































http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  39    
    
