




    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    32    SOLUTIONS    
1.  Solution: b)

The current national calendar of India was set up in 1957 by the Calendar Reform Committee that formalized a lunisolar calendar in which leap years coincide with those of the Gregorian calendar, and the months are named after the traditional Indian months. This reformed Indian calendar began with Saka Era, Chaitra 1,
1879, which corresponds to March 22, 1957.

Names of the 12 months of the Indian Civil Calendar and Correlation with Gregorian Calendar:

1.   Chaitra (30 / 31* Days) Begins March
22 / 21*

2.  Vaisakha (31 Days) Begins April 21

3.  Jyaistha (31 Days) Begins May 22

4.  Asadha (31 Days) Begins June 22

5.  Shravana (31 Days) Begins July 23

6.  Bhadra (31 Days) Begins August 23

7.   Asvina (30 Days) Begins September 23

8.  Kartika (30 Days) Begins October 23

9.  Agrahayana (30 Days) Begins
November 22

10. Pausa (30 Days) Begins December 22

11. Magha (30 Days) Begins January 21

12. Phalguna (30 Days) Begins February
20
2.  Solution: b)

Gold fell back towards a five-year low in global markets on Wednesday as investors continued to exit from the precious metal.

A looming rise in U.S. interest rates, the first in nearly a decade, has dented gold’s investment appeal, spurring more sellers in the international market after Monday’s three per cent rout. Spot gold was down 0.5 per cent at
$1,095.69 an ounce intra-day, while U.S. gold futures for August delivery were down $8.70 an ounce at $1,094.80.




3.  Solution: c)

http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp- opinion/time-to-abolish-the- mrp/article7453670.ece

The maximum retail price (MRP) that is printed on all packaged commodities that consumers purchase was introduced in 1990 by the Ministry of Civil Supplies, Department of Legal Metrology, by making an amendment to the Standards of Weights and Measures Act (Packaged Commodities’ Rules) (1976). It was meant to prevent tax evasion and protect consumers from profiteering by retailers.

Before the amendment, manufacturers could print either the maximum retail price (inclusive of all taxes) or the retail price (local taxes
extra). When producers opted for the latter method, it was found that retailers often charged more than the locally applicable taxes. Thus, the amendment was made to introduce the compulsory printing of MRP on all
packaged commodities.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Page  1    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    32    SOLUTIONS    


5.  Solution: b)




4.  Solution: d)

The new bill seeks to replace Consumer Protection Act, 1986 in order to deal with consumer protection and safety. It aims at simplifying the consumer dispute resolution process along with enhancing the pecuniary jurisdiction of the consumer grievance redressal agencies.

Key features

Central Consumer Protection Authority (CCPA): establishment of CCPA as an apex regulatory authority with more powers to protect and enforce the rights of consumers. It will have powers to recall products and initiate action suit against defaulting companies including e-tailers for refunds and return of products.

•    Product liability: If product or services causes personal injury, death or damage to property, CCPA will have powers to take action against defaulting manufacturers or service providers.

•    Speedy disposal of court cases: In this regard, provision related to
‘mediation’ has been proposed which will act as an alternative dispute resolution mechanism. However, mediation will be under the aegis of consumer courts.
Under the existing rules of procedure governing mercy petitions, the view of the Union Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), conveyed to the President in writing, is taken as the view of the Cabinet, and the President decides a mercy petition accordingly.

http://indianexpress.com/article/explained/ho w-the-president-decides-matters-of-life-and- death/#sthash.oNqmc2CR.dpuf

Once a convict has been finally awarded the death sentence by the Supreme Court,
anybody, including a foreign national, can send a mercy petition with regard to that person to the President’s Office or the MHA. A mercy
plea can also be sent to the Governor of the
state concerned, who then forwards it to the
MHA for further action.






6.  Solution: a)

However, all investments lately have all been merged in one single category. So, until a sector receives funds upto its composite cap, its fine with the government.

Read about the change here:



http://indianexpress.com/article/explained/ta king-a-composite-view-of-foreign-investment-
in-india/








http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Page  2    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    32    SOLUTIONS    
7.  Solution: a)

http://indianexpress.com/article/explained/m eaning-cop-21/

The term ‘COP’ stands for Conference of Parties. ‘Parties’ is a reference to the (now) 196 signatories of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, or UNFCCC, as it is called.

The Framework Convention came into force in
1994, two years after its text was finalised at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro in Brazil.

Every year since 1994, the ‘parties’ to the UNFCCC have met at different venues at the end of the year to discuss a global agreement to cut emissions of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, the main reason why average global temperatures have been rising.






8. Solution: a)

http://www.tribal.nic.in/Content/schemes.asp x

Union Ministry of Tribal Affairs has revised Development of Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTGs)

Under the Scheme, priority has been accorded for the protection of PVTGs and their improvement in terms of the social indicators like education, health, nutrition and livelihood in order to decrease their vulnerability.

Financial assistance under this scheme will be utilized for activities like housing, agricultural development, land distribution and land
development, animal husbandry, installation of non-conventional sources of energy, construction of link roads or other innovative activity.




9.  Solution: c)

http://indianexpress.com/article/explained/ex plained-indian-crickets-political-pitch/

In June last year, BJP president Amit Shah took over as president of the Gujarat Cricket Association (GCA) from Narendra Modi who had just been elected the country’s Prime Minister. Modi had until then controlled GCA
— he took over in 2009 — while being chief
minister of Gujarat.

Soon after Shah became GCA president, he was also named BJP president.

Both of them did not have any background in cricket.




10.           Solution: c)

The Italian government has approached the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea (ITLOS), one of the four forums available for international disputes, in the Italian Marines case.

The International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea (ITLOS) is an intergovernmental organization created by the mandate of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea. It was established by the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, signed at Montego Bay, Jamaica, on December
10, 1982.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Page  3    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    32    SOLUTIONS    
The Convention entered into force on November 16, 1994, and established an international framework for law over "all ocean space, its uses and resources". The tribunal is based in Hamburg, Germany. The Convention also established the International Seabed Authority, with responsibility for the regulation of seabed mining beyond the limits of national jurisdiction, that is beyond the limits of the territorial sea, the contiguous zone and the continental shelf.




11. Solution: c)

It is a collection of professional astronomers, at the PhD level and beyond, active in
professional research and education in astronomy. It acts as the internationally recognized authority for assigning designations to celestial bodies (stars, planets, asteroids,
etc.) and any surface features on them.

The IAU is a member of the International Council for Science (ICSU). Its main objective is to promote and safeguard the science of astronomy in all its aspects through international cooperation. The IAU maintains friendly relations with organizations that include amateur astronomers in their membership.




12.Solution: a)

After the expiry of Dr. Kalam, several articled came in newspapers. Here is all that you need to know about Dr. Kalam.
•    He was born on 15 October 1931 in Rameswaram, Ramanathapuram District of Tamil Nadu.

•    In 1960, he had joined Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) as a scientist and started his career by designing a small helicopter for the Indian Army.

•    In 1969, he had joined India Space Research Organisation (ISRO) as the project director for India’s first indigenous satellite launch vehicle programme.

•    Under his leadership and vision, India entered into the elite space club after Rohini satellite was place into the orbit in 1980.

•    He was a pioneer and instrumental in development of the Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV), India’s space workhorse.

•    In 1980, he was appointed Chairman of Integrated Guided Missile Development Program (IGMDP) and was brain
behind developing Agni and Prithvi missiles. Thus he came to be known as the Missile Man of India for his work on the development of ballistic missile

•    He was appointed CSA to Prime
Minister and Secretary of DRDO in 1992 and remained till 1998.

•    He was Chief Project Coordinator of
Pokhran II Nuclear Test
i.e. Operation Shakti which was conducted on 11 May 1998.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Page  4    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    32    SOLUTIONS    
•    He was the 11th President of India and was in office from 2002 to 2007. He was India’s most popular President and famously known as People’s President.

•    Awards and Honours: Bharat Ratna (1997), Padma Vibhushan (1990), Padma Bhushan (1981).

•    He has unique honour of receiving honorary doctorates from 30 universities and institutions. United Nations had recognised his 79th
birthday as World Student Day.
Coronary stent in India became popular as Kalam-Raju stent and helped to bring down cost of the device in the market.

Dr. Soma Raju said Mr. Kalam used to visit the Nizam’s Institute of Medical Sciences to call on colleagues admitted there in 1980s.

During one of the visits, Dr. Soma Raju had a conversation with him about the high costs of imported devices when the former President suggested that indigenous devices should be made with technology available in the country.

•    Switzerland has declared 26 May as
‘Science Day’ to commemorate visit of A P J Abdul Kalam to the country in 2005



http://www.thehindu.com/todays- paper/abdul-kalam-peoples-president-passes- away/article7471640.ece

http://www.livemint.com/Politics/nodNTgMC TsS5dfnqajZjpK/Abdul-Kalam-admitted-to- hospital.html




13.Solution: a)

It was in news because of Late Dr. Kalam.

A coronary stent is a tube-shaped device placed in the coronary arteries that supply blood to
the heart, to keep the arteries open in the
treatment of coronary heart disease. It is used in a procedure called percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI).
14.Solution: c)

The elections to the Constituent Assembly (for
296 seats allotted to the British Indian Provinces) were held in July–August 1946. The Indian National Congress won 208 seats, the Muslim League 73 seats, and the small groups and independents got the remaining 15 seats. However, the 93 seats allotted to the princely states were not filled as they decided to stay away from the Constituent Assembly.

The representatives of the princely states, who had stayed away from the Constituent Assembly, gradually joined it. On April 28,
1947, representatives of the six states5 were part of the Assembly. After the acceptance of the Mountbatten Plan of June 3, 1947 for a partition of the country, the representatives of most of the other princely states took their seats in the Assembly. The members of the
Muslim League from the Indian Dominion also
entered the Assembly.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Page  5    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    32    SOLUTIONS    


Deputy Chairman, Planning
Commission
15. Solution: d)

An independent judiciary is needed: one, to protect the supremacy of the Constitution by exercising the power of judicial review; and two, to settle the disputes between the Centre and the states or between the states.

The Constitution contains various measures like security of tenure to judges, fixed service conditions and so on to make the judiciary independent of the government.

Also, since the judiciary is also administratively controlled by the higher judiciary, independence is strengthened.




16.Solution: b)

The order is as follows:

1. President

2. Vice-President

3. Prime Minister

4. Governors of states within their respective states

5. Former presidents

5A. Deputy Prime Minister

6. Chief Justice of India

Speaker of Lok Sabha

7. Cabinet Ministers of the Union

Chief Ministers of States within their respective States

Former Prime Ministers

Leaders of Opposition in Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha

MPs are ranked at number 21 after all the ministers in the Union and states.




17. Solution: a)

The foreign policy of India is opposed to arms race and advocates disarmament, both conventional and nuclear. This is aimed at promoting world peace and security by reducing or ending tensions between power blocs and to accelerate economic development of the country by preventing the unproductive expenditure on the manufacture of arms.

India has been using the UNO platform to check the arms race and to achieve disarmament. India took the initiative of holding a six-nation summit at New Delhi in
1985 and made concrete proposals for nuclear
disarmament.

By not signing the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty (NPT) of 1968 and the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) of 1996, India has kept its nuclear options open. India opposes NPT and CTBT due to their discriminatory and hegemonic nature. They perpetuate an international system in which only five nations (USA, Russia, China, UK and France) can legitimately possess nuclear weapons.




18.Solution: d)

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Page  6    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    32    SOLUTIONS    
In 2003, the following two changes were introduced with respect to elections to the Rajya Sabha:

•   Domicile or residency requirement of a candidate contesting an election to the Rajya Sabha was removed. Prior to this, a candidate had to be an elector in the state from where he was to be elected. Now, it would be sufficient if he is an elector in any parliamentary constituency in the country.
•   Introducing open ballot system, instead of secret ballot system, for elections to the Rajya Sabha. This was done to curb cross-voting and to wipe out the role of money power during Rajya Sabha elections. Under the new system, an elector belonging to a political party has to show the ballot paper after marking his vote to a nominated agent of that political party
19.Solution: b)

At of 2013, a party is recognised as a national party if any of the following conditions is fulfilled:

•   If it secures six per cent of valid votes polled in any four or more states at a general election to the Lok Sabha or to the legislative assembly; and, in addition, it wins four seats in the Lok Sabha from any state or states; or
•   If it wins two per cent of seats in the Lok Sabha at a general election; and these candidates are elected from three states; or
•   If it is recognised as a state party in four states.



20.           Solution: b)

The 52nd Amendment Act of 1985 provided for the disqualification of the members of Parliament and the state legislatures on the ground of defection from one political party to another. For this purpose, it made changes in four Articles of the Constitution and added a new Schedule (the Tenth Schedule) to the Constitution. This act is often referred to as the
‘anti-defection law’.

These provisions facilitate democratic realignment of parties in the legislature by way of merger of parties. It also reduces corruption at the political level as well as non- developmental expenditure incurred on irregular elections. And, for the first time, it gives, a clear-cut constitutional recognition to the existence of political parties.




21.Solution: a)

Article 323 A empowers the Parliament to provide for the establishment of administrative tribunals for the adjudication of disputes relating to recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to public services of the Centre, the states, local bodies, public corporations and other public authorities.

Under Article 323 B, the Parliament and the state legislatures are authorised to provide for the establishment of tribunals for the adjudication of disputes relating to the following matters: (a) Taxation; (b) Foreign exchange, import and export;(c) Industrial and
labour; (d) Land reforms; (e) Ceiling on urban


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Page  7    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    32    SOLUTIONS    
property; (f) Elections to Parliament and state legislatures; (g) Food stuffs; (h) Rent and tenancy rights.









22.           Solution: a)

The Constitution imposes a duty upon the Centre to promote the spread and development of the Hindi language so that it may become
the lingua franca of the composite culture of
India.

Further, the Centre is directed to secure the enrichment of Hindi by assimilating the forms, style and expressions used in hindustani and in other languages specified in the Eighth Schedule and by drawing its vocabulary, primarily on sanskrit and secondarily on other languages.

Also, the members of these languages are to be given representation in the Official Language commission. The Commission consisted of a chairman and other members representing the different languages specified in the Eighth Schedule of the Constitution.




23.           Solution: a)

The functions of the Commission are, inter alia:

•   To inquire into any violation of human rights or negligence in the prevention of
such violation by a public servant, either
suo motu or on a petition presented to it or on an order of a court.
•   To intervene in any proceeding involving allegation of violation of human rights pending before a court.
•   To visit jails and detention places to study the living conditions of inmates and make recommendation thereon.
•   To review the constitutional and other legal safeguards for the protection of human rights and recommend measures for their effective implementation.
•   To review the factors including acts of terrorism that inhibit the enjoyment of human rights and recommend remedial measures.
•   To study treaties and other international instruments on human rights and make recommendations for their effective implementation.




24.           Solution: b)

The Union Executive consists of the President, Vice-President, PM, Council of Ministers and Attorney General of India.

The AG is not a member of the Central cabinet. There is a separate law minister in the Central cabinet to look after legal matters at the government level.

In the performance of his official duties, the Attorney General has the right of audience in all courts in the territory of India. Further, he has the right to speak and to take part in the proceedings of both the Houses of Parliament or their joint sitting and any committee of the



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Page  8    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    32    SOLUTIONS    
Parliament of which he may be named a member, but without a right to vote.




25.           Solution: a)

The role of CAG is to uphold the Constitution of India and the laws of Parliament in the field of financial administration.

The accountability of the executive (i.e., council of ministers) to the Parliament in the sphere of financial administration is secured through audit reports of the CAG.

The CAG is an agent of the Parliament and conducts audit of expenditure on behalf of the Parliament.

Therefore, he is responsible only to the
Parliament.




26.           Solution: c)

Though the constitution has sought to safeguard and ensure the independence and impartiality of the Election Commission, some flaws can be noted, viz.,

•   The Constitution has not prescribed the qualifications (legal, educational, administrative or judicial) of the members of the Election Commission.
•   The Constitution has not specified the term of the members of the Election Commission.
•   The Constitution has not debarred the retiring election commissioners from any further appointment by the
government.
The conditions of service and tenure of office of the election commissioners and the regional commissioners shall be determined by the president.



27.           Solution: b)

The following best sums up the relationship between the President, Administrator and the UT government by giving the example of Delhi.

The chief minister is appointed by the President (not by the lt. governor). The other ministers are appointed by the president on the advice of the chief minister. The ministers hold office during the pleasure of the president. The council of ministers is collectively responsible
to the assembly.

The council of ministers headed by the chief minister aid and advise the lt. governor in the exercise of his functions except in so far as he is required to act in his discretion. In the case of difference of opinion between the lt. governor and his ministers, the lt. governor is to refer the matter to the president for decision and act accordingly.




28.           Solution: b)

74th Amendment Act of 1992 provides for the constitution of the following three types of municipalities in every state.

•   A nagar panchayat for a transitional area, that is, an area in transition from a rural area to an urban area.
•   A municipal council for a smaller urban area.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Page  9    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    32    SOLUTIONS    
•   A municipal corporation for a larger urban area




29.           Solution: d)

The controversial Gujarat Control of Terrorism and Organised Crime (GCTOC) Bill, 2015, has been sent back to the State following an objection by the Information Technology (IT) Ministry.

The Home Affairs Ministry, which sent the Bill for an inter-ministerial consultation, returned it with the objections raised by the IT Ministry. This means the Bill will not be sent for
Presidential assent and cannot become law yet.

Any Bill passed by an Assembly on issues contravening Central laws needs Presidential assent.

The Gujarat House passed the Bill again on March 31 this year, after it was rejected thrice by two former Presidents — the late A.P.J. Abdul Kalam in 2004 and Pratibha Patil in
2008 and 2009.

The Bill was first introduced as the GUJCOC Bill in 2003 — when Narendra Modi was Chief Minister — with provisions like increasing the period to file charge sheet from 90 to 180 days and strict conditions for granting bail to an accused.




30.           Solution: b)

A Bio fertilizer is a substance which contains living microorganisms which, when applied to
seed, plant surfaces, or soil, colonizes the
rhizosphere or the interior of the plant and promotes growth by increasing the supply or availability of primary nutrients to the host plant.

Bio-fertilizers add nutrients through the natural processes of nitrogen fixation, solubilizing phosphorus, and stimulating plant growth through the synthesis of growth- promoting substances.

Bio-fertilizers can be expected to reduce the use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides. The microorganisms in bio-fertilizers restore the soil's natural nutrient cycle and build soil organic matter.




31.Solution: b)

Pakistan received $336 million from the United States for its ongoing role in combating a Taliban insurgency in neighbouring Afghanistan.

Regular payments to Pakistan under the Coalition Support Fund (CSF) programme began in 2001 when Pakistan joined the US-led coalition in Afghanistan as a “frontline ally.”

Pakistan provides use of its air bases and other facilities in exchange for the reimbursements.

Pakistan has received a total of $13 billion in
CSF payments since the programme began.

http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp- international/pak-gets-336m-to-support- forces-in-afghanistan/article7475501.ece


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  10    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    32    SOLUTIONS    


32.           Solution: d)

http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/take- steps-to-prevent-sea-erosion-officials- told/article7479929.ece

Coastal erosion is the wearing away of land and the removal of beach or dune sediments by wave action, tidal currents, wave currents, drainage or high winds. Waves, generated by storms, wind, or fast moving motor craft, cause coastal erosion, which may take the form of long-term losses of sediment and rocks, or merely the temporary redistribution of coastal sediments; erosion in one location may result
in accretion nearby. The study of erosion and
sediment redistribution is called 'coastal morphodynamics'. It may be caused by hydraulic action, abrasion, impact and corrosion.

Secondary factors that cause it are:

•    Weathering and transport slope processes

•    Slope hydrology

•    Vegetation

•    Cliff foot erosion

•    Cliff foot sediment accumulation

•    Resistance of cliff foot sediment to attrition and transport

•    Human Activity

Tertiary factors

•    Resource extraction

•    Coastal management
33.           Solution: d)

The maritime domain awareness systems inaugurated during Mr. Modi’s visit to Seychelles, in March 2015, were the outcome of an older initiative encompassing several Indian Ocean countries

http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp- opinion/all-form-little- substance/article7478857.ece

Maritime domain awareness (MDA) is defined by the International Maritime Organization as the effective understanding of anything associated with the maritime domain that could impact the security, safety, economy, or environment. The maritime domain is defined
as all areas and things of, on, under, relating to,
adjacent to, or bordering on a sea, ocean, or other navigable waterway, including all maritime-related activities, infrastructure, people, cargo, and vessels and other conveyances.






34.           Solution: b)

•    It is Asia’s highest honor and often regarded as the region’s equivalent of the Nobel Prize.

•    Established: in 1957 in the memory of Philippines’ 3rd President Ramon Magsaysay who had died in air disaster in March 1957.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  11    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    32    SOLUTIONS    


•    It was established by trustees of the New
York City based Rockefeller Brothers
Fund and Philippine government.

•    It is awarded annually to individuals or organizations from Asia region for their altruistic and philanthropic service.

•    Award carries: Medallion bearing the likeness of the late President Ramon Magsaysay, cash prize and a certificate.






35.           Solution: b)

The Competition Commission of India (CCI) has imposed fine of 420 crore rupees on the local unit of Hyundai Motor Co.

The fined was imposed after CCI investigation had found that Hyundai was engaged in anti- competitive practices.

•    CCI is a quasi-judicial statutory body whose predecessor was the MRTPC (Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission).

•    It was established 2003 as per the provisions of The Competition Act, 2002 and became fully functional only by
2009.

•    It was established with an aim to eliminate anti-competitive practices that adversely affect competition in different industries/areas and protect interests of consumers and ensure freedom of trade and also to give opinions to statutory
authorities.
36.           Solution: c)

Kazakhstan, a member of the Russia-led economic blocks became 162th member of World Trade Organization (WTO). Kazakhstan’s entry has ended its long wait of
20 years to become a member of WTO as its accession talks were initiated in 1996.

The process of becoming a WTO member is unique to each applicant country, and the terms of accession are dependent upon the country's stage of economic development and current trade regime.

The process takes about five years, on average, but it can last longer if the country is less than fully committed to the process or if political issues interfere.

http://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/in ternational/business/wto-formally-accepts- kazakhstan-as-new- member/articleshow/48241244.cms




37.           Solution: d)

The population of Royal Bengal Tiger in Sundarbans region of Bangladesh has declined sharply to 106 from 440 in 2004. It was revealed in recently released new Tiger census
2015 of Bangladesh.

The Tiger Census was conducted
by Bangladesh-India Joint Tiger Census Project. It was carried under the initiative of Strengthening Regional Cooperation for
Wildlife Protection in Asia Project. Financial


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  12    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    32    SOLUTIONS    
support to this initiative was provided by the
World Bank.

Methodology: Census 2015 was conducted by using modern technology of hidden cameras to count tigers. Previous methodology was based on count of counting pug marks. The camera tapping method is more accurate than past method.

Reasons for decline in Population: The rapid decline in population was attributed to loss of habitat, lack of proper forest management, unchecked wildlife poaching and animal- human conflict in the world’s largest mangrove forests of Sunderbans.

It should be noted that in Bangladesh, Sunderbans are spread over 6097 sq.km and it is only natural habitat of Royal Bengal tigers. There are around 74 tigers on the Indian side of the Sundarbans which stretches for nearly
4,000 miles across both countries.




38.           Solution: b)

High atlas is in Africa. Cordillera is in Asia. And Beaufort range is in Canada. Only Alps range is in Europe covering France.

Tour de France was first organized in 1903 and currently run by the Amaury Sport Organisation.

•    The prestigious cycle race is 3 week- long, traditionally held every year in the month of July and covers around 3,500 kms.

•    Each year the route of race changes but the format remains same with the
appearance of time trials. The race route passes through the mountain chains of Pyrenees, Alps and finish on the Champs-Élysées in Paris.




39.           Solution: b)

China recently launched two new navigational satellites into space as part of its domestic navigation system BeiDou (meaning Compass). India has also been adding satellites to its IRNSS.

•    These navigational satellites are a constellation of satellite helping provide accurate location on earth.

•    All such satellites seek to reduce reliance on GPS developed by USA.




40.           Solution: a).

•    It focuses on feeder separation for rural households and agricultural purpose.

•    Seeks to strengthen the distribution and sub-transmission infrastructure, including metering at all levels in rural areas.

•    Major components of the new scheme: strengthening of sub- transmission and distribution network, feeder separation, Metering at all levels including at input points, feeders and distribution transformers.

•    It also seeks to strengthen Micro grid and off grid distribution network of
rural electrification.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  13    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    32    SOLUTIONS    
•    The scheme has budgetary outlay of
76,000 crore rupees for implementation of the projects of which Union Government will provide grant of
63,000 crore rupees.




41.Solution: c)

Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEFCC) along with the 3 state governments will soon start an artificial breeding programme of Great Indian Bustard (GIB).

Under this integrated collaborative effort, 3 states viz. Rajasthan, Gujarat and Maharashtra will take part to boost the population of GIB, one of the critically endangered flying bird species in the world.

The artificially breeding operations of GIBs will begin in 2016 across these 3 states and they
will be later released from captivity to semi-
captivity after some time of initial operations.

GIB has been exterminated from almost 90 per cent of their former range even though it has ability to survive in harsh weather conditions. The main reasons are Habitat loss and poaching.






42.           Solution: c)

Long March-5 rocket carrier was recently tested in China.
•    Long March-5 has the carrying capacity twice of the payload compared to other present carriers of China.

•    It has payload capacity of 14 tonnes to geostationary transfer orbit and 25 tonnes to low Earth orbits.

•    It will serve the final chapter in building China’s manned space stations and 3 step current program of orbiting, landing and returning lunar.

ISRO has developed rockets to put satellites in orbit: the Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle
(PSLV) for launching satellites into polar orbits and the Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV) for placing satellites into geostationary orbits. These rockets have launched numerous communications satellites and earth observation satellites.




43.           Solution: b)

Union Government has constituted All India Council of Sports (AICS), as an advisory body to deliberate on matters relating to the development and promotion of sports in the country.

Government will duly consider the advice rendered by this Council, but it will not be binding and obligatory on the government.

•    Composition: It will be headed by a president in the rank of Minister of State (MoS). It will include 4 Members of Parliament (MPs), coaches, experts, sports personalities, administrators and Director General (DG) of Sports
Authority of India (SAI).

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  14    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    32    SOLUTIONS    
•    Appointments: President and members, other than ex-officio members will be appointed by the Union Government.

•    Meeting: It will meet from time to time i.e. at least once in a quarter of year to deliberate on matters related sports and games in the country.

•    Functions: Popularize sports amongst the youth and increase its outreach to rural and tribal areas along with North East and Jammu & Kashmir, areas affected by Left Wing Extremism.

•    Promote inclusiveness in sports with special focus on women, tribals and differently-abled.

•    Prevent fraud of age and sexual harassment of women in sports along with drug abuse.

•    Bring transparency, professionalism and good governance in functioning of National Sports Federations (NFS).

•    Promote sports sciences and sports medicine and augment the sports infrastructure and ensure its proper utilization.

•    Tackle the issues arising malpractices in competitive sports especially match fixing and early identification of sports talent and nurturing the identified talent.




44.           Solution: a)

Union Government has launched a national campaign Surakshit Khadya Abhiyan in a bid to
create awareness and capacity building on Safe and Hygienic food for all.

It was launched by Union Minister of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution Ram Vilas Paswan in New Delhi.

•    Objective is building a culture of food safety in the country.

•    It will ensure the safe food to consumers apart from providing them Food security in order to address the food requirements.

•    Initiated under the brand name of Jago Grahak Jago, which is mass awareness campaign which creates awareness of consumer rights and demands.

•    It is planned by Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) along with Consumer Organization VOICE and National Association of Street Vendors of India (NASVI).




45.           Solution: a)

Formerly known as Triana, unofficially known as GoreSat, it is a Earth observation and space weather satellite launched by SpaceX on a Falcon 9 launch vehicle on February 11, 2015 from Cape Canaveral.

It was originally developed as a NASA satellite proposed in 1998 by then-Vice President Al Gore for the purpose of Earth observation. It is at the Sun-Earth L1 Lagrangian point,
1,500,000 km (930,000 mi) from Earth, to monitor variable solar wind condition, provide early warning of approaching coronal mass

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  15    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    32    SOLUTIONS    
ejections and observe phenomena on Earth including changes in ozone, aerosols, dust and volcanic ash, cloud height, vegetation cover and climate.

At this location it will have a continuous view of the Sun and the sunlit side of the Earth. It will take full-Earth pictures about every two hours and be able to process them faster than other Earth observation satellites.




46.           Solution: d)

http://www.downtoearth.org.in/news/mangro ve-forests-help-protect-against-rising-sea-
level-says-study-50598

Mangrove forests prevent the effects of cyclones, storms and other calamities by this simple mechanim. This is likely due to soil building up around their mesh-like roots and acting to reduce energy from waves and tidal currents, scientists say.

Estuaries and recesses in coastlines that form bays receive the run-off from erosion on steep catchments which give them the tendency to fill in over time.

As they fill in, movement of tidal currents over the shallow areas create networks of sandbanks and channels. The sand banks grow upward to keep pace with water level changes while the channels get deeper to efficiently drain out the excess water out to the sea.




47.           Solution: a)
Ocean acidification supports coral reef formation as more carbon is dissolved in water which helps forming those hard shales.

But, the higher acidity has been proven to inhibit shell growth in marine animals and is suspected as a cause of reproductive disorders in some fish. Unless humans are able to control and eventually eliminate fossil fuel emissions, ocean organisms will find themselves under increasing pressure to adapt to their habitat's changing chemistry or perish.

Any changes happening in that system would naturally cause an imbalance in the marine ecosystem, which would further affect the food chain.

A study has also found that the rise in ocean acidification could lead affect phytoplankton, which forms the base of the marine food chain.

Some researchers also observe that as ocean acidification prompted some species to grow faster and others slower, it also changed the natural competition between species.






48.           Solution: d)

Audiovisual components, televisions, VCRs, stereo equipment, mobile phones, other handheld devices, and computer components contain valuable elements and substances suitable for reclamation, including lead, copper, and gold.

One of the major challenges is recycling the printed circuit boards from the electronic wastes. The circuit boards contain such

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  16    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    32    SOLUTIONS    
precious metals as gold, silver, platinum, etc. and such base metals as copper, iron, aluminum, etc. One way e-waste is processed is by melting circuit boards, burning cable sheathing to recover copper wire and open- pit acid leaching for separating metals of value




49.           Solution: b)

It will be an Innovation Promotion Platform involving academics, entrepreneurs and researchers and draw upon national and international experiences to foster a culture of innovation, R&D and scientific research in India.

The platform will also promote a network of world-class innovation hubs and Grand Challenges for India.

Initially a sum of Rs.150 crore will be earmarked for this purpose.




50.           Solution: c)

The Union government has proposed to strip the Reserve Bank Governor’s veto vote on India’s monetary policy. The government has also proposed to grant itself the power to appoint four of the six members of the Monetary Policy Committee, whose remit will include decisions on setting interest rates to maintain inflation at the targeted level.

§           Under the revised draft, the non- government members of the committee are to be drawn from the Reserve Bank.

§           The Reserve Bank’s Board will nominate one of its executives as the
fifth member of the committee. The Chairperson will nominate one of its employees as the sixth member.




51. Solution: a)

The GST Bill seeks to establish a GST Council tasked with optimising tax collection for goods and services by the State and Centre

§           Composition: The Council will consist of the Union Finance Minister (as Chairman), the Union Minister of State in charge of revenue or Finance, and the Minister in charge of Finance or Taxation or any other, nominated by each State government.

§           The GST Council will be the body that decides which taxes levied by the Centre, States and local bodies will go into the GST; which goods and services will be subjected to GST; and the basis and the rates at which GST will be applied.




52.           Solution: c)

Although Indian constitution and law do not provide for double citizenship normally, the provision of dual citizenship is only applicable to those children of diplomats who were born outside India.

http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/
2014-05-12/news/49795348_1_dual- citizenship-devyani-khobragade-s-indian- citizenship



http://www.oneindia.com/india/mha-rejects-

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  17    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    32    SOLUTIONS    
khobragade-s-plea-dual-citizenship-kids-
1814429.html

Children of foreign diplomats, who are born in India, are also given dual citizenship till the period of their parent’s service in India.




53.           Solution: b)

Losses of vitamins depend on cooking time, temperature, and cooking method. Some vitamins are quite heat-stable, whereas others
are heat-labile.

Many other factors than heat can destroy (some) vitamins, such as: solubility in water, exposure to air (oxidation), exposure to light (UVs), heat, acid and alkaline solutions, storage losses, etc.

Especially vitamin C is more vulnerable to cooking.




54.           Solution: a)

Jute fibre is obtained from the stem of the jute plant. It is cultivated during the rainy season. In India, jute is mainly grown in West Bengal, Bihar and Assam.

The jute plant is normally harvested when it is at flowering stage.

The stems of the harvested plants are immersed in water for a few days. The stems rot and fibres are separated by hand.









55.           Solution: d)

There are two kinds of chalk. The mineral Chalk is a porous form of limestone composed of calcium carbonate. Blackboard chalk is calcium sulphate.


The chemical bonds are too strong to dissolve in water. It does dissolve in acids. Many minerals do not dissolve in water.

In both versions of chalk there is low solubility in water.




56.           Solution: b)

The solubility of a given solute in a given solvent typically depends on temperature.




http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  18    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    32    SOLUTIONS    
Depending on the nature of the solute the solubility may increase or decrease with temperature. For many solids dissolved in liquid water, the solubility increases with temperature up to 100 °C.

So, if you add ice first the sugar will take more time to dissolve. In relatively warm water, it is possible to dissolve more sugar at a faster pace.




57.Solution: d)

Plants make food in their leaves. The leaves contain a pigment called chlorophyll, which colors the leaves green. Chlorophyll can make food the plant can use from carbon dioxide, water, nutrients, and energy from
sunlight.  This process is called photosynthesis.

Besides leaves, photosynthesis also takes place in other green parts of the plant — in green stems and green branches. The desert plants have scale- or spine-like leaves to reduce loss of water by transpiration. These plants have green stems which carry out photosynthesis.




58.           Solution: d)

Saprophytic organisms, or saprophytes, derive their food from dead organisms. They secrete enzymes that are released on food material outside their body. These enzymes break down complex food into simple forms. Common examples of saprophytes are fungi (moulds, mushrooms, yeasts) and many bacteria.

Parasitic organisms, or parasites, live on or inside other living organisms, called hosts, and obtain their food from them. The host does not
get any benefit from the parasite. Different parasites, like Cuscuta (akash-bel), Cassytha (amar-bel), hookworms, tapeworms, leeches, etc., have different modes of feeding, depending upon habit, habitat and modifications.




59.           Solution: a)

Wool industry is an important means of livelihood for many people in our country. But sorter’s job is risky as sometimes they get infected by a bacterium, anthrax, which causes a fatal blood disease called sorter’s disease.

Such risks faced by workers in any industry are called occupational hazards.

Anthrax is a rare infectious disease caused by the bacterium Bacillus anthracis. Anthrax occurs naturally around the world in wild and domestic hoofed animals, especially cattle, sheep, goats, camels and antelopes. It can also occur in humans when they are exposed to the bacterium, usually through handling animals or animal hides. There are three forms of anthrax infection: cutaneous (skin), inhalation (lungs) and gastrointestinal (stomach and intestine). If people have been intentionally exposed, as in a bioterrorist release, contact with skin would be the most likely route of exposure. Breathing in the spores that have been spread through the air could cause inhalation anthrax.

60.           Solution: c)

Copper is a very good conductor of heat and is shiny in appearance. Because of these

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  19    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    32    SOLUTIONS    
properties it was the preferred material for kitchen utensils.

But its use is now confined to just outer layer of kitchen pots that are used in cooking.

Copper toxicity is reduced to zero by using stainless steel lining on the inner side of the vessel.




61.Solution: d)

The indicators change their colour when added to a solution containing an acidic or a basic substance. Turmeric, litmus, china rose petals (Gudhal), etc., are some of the naturally occurring indicators.

The most commonly used natural indicator is litmus. It is extracted from lichens. It has a mauve (purple) colour in distilled water. When added to an acidic solution, it turns red and when added to a basic solution, it turns blue.

It is available in the form of a solution, or in the form of strips of paper, known as litmus paper.

Generally, it is available as red and blue litmus paper




62.           Solution: d)

As the name indicates the rain containing excess of acids is called an acid rain. The rain becomes acidic because carbon dioxide, sulphur dioxide and nitrogen dioxide (which are release into the air as pollutants) dissolve in rain drops to form carbonic acid, sulphuric
acid and nitric acid respectively.
Acid rain can also have a damaging effect on many objects, including buildings, statues, monuments, and cars. The chemicals found in acid rain can cause paint to peel and stone statues to begin to appear old and worn down, which reduces their value and beauty.

Acid rain causes acidification of lakes and streams and contributes to the damage of trees at high elevations (for example, red spruce trees above 2,000 feet) and many sensitive forest soils.

You can understand more here http://epa.gov/acidrain/education/site_stude nts/whyharmful.html




63.           Solution: c)

Excessive use of chemical fertilisers makes the soil acidic. Plants do not grow well when the soil is either too acidic or too basic.

When the soil is too acidic, it is treated with bases like quick lime (calcium oxide) or slaked lime (calcium hydroxide).

If the soil is basic, organic matter is added to it. Organic matter releases acids which neutralises the basic nature of the soil.




64.           Solution: b)

Some migratory birds travel as much as 15000 km to escape the extreme climatic conditions at home. Generally they fly high where the wind flow is helpful and the cold conditions allow them to disperse the heat generated by their flight muscles.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  20    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    32    SOLUTIONS    
But how these birds travel to the same place year after year is still a mystery. It seems that these birds have a built–in sense of direction and know in which direction to travel. Some birds probably use landmarks to guide them. Many birds may be guided by the sun during the day and stars at night. There is some evidence that birds may use the magnetic field of the earth to find direction.

And it is not only birds that migrate; mammals, many types of fish and insects are also known
to migrate seasonally in search of more hospitable climates.




65.           Solution: d)

All these species have been mentioned with photographs in your 7th NCERT book. Keep an eye on such prominent facts and details while reading NCERTs. They are very likely to come in exams.
66.           Solution: c)

We must take the following precautions:

Do not take shelter under an isolated tree. If you are in a forest take shelter under a small tree. Do not lie on the ground.

Do not take shelter under an umbrella with a metallic end.

Do not sit near a window. Open garages, storage sheds, metal sheds are not safe places to take shelter. Open garages increase the risk of an electrical shock.

Instead, a car or a bus is a safer place to take shelter. Electric current is discharged from the outer surface itself.

If you are in water, get out and go inside a building.




67.           Solution: a)

The whole coastline of India is vulnerable to cyclones, particularly the east coast.

The west coast of India is less vulnerable to cyclonic storms both in terms of intensity and frequency of the cyclones.

Moreover, tornadoes are also not very frequent. Most tornadoes are weak and they rarely reach high speeds upto 300 kmph.

Tornadoes are formed within cyclones.

68.           Solution: d)

The soil is classified on the basis of the proportion of particles of various sizes. If soil
contains greater proportion of big particles it is

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  21    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    32    SOLUTIONS    
called sandy soil. If the proportion of fine particles is relatively higher, then it is called clayey soil. If the amount of large and fine particles is about the same, then the soil is called loamy.

The best topsoil for growing plants is loam. Loamy soil is a mixture of sand, clay and another type of soil particle known as silt. Silt occurs as a deposit in river beds. The size of the silt particles is between those of sand and clay. The loamy soil also has humus in it. It has the right water holding capacity for the growth of plants.




69.           Solution: c)

Our muscle cells can also respire anaerobically, but only for a short time, when there is a temporary deficiency of oxygen. During heavy exercise, fast running, cycling, walking for many hours or heavy weight lifting, the
demand for energy is high. But the supply of oxygen to produce the energy is limited.

The cramps occur when muscle cells respire anaerobically. The partial breakdown of glucose produces lactic acid. The accumulation of lactic acid causes muscle cramps. We get relief from cramps after a hot water bath or a massage.

Hot water bath or massage improves circulation of blood. As a result, the supply of oxygen to the muscle cells increases. The increase in the supply of oxygen results in the complete breakdown of lactic acid into carbon dioxide and water.



70.           Solution: d)

The shape of the population pyramid tells the story of the people living in that particular country. The numbers of children (below 15 years) are shown at the bottom and reflect the level of births. The size of the top shows the numbers of aged people (above 65 years) and reflects the number of deaths.

The population pyramid of a country in which birth and death rates both are high is broad at the base and rapidly narrows towards the top. This is because although, many children are born, a large percentage of them die in their infancy, relatively few become adults and there are very few old people.






71. Solution: d)

Joint sector industries are owned and operated by the state and individuals or a group of individuals. Maruti Udyog Limited is an example of joint sector industry.

Co-operative sector industries are owned and operated by the producers or suppliers of raw materials, workers or both.

Anand Milk Union Limited and Sudha Dairy are success stories of a co-operative venture.




72.           Solution: c)

The first successful modern textile mill was established in Mumbai in 1854. The warm,


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  22    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    32    SOLUTIONS    
moist climate, port for importing machinery, availability of raw material and skilled labour resulted in rapid expansion of the industry in the region.

Initially this industry flourished in the states of Maharashtra and Gujarat because of favourable humid climate. But today, humidity can be created artificially, and raw cotton is a pure
and not weight losing raw material, so this industry has spread to other parts of India.

A weight losing material means it loses a lot of weight after processing. So, if the loss of waste is larger, it does not make sense to transport it for long distances. Instead, a weight losing material will be processed on site and therefore industries will always be located near farms. It is not the case with cotton.

Coimbatore, Kanpur, Chennai, Ahmedabad, Mumbai, Kolkata, Ludhiana, Pondicherry and Panipat are some of the other important centres.






73.           Solution: b)

Rice is the staple diet of the tropical and sub- tropical regions. Rice needs high temperature, high humidity and rainfall. It grows best in alluvial clayey soil, which can retain water.

In favourable climatic conditions as in West Bengal and Bangladesh two to three crops a year are grown.

Wheat requires moderate temperature and rainfall during growing season and bright
sunshine at the time of harvest. It thrives best in well drained loamy soil.




74.           Solution: d)

Natural gas is found with petroleum deposits and is released when crude oil is brought to the surface.

In India Jaisalmer, Krishna Godavari delta, Tripura and some areas off shore in Mumbai have natural gas resources.

A huge mass of India’s natural gas production comes from the western offshore regions, particularly the Mumbai High complex. The onshore fields in Assam, Andhra Pradesh, and Gujarat states are also major producers of natural gas.




75.Solution: d)

Contour ploughing is ploughing parallel to the contours of a hill slope to form a natural barrier for water to flow down the slope.

Contour ploughing follows the natural shape of the slope without altering it. Terrace farming alters the shape of the slope to produce flat areas that provide a catchment for water and a solid area for crop growth.

In Terrace farming, terraces are made on the steep slopes so that flat surfaces are available to grow crops. They can reduce surface run-off and soil Erosion.




76.           Solution: c)


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  23    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    32    SOLUTIONS    
Specialization is a method of production where a business or area focuses on the production of a limited scope of products or services in order to gain greater degrees of productive efficiency within the entire system of businesses or areas.

Many countries specialize in producing the goods and services that are native to their part of the world. This specialization is the basis of global trade as few countries produce enough goods to be completely self-sufficient.




77.Solution: b)

The various components of money can be aggregated together in order of liquidity. Since money is primarily used to settle day-to-day transactions, it needs to be readily usable as a means of doing so. Clearly, cash and coins are the most liquid forms of money, since they can be used instantaneously and universally used to settle unlimited transactions. Demand
deposits, or accounts with banks, are also quite
liquid, as they can be used to write cheques against, in settling daily transactions. The sum of currency in circulation and demand deposits with banks is called M1, or 'narrow money'.

Time deposits, though not as liquid and instantly available as transactions settling medium as M1, are still money, since it will be available at some point, and very often, as in the case of fixed deposits, can be converted to cash for some penalty. Usually, time deposits are much larger than both currency in circulation and demand deposits. The sum of M1 and time deposits is called 'broad money'.
78.           Solution: d)

When a currency appreciates or strengthens in relation to other currencies, imports get cheaper. This means your dollar will buy more of another foreign currency so that you can purchase foreign goods.

One of the biggest disadvantages of higher exchange rates or a strong dollar may be that it leads to trade deficits. Because strong currencies lead to cheaper imports, a country tends to import more than they export. This causes a trade deficit (not fiscal deficit).









79.           Solution: b)

Central Government levies taxes on income (except tax on agricultural income, which the State Governments can levy), customs duties, central excise and service tax. Value Added Tax (VAT), (Sales tax in States where VAT is not yet in force), stamp duty, State Excise, land
revenue and tax on professions are levied by
the State Governments.

Some taxes are levied and collected by the
Centre but shared with the States. These
include taxes on income other than agricultural income and union excise duties on goods included in Union List, except medicinal and toilet preparations.

In last 10-15 years, Indian taxation system has undergone tremendous reforms. The Constitution (Eightieth Amendment) Act,
2000, significantly changed the manner of


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  24    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    32    SOLUTIONS    
distribution of Central tax collections between the Central and State Governments. Prior to this amendment, income tax and Union excise duties were the only taxes shared with the States.






80.           Solution: c)

The main difference between revenue receipts and capital receipts is that revenue receipts are recurring in nature, which the government can expect to receive year after year, whereas capital receipts are a kind of one-time income.

So, earnings from interest rates cannot be counted as capital receipts as they are recurring income in nature. They come under revenue receipts.

Moreover, grants from governments are also counted in the revenue receipt segment.

The main items of capital receipts are loans raised by the government from the public
which are called market borrowings, borrowing
by the government from the Reserve Bank and commercial banks and other financial institutions through the sale of treasury bills, loans received from foreign governments and international organisations, and recoveries of loans granted by the central government.




81.Solution: d)

The atmosphere is the thin layer of air (gases, dust etc.) that surrounds the earth. The
gravitational force of the earth holds the
atmosphere around it. This is because atmosphere has a weight.

Primordial heat is responsible for many tectonic events on the earth like volcanism, plate movement etc.

Coriolis force is responsible for wind movement not attraction of atmosphere of earth.






82.           Solution: c)

The crust forms only 0.5 per cent of the volume of the earth, 16 per cent consists of the mantle and 83 per cent makes the core.

















83.           Solution: d)

The earth movements are divided on the basis of the forces which cause them. The forces which act in the interior of the earth are called as Endogenic forces and the forces that work on the surface of the earth are called as Exogenic forces.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  25    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    32    SOLUTIONS    


When it stops blowing the sand falls and gets deposited in low hill – like structures. These are called sand dunes.

When the grains of sand are very fine and light, the wind can carry it over very long distances. When such sand is deposited in large areas, it
is called loess. Large deposits of loess are found
in China.




85.           Solution: b)

In economics, Veblen goods are types of material commodities for which the demand is proportional to its high price, which is an apparent contradiction of the law of demand; Veblen goods also are commodities that function as positional goods.

Veblen goods are types of luxury goods, such as expensive wines, jewelry, fashion-designer handbags, and luxury cars, which are in demand because of the high prices asked for
them.






All these forces are responsible for shaping the earth around you.






84.           Solution: a)

When the wind blows, it lifts and transports sand from one place to another.
The high price makes the goods desirable as symbols of the buyer's high social-status, by way of conspicuous consumption and conspicuous leisure; conversely, a decrease of the prices of Veblen goods would decrease demand for the products




86.           Solution: b)

In thermosphere temperature rises very rapidly with increasing height.

Ionosphere is a part of this layer. It extends between 80-400 kms. This layer helps in radio
transmission. In fact, radio waves transmitted

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  26    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    32    SOLUTIONS    
from the earth are reflected back to the earth by this layer.

On the other hand, Mesosphere extends only up to the height of 80 km.

Meteorites burn up in this layer on entering from the space.




87.           Solution: a)

It is calculated as the profit that a firm is expected to earn considering the cost of inputs and the depreciation of capital. It is influenced by expectations about future input costs and demand. The MEC and capital outlays are the elements that a firm takes into account when deciding about an investment project.

The MEC needs to be higher than the rate of interest, r, for investment to take place.









88.           Solution: d)

In its metaphysics, Nyaya school is closer to Vaisheshika school of Hinduism than others. It holds that human suffering results from mistakes/defects produced by activity under wrong knowledge (notions and ignorance).

Moksha (liberation), it states, is gained through right knowledge. This premise led Nyaya to concern itself with epistemology, that is the reliable means to gain correct knowledge and
to remove wrong notions.
False knowledge is not merely ignorance to Naiyayikas, it includes delusion. Correct knowledge is discovering and overcoming one's delusions, and understanding true nature of soul, self and reality.




89.           Solution: b)

Pratītyasamutpāda, commonly translated as dependent origination or dependent arising, states that all dharmas ("things") arise in dependence upon other dharmas: "if this exists, that exists; if this ceases to exist, that also ceases to exist."

It is a pragmatic teaching, which is applied to dukkha and the cessation of dukkha.

The term is also used to refer to the twelve
links of dependent origination, which describes the chain of causes which result in rebirth. By reverting the chain, liberation from rebirth can be attained.




90.           Solution: a)

The Indian National Army and Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose were playing their remarkable part in the freedom struggle of India.

On the eve of the Second World War Bose came to believe that Gandhi's Non-violent Movement might not bring independence.

In 1939 he resigned from the congress presidentship and organised forward Bloc for a more vigorous national struggle. The government first imprisoned him, and thereafter kept him confined to his house
under close watch.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  27    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    32    SOLUTIONS    


Widespread agitation ensued in the streets and in the press, and the Congress advocated
91.Solution: d)

The first war of Indian Independence was fought in 1857 AD, during the reign of Governor General of Lord Canning.

The immediate cause of the revolt of 1857 was that Mangal Pandey killed two British officers on parade at Barrackpore.

This revolt spread in Lucknow, Ambala and Meerut cantonments. On May 10, 1857 soldiers at Meerut refused to touch the new Enfield rifle cartridges. The soldiers along with other group of civilians, went on rampage.

They marched to Delhi, seized the city and proclaimed the Bahadur Shah Zafar, emperor of India. Due to the lack of unity and organisation this revolt failed.




92.           Solution: c)

In July 1905, Lord Curzon, the Viceroy and Governor-General (1899–1905), ordered the partition of the province of Bengal supposedly for improvements in administrative efficiency in the huge and populous region. It also had justifications due to increasing conflicts between Muslims and dominant Hindu regimes in Bengal.

However, the Indians viewed the partition as an attempt by the British to disrupt the growing national movement in Bengal and divide the Hindus and Muslims of the region. The Bengali Hindu intelligentsia exerted considerable influence on local and national politics.
boycotting British products under the banner of swadeshi.




93.           Solution: d)

The First World War began with an unprecedented outpouring of support towards Britain from within the mainstream political leadership, contrary to initial British fears of an Indian revolt. India contributed massively to
the British war effort by providing men and
resources.

About 1.3 million Indian soldiers and labourers served in Europe, Africa and the Middle East, while both the Indian government and the princes sent large supplies of food, money and ammunition.

However, Bengal and Punjab remained hotbeds of anti colonial activities. Nationalism in Bengal, increasingly closely linked with the unrests in Punjab, was significant enough to nearly paralyse the regional administration.






94.           Solution: b)

The British themselves adopted a "carrot and stick" approach in recognition of India's support during the war and in response to renewed nationalist demands. In August 1917,

The means of achieving the proposed measure were later enshrined in the Government of India Act 1919, which introduced the principle
of a dual mode of administration, or diarchy, in

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  28    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    32    SOLUTIONS    
which both elected Indian legislators and appointed British officials shared power. The act also expanded the central and provincial legislatures and widened the franchise considerably.

Diarchy set in motion certain real changes at the provincial level: a number of non- controversial or "transferred" portfolios, such as agriculture, local government, health, education, and public works, were handed over to Indians, while more sensitive matters such
as finance, taxation, and maintaining law and order were retained by the provincial British administrators.




95.           Solution: a)

Gandhi’s concept of Satyagraha was from this movement only.

It was originally founded by Bhagat Jawahar Mal in 1840.His main aim was to purify the Sikh religion by removing all the abuses, superstitions and ill-practices from it.

But after the British annexation of Punjab revival of Sikh power and sovereignty became the major objective of the Kukas.

This caused a great deal of anxiety in the
British official ranks.

So they took various measures between 1863 and 1872 and were finally able to suppress this movement.




96.           Solution: d)
He also served as leader of the Indian National Congress, Premier of the Madras Presidency, Governor of West Bengal, Minister for Home Affairs of the Indian Union and Chief Minister of Madras state. Rajagopalachari founded the Swatantra Party and was one of the first recipients of India's highest civilian award, the Bharat Ratna.

He favoured talks with both Muhammad Ali Jinnah and the Muslim League and proposed what later came to be known as the C. R. Formula.




97.           Solution: b)

Under the presidency of Jawaharlal Nehru at its historic Lahore session in December 1929, the Indian National Congress adopted a resolution calling for complete independence from the British. It authorised the Working Committee to launch a civil disobedience movement throughout the country. It was decided that 26 January 1930 should be observed all over India as the Purna Swaraj (total independence) Day.

A special session was held in Karachi to endorse the Gandhi-Irwin Pact. Karachi session became famous because of the two resolutions that were adopted-one on Fundamental rights and other on National Economic program, both drafted by Dr.
Rajendra Prasad. The goal of Purna Swaraj was reiterated. This was the first time the congress spelt out what swaraj would mean for the masses.




http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  29    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    32    SOLUTIONS    
98.           Solution: c)

The revolutionary philosophies and movement made their presence felt during the 1905
Partition of Bengal. Arguably, the initial steps
to organize the revolutionaries were taken by Aurobindo Ghosh, his brother Barin Ghosh, Bhupendranath Datta etc. when they formed the Jugantar party in April 1906.

Jugantar party leaders like Barin Ghosh and Bagha Jatin initiated making of explosives. Amongst a number of notable events of political terrorism were the Alipore bomb case, the Muzaffarpur killing tried several activists and many were sentenced to deportation for life, while Khudiram Bose was hanged.




99.           Solution: d)

Towards the end of the successor of Nagabhata II, successfully attacked Kannauj and established control there. This was short-lived as he was soon after defeated by the Rastrakuta ruler, Govinda III. However, he was kept busy in internal politics by an alliance of different kingdoms in the south. The struggle for Kannauj became serious after the Pratiharas exercised control over it.

During the rule of Krishna III, there was successful campaign against the Cholas. The Rastrakutas also formed a matrimonial relationship with the Gangas and defeated the kingdom of Vengi. By the end of the 9th
Century the power of the Rastrakutas started to decline along with the Palas.

This was seen as an ideal opportunity by the feudal king Taila II who defeated the
Rastrakuta ruler and declared his kingdom there. This came to be known the Later Chalukya dynasty. Their kingdom included the states of Karnataka, Konkan and northern Godavari. By the end of the tripartite struggle, the Pratiharas emerged victorious and established themselves as the rulers of central India.




100.         Solution: a)

Harsha died in 647, having ruled for 41 years. His empire died with him, disintegrating
rapidly into small states. The succeeding period is very obscure and badly documented, but it marks the culmination of a process that had begun with the invasion of the Huns in the last years of the Gupta Empire.




In 648, Tang Taizong sent Wang Xuance to India in response to Harsha sending an ambassador to China. However once in India he discovered Harsha had died and the new king attacked Wang and his 30 mounted subordinates.

This led to Wang Xuance escaping to Tibet and then mounting a joint of over 7,000 Nepalese mounted infantry and 1,200 Tibetan infantry and attack on the Indian state on June 16. The success of this attack Wang Xuance the prestigious title of the "Grand Master for the Closing Court." He also secured a reported Buddhist relic for China




    


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  30    
    
