


    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  




INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK PRELIMINARY EXAM - 2015

INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST - 25
GENERAL STUDIES
PAPER-I
Time Allowed: 2 Hours                                                                                              Maximum Marks: 200

INSTRUCTIONS
1.   IMMEDITELY AFTER THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE EXAMINATION, YOU SHOULD
CHECK THAT THIS TEST BOOKLET DOES NOT HAVE ANY UNPRINTED OR TORN OR MISSING PAGES OR ITEMS, ETC. IF SO, GET IT REPLACED BY A COMPLETE TEST BOOKLET.
2.  You have to enter your Roll Number on the Test Booklet in the Box provided alongside. DO NOT Write anything else on the Test Booklet.
4.  This  Test  Booklet  contains  100  items  (questions).  Each  item  is  printed  only  in  English.  Each  item comprises  four  responses  (answers).  You  will  select  the response  which  you  want  to mark  on the Answer Sheet. In case you feel that there is more than one correct response, mark the response which you consider the best. In any case, choose ONLY ONE response for each item.
5.  You have to mark all your responses ONLY on the separate Answer Sheet provided.  See directions in
the Answer Sheet.
6.  All items carry equal marks.

7.  Before you proceed to mark in the Answer Sheet the response to various items in the Test Booklet, you have  to  fill  in  some  particulars  in  the  Answer  Sheet  as  per  instructions  sent  to  you  with  your Admission Certificate.
8.  After you have completed filling in all your responses on the Answer Sheet and the examination has concluded, you should hand over to the Invigilator only the Answer Sheet. You are permitted to take away with you the Test Booklet.
9.  Sheets for rough work are appended in the Test Booklet at the end.
10.  Penalty for wrong answers :
THERE WILL BE PENALTY FOR WRONG ANSWERS MARKED BY A CANDIDATE IN THE OBJECTIVE TYPE QUESTION PAPERS.
(i)    There are four alternatives for the answer to every question. For each question for which a wrong answer has been given by the candidate, one-third of the marks assigned to that question will be deducted as penalty.
(ii)   If a candidate gives more than one answer, it will be treated as a wrong answer even if one of the given  answers  happens  to be correct  and there will be same  penalty  as above  to that question.
(iii)     If a question is left blank, i.e., no answer is given by the candidate, there will be no penalty for that question.


http://www.insightsonindia.com

INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST SERIES FOR CIVIL SERVICES PRELIMINARY EXAM 2015




http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                             INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Page  1    
    



    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  





1.   The PSLV programme of the ISRO launches satellites for which of the following purposes?
1.   Earth observation
2.  Navigation
3.  Studying space sciences
4.  Disaster management

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 4 only
d)  All of the above




2.  The government has recently taken a decision to revive some Urea factories. Consider the following about Urea.
1.   Urea is naturally produced in
humans and animals.
2.  CO2 is used in the manufacturing of
Urea.
3.  It also contains NPK (nitrogen- phosphorus-potassium).

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




3.  Investments made by which of the following are considered as domestic investment in India?
1.   A foreign company investing in
India which also has a subsidiary in
India.
2.  Investments made by NRIs and Persons of Indian origin (PIOs) in India.
3.  Profits earned on investments made by an Indian firm abroad



Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only d)  2 only




4.  What are non-repatriable investments, in the context of NRIs?
a)  It refers to the investment wherein NRI cannot convert invested money back to his home country.
b)  It refers to the investments where a
foreign currency can be converted back into the currency of the home country by an NRI.
c)  The investments that come in the form of remittances where no return is earned by the NRI.
d)  Investment made in government bonds of home country.




5.  A new species of fish called Pethia striata was discovered by ecologists in Tunga River in the Kudremukh National Park, Karnataka. Consider the following in regard to it.
1.   The fish is native to Western Ghats.
2.  The fish has been put under the category of “vulnerable” as per IUCN.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                             INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                               Page  2    
    



    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  
3.  The fish is useful for purposes of phyto-remediation in the local rivers.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only d)  1 only




6.  The ancient city of Palmyra was recently in news because of
a)  excavation of man made rocks dating back even the pre-stone age period
b)  its take over by the militant group
ISIS
c)  its impending inclusion in the Chinese ‘One road One Belt’ initiative
d)  it being the first UNESCO world
heritage site that has been brought to ruins


7.   Consider the following statements:
1.   The Vernacular Press Act was passed in 1878 under the Governor Generalship and Viceroyalty
of Lord Ripon
2.  The Vernacular Press Act of 1878 was directed only against Indian language newspapers
Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 Only b)  2 Only c)  Both
d)  None


8.  Recently released UN World Economic
Situation and Prospects (WESP) Report for Mid update -2015 has
projected that India’s economic growth
will surpass China’s growth in 2016. As per the report this will be made possible by
1.   Strong double digit growth in agriculture
2.  Increase in Indian exports
3.  Stronger domestic consumption

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




9.  Which of these states have achieved
100% financial inclusion as per the PM Jan Dhan Yojana?
1.   Meghlaya
2.  Kerala
3.  Assam
4.  Goa
5.  Punjab

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  2, 3 and 4 only
b)  2, 3, 4 and 5 only c)  1, 2 and 4 only
d)  1, 3 and 5 only




10. Researchers have recently discovered the driest location on Earth which is as dry as the Martian surface. The location is
a)  Yungay in Atacama Desert, Chile
b)  Maria Elena south in Atacama
Desert, Chile
c)  Erg Chebbi in Sahara Desert d)  Sahel in Sahara desert

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                             INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Page  3    
    



    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  


11. Electrostatic precipitators can solve the urban pollution in India with regard to
1.   Particulate matter
2.     NO2
3.  Hydrocarbons

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 only
c)  2 and 3 only d)  1 and 3 only




12. Catalytic converters, having expensive metals namely platinum-palladium
and rhodium as the catalysts, are fitted into automobiles for
a)  enhancing their energy efficiency
b)  reducing their fuel consumption c)  reducing emission of poisonous
gases
d)  improving their transmission system and speed




13. Genetic modification of plants can be helpful in
1.   increased efficiency of mineral usage by plants
2.  enhanced nutritional value of food
3.  making tailor-made plants to supply alternative resources to industries

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only
b)  All of the above c)  2 and 3 only
d)  1 and 3 only
14. The ‘Bt’ protein in the ‘Bt Cotton’ is a toxin. When a cotton plant is made into Bt Cotton, why isn’t it harmed by this toxin?
a)  The toxin is harmful only to insects
not plants
b)  The toxin is present in an inactive form in the plant
c)  The genetic modification is done in a way that the plant is made immune to such toxins
d)  Both (a) and (c)




15. Tropics are known for greater biological diversity than temperate regions. Which of the following can NOT be reason(s) for the same?
1.   With the geological stability in tropics, it had more time for species evolution and     diversification.
2.  There is greater solar energy available at the tropics.
Choose the right option from the code below. a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  Both can be the correct reasons.




16. Consider the following differences between active and passive euthanasia.
1.   Active euthanasia is illegal but passive euthanasia is legal in India.
2.  Unlike Active euthanasia, passive euthanasia is done by withdrawing life support.
3.  In active euthanasia, instant death
occurs for the patient, unlike passive euthanasia.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                             INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Page  4    
    



    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only
b)  All of the above c)  2 and 3 only
d)  1 and 3 only




17. India and Mongolia recently decided to elevate their ties to the level of
Strategic partnership. What does the term ‘strategic partnership’ mean?
a)  Strategic partnership between two nations is equivalent of joining an alliance and becoming allies in international affairs.
b)  Its a long-term interaction/committment between two countries based on political, economic, social and historical factors.
c)  Strategic partners are obstructed
with least restrictions in the economic sphere like tarrifs, investments and duties.
d)  Its a long term mutual agreement between two nations to support each other militarily in the outbreak of a war or aggression.




18. Balance of Payments (BoP) does NOT
include which of the following?
1.   Foreign portfolio Investment
2.  External commercial borrowing
3.  Foreign Direct Investment
4.  Trade in invisibles
5.  Private remittances

Choose the correct answer using the following codes:

a)  1, 2 and 5 only b)  2, 3 and 4 only
c)  1 and 4
d)  All are included in BoP.




19. The book ‘ Economic History of India’ which examined in minute detail the entire economic record of colonial rule since 1757, was written by?
a)  Justice Mahadev Govind Ranade
b)  Dadabhai Naoroji
c)  Romesh Chandra Dutta d)  M. N. Roy




20.The Triffin dilemma or paradox is the conflict of economic interests that arises between short-term domestic and long-term international objectives when
a)  a national currency also serves as a
world reserve currency
b)  a nation is forced to go for trade deficit even though it wants trade surplus
c)  a nation’s monetary policy is largely in conflict with that of the global monetary policy
d)  free trade agreements clash with the objective of reviving domestic industries




21. In his recent speeches, the RBI governor has pointed out that growth should not be diverted from other markets due to quantitative easing. What does it imply?
1.   In periods of slump growth
economies are often resorting to lose monetary policy to boost growth in short-run
2.  Fiscal stimulus and tax sops by
governments are being used to attract investment without under

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                             INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Page  5    
    



    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  
taking structural reforms and policy correction

Which of the above is/are correct?

a)  1 only b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2 d)  None




22. Consider the following statements about the Controller general of Accounts (CGA) in India.
1.   He is appointed by the President of
India.
2.  He is the principal accounts adviser to the Union government.
3.  Union finance account prepared by him is presented to the Parliament.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only
b)  All of the above c)  2 and 3 only
d)  1 and 3 only




23. Consider the following statements:
1.   The Shell gas and oil compnay is headquartered in London
2.  The Netherlands government is the
largest shareholder in the Shell company

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 Only b)  2 Only c)  Both
d)  None
24. World’s first fully warm-blooded fish named Opah or moonfish was discovered recently. Beinf a fully warm-blooded fish means that
a)  ability to generate heat
independent of the environment and circulate heated blood throughout its body
b)  ability to live in all seasons in warm
water irrespective of the surrounding temperature
c)  ability to survive in chilly cold waters by solely internal body mechanisms
d)  ability to generate heat in the body
without any use of external body parts independent of the surrounding environment




25. State Bank of India (SBI) has launched contact-less credit and debit cards sbiINTOUCH using Near Field technology (NFC). Consider the following about NFC technology.
1.   Its a short range low powered
Bluetooth based link technology.
2.  A pairing code is needed every time a device connected via NFC.
3.  It operates on radio frequency.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only
b)  All of the above c)  2 and 3 only
d)  3 only






http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                             INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Page  6    
    



    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  
26. The scheme USTAAD launched by Union Ministry of Minority affairs is concerned with
a)  upgrading Skills and Training of minority communities by preservation of traditional ancestral arts and crafts
b)  skill development of minority
population to make them more employable in small scale industries
c)  providing financial and technical
support to the traditional craft based businesses run by minority for reviving Indian culture
d)  providing scholarships to the talented child artists from the minority community and showcase their talent to the whole of India




27. As per Jainism, to attain purity of soul, one must fight against
1.   Worldly passions
2.  Bodily senses
3.  One’s own soul

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




28. Consider the following statements about the Civil Disobedience movement (CDM).
1.   The movement officially was not
approved by the congress before its launch.
2.  26th January as Independence Day all over the country was decided
during CDM.
3.  All the round table conferences between the British government and Indian leaders         followed only after this movement.
4.  The movement was withdrawn
because of violence.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 4 only c)  2 and 3 only d)  1 and 3 only




29. The Moro people or Bangsamoro are a population of indigenous Muslims living in which of the following countries?
a)  Malaysia
b)  Indonesia c)  Philippines d)  Myanmar




30. Capillary action is the ability of a
liquid to flow in narrow spaces without the assistance of
1.   Gravity
2.  Inter-molecular forces
3.  Surface tension of water

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only d)  1 only

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                             INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Page  7    
    



    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  
31. Mangroves grow best in Inter-tidal zones due to
1.   shallowness of water there
2.  high nutrient content in inter-tidal zones
3.  lesser sediment load

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




32. Global strategic petroleum reserves (GSPR) refer to
a)  untapped petroleum reserves that lie in the global commons like Antarctica
b)  untapped petroleum reserve in the
ocean basins of international waters
c)  crude oil inventories held by governments to tackle an emergency of energy crisis.
d)  petroleum reserves that lie in zones
of international territorial disputes




33. Thickness of atmosphere is greatest at the equator due to
1.   Air being less dense at equator
2.  High insolation and strong convectional currents in troposphere over equator
3.  At equator gravitational pull on gases is more

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only
c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




34. Which of the following are sources of methane emission?
1.   Wetland rice cultivation
2.  Livestock rearing
3.  Oceans

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




35. As per a recent ruling of Supreme Court regulating public advertisements, whose images can feature in a government advertisement?
1.   Chief Minister
2.  Prime Minister
3.  President and Vice-President
4.  Late Prime Ministers

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  2 only
d)  3 and 4 only




36. Which of the following come under the concept of ‘Ecological Engineering’?
1.   pest management through biocontrol agents
2.  using geo-engineering to stall
climate change


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                             INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Page  8    
    



    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  


3.  conservation of non-renewable
energy

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  2 only
d)  1 and 3 only



37. Why does milk overflow when it starts boiling in a vessel, and water does not? a)  Milk’s boiling point is lower than
that of water.
b)  Milk is denser than water, so more heat makes it lighter for it to overflow easily.
c)  When milk is heated, its denser contents like fat start depositing on the top layer stoping the vapour from exiting
d)  milk is heavier than water, so
escaping of vapour takes place at much grater force pushing milk out of the container




38. Consider the following statements:
1.   An individual on the path to becoming a buddha is known as Bodhisattva
2.  Avalokiteshvara is an embodiment
of Buddha and Shiva worshipped by converts from Buddhism to Hinduism during the reign of Gupta empire

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 Only b)  2 Only c)  Both
d)  None
39. With reference to permaculture, consider the following stattements
1.   It is a systems approach to agriculture which encompasses elements and processes aimed to making agriculture sustainable and efficient
2.  Agroforestry and rainwater
harvesting are some of the elements of permaculture

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 Only b)  2 Only c)  Both
d)  None



40.NASA’s Messenger spacecraft crashed into Mercury recently. This crash was due to
a)  excessive gravitation pull of the Sun
b)  Change in Messenger’s orbital positions with respect to Mercury’s
c)  Messenger running out of fuel
d)  it being hit by an asteroid orbiting
Mercury




41. Internet.org, a partnership between a Social networking company and some mobile companies, aims at
a)  providing seamless wireless internet connectivity to every person in developing countries
b)  providing free web access in less developed countries
c)  providing affordable or free access to select internet services in less developed countries
d)  providing basic digital literacy
about internet to every person in the less developed countries

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                             INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Page  9    
    



    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  


44. Which of the following participate in the electing the President of India?
42. Consider the following statements
regarding the administrator of UTs in
India.
1.   An administrator of a union territory is an agent of the
President and not head of state like a governor.
2.  The administrator of a UT has
absolute veto power over the laws enacted by the legislative assembly of that UT.
3.  In a UT having an elected
government, administrator is appointed after consultation with the CM of the UT.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 only
d)  1 and 3 only






43. In the case of difference of opinion between the Lt. governor (LG) of Delhi and his ministers
a)  the matter is to be referred to the Central government for resolution and its decision will prevail
b)  the matter is referred to the President and the LG will act accordingly.
c)  the matter is referred to the Delhi assembly which decides the issues on the basis of special majority
d)  the matter is referred a bench of
SC, the decision of which is binding on the LG and ministers
1.   Elected Members of Legislative
Councils
2.  Nominated members of both houses of Parliament
3.  Elected members of the legislative assembly of the UTs

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  3 only
d)  1 and 3 only




45. If Parliament has repeatedly failed to perform its duty, in the opinion of the President, then as per his constitutional mandate he can
1.   Dissolve the Lok Sabha
2.  Dismiss the Council of Ministers
3.  Promulgate ordinance to keep the legislative business on track

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  3 only
d)  None of the above




46. Consider the following statement “This school drew upon the anthropomorphic traditions of Roman religion and represented
the Buddha with a youthful Apollo-
like face, dressed in garments resembling those seen on Roman imperial statues.”



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                             INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Page  10    
    



    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  
The above statement refers to which of the following schools of art?



a)  Mathura school of art b)  Gandhara school of art c)  Taxila School of art
d)  Both a and b




47. Which of the following bodies do NOT find a mention in the constitution of India?
1.   Cabinet
2.  Parliamentary Committees
3.  NITI Ayog
4.  Prime Minister’s Office (PMO)

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 4 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  3 and 4 only
d)  All of the above




48. Which of the following announcements were made at the Delhi durbar, 1911?
1.   Capital to be Delhi
2.  Annulment of partition of Bengal
3.  Provision of separate electorates for minorities

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 only
d)  All of the above
49. The Government of India Act 1919 led to the adoption of an important tradition into India. This is
a)  the finance minister presenting the whole budget by reading
b)  President’s address to both houses of Parliament
c)  Use of English language in
legislatures
d)  All of the above




50. With reference to spacewalks, consider the following statements:
1.   Before going out for spacewalk, astronauts breathe pure oxygen for a few hours to get rid of all the nitrogen in an their body
2.  Astronauts practice spacewalks underwater in a large swimming pool which is called as the Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory, or NBL

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 Only b)  2 Only c)  Both
d)  None




51. Laterite soils found in India are rendered infertile because of
1.   excessive iron in the soil
2.  lack of organic matter
3.  little nitrogen content in the soil

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 only
d)  None of the above



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                             INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Page  11    
    



    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  
52. Which of the following factors contribute to the formation of the Indian Monsoon?
1.   Land-sea frontier of India and its differential heating
2.  High temperature and shifting of the Sun in summer
3.  Trade winds

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 only
d)  All of the above




53. Consider the following regions.
1.   Slopes of the Western Ghats
2.  North-eastern regions of Arunachal
Pradesh, Meghalaya, Assam
3.  Tarai areas of the Himalayas
4.  Andaman groups of Islands

What kind of vegetation are you most likely to find common in all these areas?

a)  Tropical Deciduous forests b)  Tropical evergreen forests c)  Monsoon type of Forests
d)  Mountain vegetation




54. The Badami cave temples are a complex of temples located at Badami, a town in the Bagalkot District in the north part of Karnataka, India. Which of the following dynasties does Badami cave architecture belong to?
a)  Chalukya
b)  Rashtrakuta c)  Hoysala
d)  Pallava
55. With reference to Rohingya People consider the following statements
1.   They are Indo-Aryan peoples living in northern Rakhine State, Myanmar, who predominantly speak Urdu mixed Bengali language
2.  Next to Myanmar, significant population of Rohingya people live in Saudi Arabia

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 Only b)  2 Only c)  Both
d)  None




56. Choosing people for constitutional positions in legislative bodies in India can NOT happen by which of the following systems?
1.   First past the post (FPTP) election system
2.  Proportional Representation election System
3.  Nomination
4.  Competitive Examinations

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 4 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  3 and 4 only d)  4 only




57. With reference to Deep Space Climate Observatory, consider the following statements:
1.   It was launched by NASA for the purpose of Earth observation
2.  Its functions include observing
phenomena on Earth including


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                             INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Page  12    
    



    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  
changes in ozone, aerosols, dust and volcanic ash, cloud height, vegetation cover and climate

Which of the above stateents is/are correct?

a)  1 Only b)  2 Only c)  Both
d)  None




58. The proceedings in Lok Sabha always starts with ‘X’, move to ‘Y’ and then ‘Z’. X, Y and Z here are
a)  Zero hour, Business hour and
Agenda of the house
b)  Zero hour, Question hour and
Agenda of the house
c)  Question hour, Zero hour and
Agenda of the house
d)  Business hour, Zero hour and
Question hour




59. Any withdrawal of money from the consolidated fund of India by the government has to go through the same procedure as that of a
a)  Regular government budget
b)  Regular government budget only in case of major expenditures that exceed the annual budget
c)  Ordinary withdrawal from the
Public Account of India
d)  A withdrawal from the Public Account of India in emergency cases



60.As per the Constitution, which of these statements regarding the Office of Governor is/are true?
1.   Constitutionally, he is under the control and subordinate to the Central government.
2.  Consultation with the CM of the state is a must before appointing Governor of that state.
3.  Domicile residents of a state are not eligible for being the Governor of that state.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 only
c)  3 only
d)  None of the above




61. If the Legislative assembly (LA) of a state passes a bill, which is then rejected by the legislative council (LC), which of the following may follow?
1.   The bill will stand repealed.
2.  The bill will be referred to a joint sitting of both the houses.
3.  The bill will be referred to the
Governor for a final view.
4.  The bill can be again passed by the
LA and re-sent to the LC.
5.  The LA can directly reject the view of the LC, and go ahead with enacting the bill.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  4 or 5 only
b)  1 or 2 or 3 only c)  2 or 5 only
d)  4 only



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                             INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Page  13    
    



    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  
62. With reference to natural rubber, consider the following statements
1.   It consists of polymers of the organic compound isoprene, with minor impurities of other organic compounds plus water
2.  Rubberwood plants requires well- drained, weathered soil consisting of laterite, lateritic types, sedimentary types, nonlateritic red, or alluvial soils

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 Only b)  2 Only c)  Both
d)  None




63. With reference to child labour problem in India, consider the following statements
1.   At present there is complete ban on
child labour under the age of 14 in all types of occupation except farm and domestic work after school hours
2.  The Child Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Act is being implemented by the Ministry of Women and Child Welfare

Which of the above statements is/are
INCORRECT?

a)  1 Only b)  2 Only c)  Both
d)  None




64. Consider the following statements.
1.   Transfer of judges of the high courts is the sole prerogative of the Chief Justice of India    (CJI).
2.  The state government can take disciplinary action against erring judges of the High Court           in that respective state.
3.  The CM of the state is consulted
before appointing the judges of the concerned High Court.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 only
c)  3 only
d)  None of the above




65. Union Cabinet has given its approval to Benami Transactions (Prohibition) (Amendment) Bill, 2015. The bill aims to
a)  tackle black money generation in
India
b)  regulate unauthorized transactions in the security markets
c)  regulate all private institutions where the owner’s identity has not been officially verified
d)  regulate money laundering activities on cyber networks




66. ‘Minimal Alternate Tax’ has been in news for some time. It is basically
a)  a minimum amount of tax that companies have to pay for diversifying their business portfolio
b)  the minimum tax that companies have to pay even if their book
profits are zero




http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                             INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Page  14    
    



    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  
c)  the minimum tax that companies need to pay even if their net income is shown to be zero
d)  the minimum tax that companies need to pay to start doing business outside India






67. The ultimate goal of Buddhism is the attainment of the sublime state of Nirvana, which as per it can be attained by
a)  following the eightfold path taught by the Buddha
b)  realizing directly the four noble truths taught by the Buddha
c)  contemplating on existence,
meditation and Buddhist spiritual processes
d)  doing good to all selflessly




68. Consider the following statements with reference to a River in India
1.   This river rises on the western slopes of the Aravalli Range near Ajmer
2.  This river is known as Sagarmati near its origin place
3.  This river dissipates into the wastes of the northeastern part of the marsh called the Rann of Kachchh (Kutch) in Gujarat state

Identify the river from above clues:

a)  River Banas b)  River Luni
c)  River Kali Sindh
d)  River Gomti
69. With reference to Varishtha Pension Bima Yojana (VPBY), consider the following statements
1)  The scheme will be operated by all the nationalized banks
2)  This scheme aims to provide monthly pension ranging from Rs
500/ to Rs 5,000/ per month to
senior citizens of the country
3)  Citizens aged 60 years and above can avail the benefits of this scheme

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 and 2 Only b)  1 and 3 Only c)  2 and 3 Only d)  All



70. Which of the following were the factors behind the decline of the Gupta empire?
1.   Foreign invasion
2.  Rise of the feudatories in the kingdom
3.  Immense economic loss due to lowered revenue from trade and commerce

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




71. Din-e Illahi, started by Mughal emperor Akbar was
a)  a system of governance in the provinces to keep the subedars
under check




http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                             INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Page  15    
    



    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  
b)  a system of tax collection that was based on concessions for poor and equity for landless farmers
c)  a religion where the soul is encouraged to purify itself by yearning for God.
d)  a set of moral precepts propounded by Akbar that carried the force of law


72. During autumn and spring seasons, there is a bloom of phytoplankton growth in lakes. This is because in these seasons
a)  The biotic and nutrient load of lake
water is at its peal
b)  Lake waters are least disturbed by rain and surface run-offs that could have harmed phytoplanktons
c)  Temperature is optimal for the
growth of phytoplanktons d)  Lake water churns and
redistributes water and oxygen
which are vital for the growth of phytoplanktons


73. Which of the following committees is/are NOT related to Panchayat Raj institutions?
1.   Ashok Mehta committee
2.  Balwant Rai Mehta committee
3.  Dr.L.M.Singhvi Committee
4.  G.V.K Rao committee

Choose the correct answer using the codes below:

a)  3 Only b)  4 Only
c)  Both 3 and 4 d)  All are related



74. Your friend tells you that you can increase your weight without
increasing your mass. Which of these factors is your friend referring to, that can do so?
1.   Change in the rotation period of the earth
2.  Change in the revolution time of the earth around the sun
3.  Change in thickness (radius) of the
earth

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only d)  3 only


75. Micro-propagation is a technique of
a)  Producing a large number of plants through tissue culture
b)  Large scale genetic modification in the micro components of plant
c)  Growing plants on a large scale in
nutrient medium which has only micro-nutrients
d)  None of the above




76. With reference to Magna Carta, consider the following statements
1.   It promised the protection of church rights and other rights to rebelling barons
2.  It was a charter agreed and enacted by the Pope of Vatican in
1215

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 Only b)  2 Only c)  Both
d)  None

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                             INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Page  16    
    



    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  


3.  Reducing debt to GDP ratio of the country
77. Which of the following diseases in
India can be tackled by improving sanitation?
1.   Anaemia
2.  Cholera
3.  Japanese encephalitis (JE)
4.  Hepatitis

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only d)  3 only

a.   1 and 2 only
b.  2, 3 and 4 only c.   3 only
d.  All of the above



78. Consider the following statement: “Its purpose is to contribute to peace and
security by promoting international collaboration through education, science, and culture in order to further universal respect for justice, the rule of law, and human rights along with fundamental freedom proclaimed in the United Nations Charter.”

Which of the following United Nations body has the above statement as its main purpose?

a)  UNICEF b)  UNHCR c)  UNESCO d)  UNDP




79. In budget documents, the term ‘fiscal prudence’ is often mentioned. What does it imply?
1.   Not taking any new government
initiative to lower government costs
2.  Harmonization of monetary and fiscal targets

80.With reference to LED lamp, consider the following statements:
1.   LEDs are not affected by high
temperature unlike fluorescent lamps
2.  LED chips need controlled direct
current (DC) electrical power in order to function smoothly
3.  Unlike other lamps, most LEDs do
not emit light in all directions

Which of the above statements is/are
INCORRECT?


a)  1 and 3 Only b)  1 and 2 Only c)  2 and 3 Only d)  All




81. Increasing the Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) and interest rates in the economy will lead to
a)  greater money supply and higher
investments in the economy
b)  lesser money supply and lower investments in the economy
c)  constant money supply but lower investments in the economy
d)  lesser money supply but higher investment in the economy



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                             INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Page  17    
    



    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  
82. The main items of capital receipts of the Government of India are
1.   Market borrowings
2.  Borrowings from the RBI
3.  Borrowings by sale of treasury bills
4.  Sale of share in PSUs

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only
b)  All of the above c)  1, 3 and 4 only d)  3 and 4 only




83. Consider the phenomenon of
‘casualization of workforce’.
1.   It is the movement of labour from formal sector to the self-employed and informal sectors
2.  Casualization has only increased
after the 1991 economic reforms.
3.  Casualization leads to lower economic growth of a country.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only d)  2 only




84. Consider the following statements:
1.   It is a national park located in West
Garo Hills district of Meghalaya
2.  UNESCO added this National park to its list of Biosphere Reserves in May 2009
3.  This biosphere reserve has a remnant population of the Red
panda
To which of the following national parks/biosphere reserves does the above description apply?

a)  Manas b)  Nokrek
c)  Dihang-Dibang
d)  Dibru – Saikhowa




85. A reduction in Per capita income of
India can happen by
1.   High rates of depreciation in the economy
2.  Negative net income from abroad
3.  Lowering of India’s GDP

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




86. The upstream industries in the petroleum sector are largely concerned with
1.   Marketing of crude oil
2.  Production of crude oil
3.  Exploration of crude oil
4.  Refining of crude oil

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 3 only b)  1 and 4 only
c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                             INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Page  18    
    



    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  
87. With reference to the steel sector in India, consider the following statements:
1.   In 2014, India was the second largest steel producer in the world, next only to China
2.  India is the world’s largest producer of sponge iron with a host of coal based units
3.  India is a net importer of steel from other countries

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 and 3 Only b)  2 and 3 Only c)  1 and 2 Only d)  All




88.Ocean currents are at the surface as well as in the deeper ocean. Surface and deep ocean currents are driven respectively by which of the following factors?
a)  Wind and density differences in the ocean
b)  Wind and temperature differences in the ocean layers
c)  Gravity and temperature
differences in the ocean layers d)  Coriolis force and density
differences in the ocean




89. Little or no ocean tides occur at the equator due to
1.   the regular heating of the equators
2.  the peculiar orbital plane of the moon
3.  presence of heavy surface water currents

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only d)  2 only




90.Subduction of the earth can lead to which of the following?
1.   Cyclones
2.  Tsunami
3.  Volcanism
4.  Earthquakes
5.  Orogeny

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 3 only b)  2, 3 and 4 only
c)  2, 3, 4 and 5 only d)  3, 4 and 5 only




91. In which of the following ways, the earth’s atmosphere is heated?
1.   Directly by solar radiation
2.  Indirectly by radiation reflected from earth
3.  Transfer of heat across earth by advection

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




92. Mimansa, a school of Vedanta Philosophy, recognizes which of the following as the means of valid knowledge?
1.   Perception

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                             INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Page  19    
    



    




2.  Postulation
3.  Inference
http://www.insightsonindia.com  


c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above
4.  Comparison and analogy

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 4 only
c)  1, 3 and 4 only d)  All of the above




93. With reference to tropical cyclones, consider the following statements
4.  They are characterized by a low- pressure center and numerous thunderstorms that produce strong winds and flooding rain
5.  Tropical cyclones help to maintain equilibrium in the Earth's troposphere

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 Only b)  2 Only c)  Both
d)  None




94. Which of the following could be verified for the Indus Valley Civilization?
1.   They had uniform measure of
weights and measures.
2.  They had monarchial style of governance.
3.  Gold jewelry was popular in the civilization.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only

95. Which of the following play a role in the formation of tropical cyclones?
1.   Westerlies
2.  Tropical jet streams
3.  Roaring forties

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 only
d)  None of the above




96. The Indigo movement, 1860, was initiated by the peasants because
a)  european planters forced peasants to grow indigo
b)  peasants were not being given
market price for indigo produced by the government
c)  the British government imposed
heavy tax on the production of
Indigo
d)  farmers growing Indigo were not allowed to grow any other crop




97. Consider the following statements about Bardoli Satyagraha.
1.   It was started after Gandhi joined
the cause of national freedom movement.
2.  It was centred around increased
land revenue by the British government.
3.  The movement was led by
Vallabhbhai Patel.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                             INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Page  20    
    



    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  
4.  It was restricted to Gujarat.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 4 only
d)  All of the above




98. Consider the following statements
1.   A Rubik’s Cube is a combination puzzle toy
2.  A normal (3x3x3) Rubik’s Cube
consists of 21 pieces

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 Only b)  2 Only c)  Both
d)  None




99. The de facto assumption of climate change policy is that the world must limit the increase in global temperatures to 2 degrees Celsius above pre-Industrial levels. With reference to this, consider the following statements
1.   It is assumed that if the limit is
crossed, ice sheets in Greenland
and West Antarctica become unstable and melt at an unstoppable rate
2.  According to the latest consensus science reported in September by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the Earth has already warmed 2°C from 1880 (preindustrial times) to 2012

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 Only b)  2 Only c)  Both
d)  None




100.          Which of the following does NOT find mention in the Preamble to India’s Constitution?
1.   Social justice
2.  Liberty of worship
3.  Equality of status
4.  Liberty of religion

Choose  the correct answer using the codes below:

a)  2 Only b)  3 Only
c)  2 and 4 Only d)  4 Only



















http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                             INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Page  21    
    
