


    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    33    




INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK PRELIMINARY EXAM - 2015

INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST - 33
GENERAL STUDIES
PAPER-I
Time Allowed: 2 Hours                                                                                              Maximum Marks: 200

INSTRUCTIONS
1.   IMMEDITELY AFTER THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE EXAMINATION, YOU SHOULD
CHECK THAT THIS TEST BOOKLET DOES NOT HAVE ANY UNPRINTED OR TORN OR MISSING PAGES OR ITEMS, ETC. IF SO, GET IT REPLACED BY A COMPLETE TEST BOOKLET.
2.  You have to enter your Roll Number on the Test Booklet in the Box provided alongside. DO NOT Write anything else on the Test Booklet.
4.  This  Test  Booklet  contains  100  items  (questions).  Each  item  is  printed  only  in  English.  Each  item comprises  four  responses  (answers).  You  will  select  the response  which  you  want  to mark  on the Answer Sheet. In case you feel that there is more than one correct response, mark the response which you consider the best. In any case, choose ONLY ONE response for each item.
5.  You have to mark all your responses ONLY on the separate Answer Sheet provided.  See directions in
the Answer Sheet.
6.  All items carry equal marks.

7.  Before you proceed to mark in the Answer Sheet the response to various items in the Test Booklet, you have  to  fill  in  some  particulars  in  the  Answer  Sheet  as  per  instructions  sent  to  you  with  your Admission Certificate.
8.  After you have completed filling in all your responses on the Answer Sheet and the examination has concluded, you should hand over to the Invigilator only the Answer Sheet. You are permitted to take away with you the Test Booklet.
9.  Sheets for rough work are appended in the Test Booklet at the end.
10.  Penalty for wrong answers :
THERE WILL BE PENALTY FOR WRONG ANSWERS MARKED BY A CANDIDATE IN THE OBJECTIVE TYPE QUESTION PAPERS.
(i)    There are four alternatives for the answer to every question. For each question for which a wrong answer has been given by the candidate, one-third of the marks assigned to that question will be deducted as penalty.
(ii)   If a candidate gives more than one answer, it will be treated as a wrong answer even if one of the given  answers  happens  to be correct  and there will be same  penalty  as above  to that question.
(iii)     If a question is left blank, i.e., no answer is given by the candidate, there will be no penalty for that question.


http://www.insightsonindia.com

INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST SERIES FOR CIVIL SERVICES PRELIMINARY EXAM 20




http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Page  1    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    33    




1.   ‘Unnat Bharat Abhiyaan’ programme relates to
a)  improving the Indian urban economic growth rate
b)  skill development of workers in the unorganized sector
c)  establishment of centres of
excellence throughout the country d)  upliftment of rural India




2.  Which of the following correctly differentiates between Aesthenosphere and Lithosphere?
1.   Aesthenosphere is more solid than
Lithosphere.
2.  The Mid-oceanic ridges occur in
Aesthenosphere and not lithosphere.
3.  Lithosphere lies above
Aesthenosphere.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only d)  3 only


3.  Diastrophism includes all those processes that involve
1.   Uplifting or warping of the large
parts of earth’s crust
2.  Folding of earth’s crust
3.  Generation of earth’s crust



Choose the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  None of the above


4.  Who among the following can appear in the proceedings of the Parliament but without a right to vote?
1.   President of India
2.  CAG
3.  Attorney General of India
4.  Chairman of Finance Commission



Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 4 only b)  1 and 4 only
c)  3 only
d)  2 and 3 only


5.  ‘Nalayira Divyaprabandhanam’ is known as
a)  a major composition of the Alvar saints
b)  the rulebook of Lingayats guiding their social and economic conduct
c)  the most famous Tamil translation of
Kabir’s work
d)  the code of conduct of the
Vaishanavas in TamilNadu




6.  Some laws made on general matters by the Autonomous District Councils established under Sixth Schedule of the Constitution need the approval of
a)  State Legislature
b)  Parliament

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  2    
    



    




c)  Governor of the State
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    33    


b)  1 and 2 only
d)  Home Minister of the State




7.   Which of the following statements regarding the governance in Union Territories is INCORRECT?
a)  Lt. Governor cannot promulgate an
ordinance in the recess of the assembly without the prior permission of the President.
b)  Parliament can enact laws for Union Territories even where an elected Assembly exists.
c)  Governor of a state can be given additional responsibility of a Union territory, which he governs without the aid and advice of the State Council of Ministers.
d)  None of the above




8.  Consider the following about the financial powers of the Governor of a State.
1.   No demand for a grant can be made
except on his recommendation.
2.  Money bills can be introduced in the state legislature only with his prior recommendation.
3.  He can make advances out of the
Contingency Fund of the state to meet any unforeseen expenditure.
4.  He sees that the Annual Financial
Statement (state budget) is laid before the state legislature.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.
c)  3 and 4 only
d)  All of the above




9.  “To uphold the Sovereignty and integrity of India” is a part of the Oath of the
a)  Judges of the Supreme Court b)  Members of the Parliament
c)  President of India
d)  Both (a) and (b)




10. The Committee on Petitions in the
Parliament pertains to
a)  Privilege matters of the Members of the Parliament
b)  Entertaining complaints regarding political defections
c)  Entertaining representation from public on matters relating to the Union List
d)  Enforcing the code of conduct of the
Members of the Parliament




11. Which of the following statements about
Cabinet Committees is INCORRECT?
a)  Non-cabinet ministers are barred from its membership.
b)  They are setup by the Prime
Minister.
c)  They are not mentioned in the constitution.
d)  There are both ad hoc and permanent cabinet committees.




12. Consider the following statements.
a)  1, 2 and 4 only


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  3    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    33    
1.   No ground has been mentioned in the constitution for the removal of the Vice President.
2.  He can be elected for any number of
terms.
3.  He can act as a President for a maximum period of six months.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




13. The Constitution of Jammu and
Kashmir (J&K) declares
a)  The state of J&K to be an integral part of India.
b)  The state of J&K to be a temporary part of India.
c)  The State of J&K to be an autonomous state supported and guarded by the Government of India.
d)  J&K to be a sovereign state in alliance with the Government of India.




14. President’s Rule under Article 356 can be imposed on a state if
1.   The state government is pursing
anti-secular politics.
2.  The State government has been accused of corruption and maladministration.
3.  The State government disregards constitutional directions given by the Central     government.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




15. The Zonal Councils have been established by
a)  The Constitution of India
b)  States Reorganization Act 1956
c)  A resolution of the Central Cabinet d)  None of the above




16. ‘Full Faith and Credit Clause’ laid down by the Constitution means that
a)  The Council of Ministers is able to govern because it carries the credibility of a universal adult franchise.
b)  All records and acts of the Government of India or the states are to given full faith and credit throughout the territory of India.
c)  Lok Sabha passes the Vote on
Account motion based on the credibility of the executive even before the annual budget is examined thoroughly.
d)  None of the above





http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  4    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    33    


20.Earliest sites found to the East or South of the Indus river system include
17. The Ajivika sect believes that
a)  Everything is pre-determined. b)  The world is a random chaos.
c)  The world is a play of four elements
and temporary.
d)  Human will is supreme.




18. As per the teachings of Mahavira Jain
1.   Monastic existence is necessary for salvation.
2.  Salvation cannot be attained by women and non-brahmin castes.
3.  Observing celibacy is a very important condition for attaining salvation.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




19. Khanqahs are related to the
a)  places where Mughal rulers met their subjects for grievance redressal
b)  places of rest where Sufi mystics met and discussed spiritual matters with the visitors
c)  art galleries where artists performed
for the general public in Mughal courts
d)  a style of decorative wall embroidery found mostly on the centre of arches
erected by Mughal rulers
1.   Kalibangan
2.  Lothal
3.  Dholavira

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




21. Instead of spreading paddy seeds on the field, saplings are sown. Why?
a)  It increases survival chances of the crop.
b)  It reduces attack from pests.
c)  It allows more use of fertilizers in the field.
d)  If seeds are thrown directly on the
ground, roots may not penetrate deep.




22. Under Gana or Sangha system of governance during the period of the Magadha Kingdom
a)  People ruled through their directly elected representatives
b)  Several Rajas ruled together and took collective decisions.
c)  Only one king governed a very large
area.
d)  Village assemblies were self- governed by popular representation




http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  5    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    33    
23. As per Buddhist teachings constant craving could be removed by
a)  Renouncing everything
b)  Joining the Buddhist sangha
c)  Becoming a celibate and doing penance
d)  Following moderation in everything




24. Arthashashtra by Kautilya was written during the rule of
a)  Chandragupta Maurya b)  Bindusara
c)  Ashoka
d)  Harshavardhana




25. According to Swami Dayanand
Saraswati
1.   World is an illusion and one must get rid of it.
2.  Salvation can be attained by
performing the right rituals with the learned and pious.
3.  Worshipping idols is one way of
attaining to the formless ultimate reality.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  None of the above




26. Consider the following about the Oudh
Kisan Sabha setup in 1920.
1.   It was established by Jawaharlal
Nehru.
2.  It was setup to address the subdued participation from Awadh in mass movements.
3.  The Sabha adopted strictly
constitutional and legal methods for achieving its objectives.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only d)  1 only


27. Which of the following statements is INCORRECT concerning the Civil Disobedience Movement?
a)  Dalit participation in Civil
Disobedience movement was limited. b)  It was launched in response to
Montague statement that did not satisfy Indian leaders.
c)  Gandhi-Irwin pact came amidst the movement.
d)  None of the above




28. Kheda Satyagraha was organized by
Gandhiji in response to
a)  British forcing the Kheda peasants to grow only particular crops on their farms
b)  Exploitative land ownership structure in rural areas that resulted in farmer suicides
c)  Lack of security of tenure for Kheda peasants
d)  British authorities refusing to grant remission of revenue for farmers that suffered crop losses

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  6    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    33    


3.  Kal

29. The aim of the Home Rule League
Movement launched by Tilak was
a)  Demanding purna swaraj from the British by using both constitutional and extra-constitutional methods
b)  Overthrowing the British government with support from Burma
c)  Gradual reform of the administration to introduce self-government by Indians
d)  Organizing mass movements to in India and abroad to expose the exploitative character of the British rule




30. Which of the following statements with regard to the ‘Zimmerman Plan’ is correct?
1.   It was formed in Europe.
2.  It aimed to mobilize Indian settlers abroad to help invade British India.
3.  It was behind organizing the RIN
mutiny in India.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




31. Which of the following newspapers and journals advocated revolutionary terrorism in British India?
1.   Yugantar
2.  Sandhya
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




32. Bande Matram, for the first time, was the theme song of which movement? a)  Non-cooperation Movement
b)  Rowlatt Satyagraha
c)  Swadeshi Movement
d)  Civil Disobedience Movement




33. Consider the following about the Poona
Sarvajanik Sabha.
1.   It was founded by Dadabhai Naoroji.
2.  Its objective was to serve as a bridge between the government and people.
3.  It was the first organization to propose the concept of Swaraj for India.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  2 only
d)  1 and 3 only




34. ‘Moral policing’ with reference to the
Government may refer to
a)  State intruding in the cultural liberty of the individual

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  7    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    33    
b)  State trying to regulate any area of a citizen’s political or social life
c)  State using excessive use of police force even for small illegal activities
d)  State mandating moral education to be compulsory in schools and colleges




35. 10th August was celebrated recently as a)  World Ecology Day
b)  World Bio-Fuel Day
c)  Global Commons Day
d)  World Conservation Day




36. Consider the following statements about the recently launched scheme Nayi manzil.
1.   It intends to cover people in 17-35
age groups.
2.  It will cover all minority communities.
3.  It will intervene in education and skill development for improving the welfare of minorities.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  2 only
d)  All of the above
1.   High strength to weight ratio
2.  Excellent corrosion resistance
3.  Use in Liquid propellant tanks

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  2 only
d)  All of the above




38. A new mobile app ‘Disha’ has been launched by the Union Telecom Minister recently. The app is concerned with
a)  Promoting awareness of government
schemes in rural areas
b)  Tracking individuals who are joining Naxalite cadres and help bring them back
c)  Aiding digital literacy in the State of
Bihar
d)  None of the above




39. Aadhar enrolment can be done for
1.   Non-resident Indians (NRIs)
2.  Overseas Indian Citizens
3.  Persons of Indian Origin (PIOs)

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.




37. ISRO has recently started commercial production at the first indigenous Titanium Sponge Plant. Titanium sponge can be useful in applicable in
aerospace and defence areas due to its

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  2 only
d)  All of the above

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  8    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    33    
40.Consider the following about Lakshya developed by DRDO.
1.   It is a pilotless target aircraft.
2.  Its flight path can be pre- programmed based upon the type of mission.
3.  It is equipped with cruise missile.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  2 only
d)  All of the above




41. Suez Canal links the
a)  Red Sea with Caspian Sea
b)  Arabian Sea with Caspian Sea
c)  Mediterranean Sea with Red Sea d)  Caspian Sea with Arabian Sea




42. 193 member states of United Nations have reached an agreement on the outcome document New Sustainable Development Agenda for the next 15 years. The new agenda draft document is called
a)  Towards New Development: The
2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development
b)  A Brave New World: The 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development c)  Transforming our World: The 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development d)  People, Planet and Peace: The 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development
43. Maitri and Dakshin Gangotri are a)  Indian research stations in
Antarctica
b)  Indo-Chinese research base in upper
Himlayas near Siachin
c)  Indo-Russian observatory in Arctic to track climate change
d)  Indo-Denmark research observatory
Arctic Ocean




44. Which of these nations do NOT have any known mineral deposit?
a)  Uganda
b)  Switzerland c)  Georgia
d)  None of the above




45. Which of these crops/plants is/are NOT native to India and have been brought here from abroad for cultivation?
1.   Lotus
2.  Jasmine
3.  Mango

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  3 only
d)  All are native to India.




46. Consider the following about Deccan traps.
1.   They are formed from lava flows.
2.  They are a flood basalt province.
3.  They cover most of Northern plateaus of India.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  9    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    33    
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only d)  All the above




47. Earth is not a perfect sphere; it has a bulge at the equator. This bulge is due to a)  The revolution of earth around the
Sun
b)  The rotation of Earth on its axis
c)  Dynamic action of Primordial heat of earth
d)  Lower gravitation force at equator as compared to the poles




48. Which one of the following is NOT an evidence to prove ‘Sea floor spreading’? a)  The age of rocks from the ocean floor b)  Synchronic reversing of magnetic
field in rocks of ocean floor.
c)  The way fossils are distributed across different continents.
d)  Volcanic activity along the mid- oceanic ridges




49. Lithification is a process by which
a)  Aesthenosphere has been formed b)  Lithosphere has been formed
c)  Sedimentary rocks are formed d)  Igneous rocks are formed
50. Depth of weathering mantle is more in tropical forests than in Tundra regions. The factors contributing to this are
1.   Higher moisture and water
availability
2.  Higher temperature
3.  More active biological weathering

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only d)  All the above




51. In a meandering large river, there is active deposition over convex banks whereas undercutting dominates over the concave bank. This is because of
a)  Difference in the rush velocity of water on the convex and concave side of the bank
b)  Formation of ox-bow lakes in the course of meandering
c)  Change in Coriolis force as the river meanders
d)  Low velocity of the river




52. Troposphere is responsible for which of the following?
1.   Temperature variation on earth
2.  Pressure variation on surface of earth
3.  Humidity, clouds and precipitation

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  10    
    



    




b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    33    


55. The Central parts of tropical land generally receive lesser rainfall than the coastal parts because
a)  Westerlies are present at low lying
coastal areas in tropical areas

53. Consider the following statements.

Assertion (A): Generally at the same latitude rainfall is more over the oceans than on the continents.

Reason (R): Generally at the same latitude solar insolation received over the oceans is more than that on continents.

In the context of the statements above, which of these is true?

a)  A and R both are true, and R is the correct explanation for A.
b)  A and R both are true, and R is the NOT
the correct explanation for A. c)  A is correct, R is incorrect.
d)  A is incorrect, R is correct




54. The conditions that support dew formation are
1.   High speed winds in the night
2.  Clear sky
3.  High relative humidity
4.  Cold nights

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 4 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  2, 3 and 4 only
b)  Moisture carried by winds reduces as they travel inward in a continent
c)  Central parts receive higher solar insolation than the coastal areas
d)  Jet streams cannot reach inner
continental areas




56. The Mediterranean climate is characterised by hot, dry summer and mild, rainy winter due to the influence of
1.   Influence of sub-tropical high in summer
2.  Westerly wind in winter

Which of the above is/are correct?

a)  1 only b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None




57. Surface salinity of ocean water is influenced in
1.   Coastal regions by the fresh water
flow
2.  Polar regions by the processes of freezing and thawing of ice
3.  Movement of ocean currents

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  11    
    



    




c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    33    




61. Which of the following factors affect the recharge or availability of potable
groundwater?
58. Apart from Winds, movement of ocean
water is influenced by
1.   Temperature differences
2.  Density differences
3.  External force of Sun
4.  External force of Moon

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 4 only b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1, 3 and 4 only
d)  All of the above




59. Zenkeria Sebastinei is
a)  a critically endangered grass in
Agasthiyamalai peak
b)  a newly found frog species in
Western Ghats
c)  an antidote to cancer found in Caribbean islands discovered recently
d)  an endemic grass species of Sri
Lanka that has been introduced in
India to improve pastoral lands




60.Which of the following continents does NOT have any ‘Mega diversity centres’ (ecological hotspots as characterized by IUCN)?
a)  Europe
b)  North America c)  Australia
d)  Africa
1.   Vegetation cover
2.  Diversion of water for high water demanding crops
3.  Pollution from industrial effluents

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




62. The Chipko Andolan (‘Hug the Trees movement’) was concerned with
a)  Local communities losing control in
official management of forest resources
b)  Government’s legitimate right to cut
trees in a hilly area
c)  Global warming caused due to deforestation
d)  Stopping alienation of people from their forests




63. Coliform group of bacteria, found in human intestine, if also present in water indicates
a)  Contamination of water by disease- causing organisms
b)  Cultutal eutrophication of water
c)  High pH of water that is unsuitable for drinking
d)  Presence of radiation in water

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  12    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    33    


Assertion (A): Many thermal power plants are set up near coal or oil fields.
64. What kind of Mirror would be best
suited for use in a solar cooker?
a)  Concave mirror b)  Convex mirror c)  Plain mirror
d)  A combination of convex and plain mirror




65. Electricity generation from ‘Ocean thermal energy’ is based on the
a)  Heat generated from volcanic eruptions at the bottom of the ocean
b)  Hot springs found in the ocean
c)  Difference in the temperature of high and low tides
d)  Temperature differential between surface and Deep Ocean




66. Which of the following gases are generated in the decomposition process of slurry in a bio-gas plant?
1.   Methane
2.  Carbon dioxide
3.  Hydrogen
4.  Hydrogen Sulphide

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 3 only b)  2 and 4 only
c)  1 and 3 only d)  All the above




67. Consider the following statements.

Reason (R): The transmission of electricity is more efficient than transporting coal or petroleum over the same distance.

In the context of the statements above, which of these is true?

a)  A and R both are true, and R is a possible correct explanation for A.
b)  A and R both are true, and R can
NOT be a correct explanation for A. c)  A is correct, R is incorrect.
d)  A is incorrect, R is correct




68. Most power stations constructed these days produce Alternating Current (AC) instead of Direct Current (DC). What is the advantage of producing AC over DC?
1.   In AC power can be transmitted
across long distances without much loss of energy.
2.  DC power generation is much costlier than AC generation.

Which of the above is/are true?

a)  1 only b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2 d)  None




69. Which of the two organs of human body produce a significant magnetic field?
1.   Heart
2.  Brain
3.  Lungs
4.  Legs


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  13    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    33    
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 b)  2 and 4 c)  1 and 2 d)  3 and 4




70. Sky appears dark to passengers flying at very high altitudes because
a)  Scattering of light is not prominent
at such heights
b)  Clouds are absent at such heights
c)  The absence of polluting particles at such heights
d)  The low atmospheric pressure outside the aeroplane


71. In the formation of rainbow, which of the following phenomenon occurs?
1.   Refraction of light
2.  Dispersion of light
3.  Internal reflection of light

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.



73. Rate of breathing in aquatic organisms is much faster than that seen in terrestrial organisms. This may be because
a)  Water is a denser medium than air.
b)  Aquatic organisms lie at a lower trophic level than terrestrial organisms.
c)  Amount of oxygen dissolved in water is fairly low as compared to that in air.
d)  Aquatic organisms are not biologically
as evolved as the terrestrial organisms.




74. If you observe the bottom of a cooking vessels getting blackened on a gas stove, it means that
a)  The gas fuel contains very high
amounts of carbon
b)  The gas fuel contains lead
c)  The air holes of the stove are blocked and the fuel is getting wasted
d)  The gas fuel contains blue carbon




75. Consider the following statements.
a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




72. When growing plants detect light, a hormone ‘X’, synthesises at the shoot
tip, helps the cells to grow longer in that
direction. The hormone ‘X’ is a)  Cytokinin
b)  Auxin
c)  Melanin
d)  Abscicic acid

Assertion (A): Carbon plays a very important role in sustaining life on earth.

Reason (R): Carbon is the most abundant element in the earth’s crust.

In the context of the statements above, which of these is true?

a)  A and R both are true, and R is a possible correct explanation for A.
b)  A and R both are true, and R can
NOT be a correct explanation for A. c)  A is correct, R is incorrect.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  14    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    33    
d)  A is incorrect, R is correct




76. Under the River boards Act, a River board is established
a)  by Central government on the request of the state governments concerned  to advise them
b)  by Supreme Court on a petition by the state governments concerned to advise them
c)  by the Parliament based on the exigencies of the situation
d)  by the State governments jointly after seeking permission from the President




77. Apart from Central government, the
Comptroller and Auditor general of
India presently is authorized to audit the accounts of
1.   State governments
2.  Local governments
3.  National political parties

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only d)  1 only




78. The Preamble to the Indian constitution is based on
a)  Nehru Report 1928
b)  Objectives Resolution drafted by
Pandit Nehru
c)  Government of India Act, 1935
d)  The Constitution of the Indian
National Congress in British India




79. Balance of Payments deficit can be reduced through
1.   Export promotion
2.  Import control
3.  Increasing foreign exchange reserves
4.  Devaluation of currency

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only
b)  1, 2 and 3 only c)  1, 2 and 4 only d)  3 and 4 only




80.Fiscal policy of the government is related with
1.   Taxation
2.  Government spending
3.  Government borrowing
4.  Public debt

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only
b)  1, 2 and 3 only c)  3 and 4 only
d)  All of the above




81. As per Keynes, speculative demand for money arises due to the
a)  Predictions in the market about
future bond interest rates
b)  Needs for transaction in a market economy

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  15    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    33    
c)  Uncertainty of a household expenditure
d)  The fluctuations in the external sector of the economy




82. Marginal productivity of labour in agricultural sector of India is zero. This points to
a)  Disguised unemployment in Indian
agriculture
b)  Potential for employment in Indian agriculture
c)  Unemployment in Indian agriculture d)  Growing labour demand in the
agricultural sector




83. Liquidity trap is a situation where
a)  All potential investors expect the interest rates to move up in future
b)  Interest rates in the market fluctuate
so much that bonds become non- liquid
c)  People put all their money in buying
bonds
d)  All of the above




84. Since the 1991 economic reforms, Indian agriculture has been experiencing slowdown in growth rates. This may be because of
1.   Stagnation in green revolution
technology
2.  Falling public investment in agriculture
3.  Low market price of agricultural
produce
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




85. The main objectives of food management in India is/are
1.   Maintenance of buffer stock for
ensuring food security
2.  Procurement of food grains from farmers at remunerative prices
3.  Distribution of food grains at affordable prices

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




86. Which of these methods can be used in
India to solve Industrial disputes?
1.   Decision by labor Unions
2.  Collective bargaining
3.  Worker’s participation in management

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  16    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    33    


Choose the correct answer using the codes below.
87. Securities and Exchange Board of India
(SEBI) regulates
1.   Money market
2.  Capital market
3.  Commodity market
4.  Futures market

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 4 only c)  1 only
d)  1, 2 and 3 only




88.Price rigging in stock market refers to
a)  Insider trading of stocks in securities markets
b)  Manipulation of securities prices so
as to inflate or depress their market price
c)  Speculative and high frequency
trading
d)  None of the above


89. Which of the following banking services are provided to the government by RBI?
1.   Maintaining and operating of deposit
accounts of the Central and State
Governments
2.  Receipts and collection of payments to the Central and State Governments.
3.  Making payments on behalf of the
Central and State Governments.
4.  Transfer of funds and remittance facilities to the Central and State Governments

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 4 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




90.Inflation in the country can be managed by
1.   Fiscal policy
2.  Monetary policy
3.  Supply management through imports

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




91. The practice of purchasing a currency in one market and selling it in another market is called as
a)  Spot trading
b)  Futures Trading c)  Arbitrage
d)  Speculative trading




92. The free radical theory of aging (FRTA) states that organisms age because cells accumulate free radical damage over time. Free radicals can be tackled by
1.   Taking food rich in antioxidants
2.  Taking high calories food to remain energetic throughout the day


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  17    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    33    
3.  Reducing the intake of watery and fibrous food

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 only
d)  1 and 3 only




93. When a transgene is introduced into the genome of an organism it can
1.   Prevent the expression of an existing native gene
2.  Enhance the expression of a native
gene

Which of the above is/are correct?

a)  1 only b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None


94. Bio-pesticides can be used for the control of
1.   Weeds
2.  Insects
3.  Pathogens

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




95. Sub-culturing is a process of
a)  Using different genetic material to preserve different traits of organisms
b)  Changing culture vessels containing fresh media from time to time to preserve tissues
c)  Growing genetically modified plants in laboratory
d)  None of the above




96. When a plant is introduced from an outside country ‘Quarantine’ is necessary because
1.   There is a risk of entry of disease in
the country via plants.
2.  Exotic species may come with the plants that can disrupt ecosystems.

Which of the above is/are correct?

a)  1 only b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None




97. Viruses can spread from host plant to other plants through
1.   Seeds
2.  Pollens
3.  Insect vectors
4.  Fungi

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  18    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    33    


98. Ozone layer is thicker at poles as compared to tropics. A possible reason is
a)  Lower solar insolation received at
poles to break ozone down
b)  Lower breakdown of ozone layer due to free radicals
c)  Greater albedo coming from the ice sheets at poles
d)  None of the above


99. Sea-level rise is projected to have negative impacts on
1.   Human settlements
2.  Tourism
3.  Freshwater supplies
4.  Fisheries
5.  Wetlands

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2, 3 and 4 only b)  2 and 4 only
c)  1, 3 and 5 only d)  All of the above




100.          Which of the following can help reduce global warming and its effects?
1.   Reducing the use of nitrogenous fertilizers in agriculture
2.  Increasing the vegetation cover
3.  Reducing urban heat islands

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  19    
    
