


    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    31                       




INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK PRELIMINARY EXAM - 2015

INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST - 31
GENERAL STUDIES
PAPER-I
Time Allowed: 2 Hours                                                                                              Maximum Marks: 200

INSTRUCTIONS
1.   IMMEDITELY AFTER THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE EXAMINATION, YOU SHOULD
CHECK THAT THIS TEST BOOKLET DOES NOT HAVE ANY UNPRINTED OR TORN OR MISSING PAGES OR ITEMS, ETC. IF SO, GET IT REPLACED BY A COMPLETE TEST BOOKLET.
2.  You have to enter your Roll Number on the Test Booklet in the Box provided alongside. DO NOT Write anything else on the Test Booklet.
4.  This  Test  Booklet  contains  100  items  (questions).  Each  item  is  printed  only  in  English.  Each  item comprises  four  responses  (answers).  You  will  select  the response  which  you  want  to mark  on the Answer Sheet. In case you feel that there is more than one correct response, mark the response which you consider the best. In any case, choose ONLY ONE response for each item.
5.  You have to mark all your responses ONLY on the separate Answer Sheet provided.  See directions in
the Answer Sheet.
6.  All items carry equal marks.

7.  Before you proceed to mark in the Answer Sheet the response to various items in the Test Booklet, you have  to  fill  in  some  particulars  in  the  Answer  Sheet  as  per  instructions  sent  to  you  with  your Admission Certificate.
8.  After you have completed filling in all your responses on the Answer Sheet and the examination has concluded, you should hand over to the Invigilator only the Answer Sheet. You are permitted to take away with you the Test Booklet.
9.  Sheets for rough work are appended in the Test Booklet at the end.
10.  Penalty for wrong answers :
THERE WILL BE PENALTY FOR WRONG ANSWERS MARKED BY A CANDIDATE IN THE OBJECTIVE TYPE QUESTION PAPERS.
(i)    There are four alternatives for the answer to every question. For each question for which a wrong answer has been given by the candidate, one-third of the marks assigned to that question will be deducted as penalty.
(ii)   If a candidate gives more than one answer, it will be treated as a wrong answer even if one of the given  answers  happens  to be correct  and there will be same  penalty  as above  to that question.
(iii)     If a question is left blank, i.e., no answer is given by the candidate, there will be no penalty for that question.


http://www.insightsonindia.com

INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST SERIES FOR CIVIL SERVICES PRELIMINARY EXAM 20




http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Page  1    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    31                       





1.   What is/are the similarities between phytoplankton in a pond ecosystem; and lichens in a terrestrial ecosystem?
1.   They both can prepare their own
food.
2.  They both are the pioneer species forming the pioneer community.
3.  They both are in a symbiotic relationship with some species in their respective ecosystem.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only d)  2 only




2.  Consider the following about Sickle Cell
Anaemia.
1.   It is a hereditary disease
2.  It spreads via air and water
3.  It leads to leads to jaundice and frequent ailments in children
4.  It can be prevented by increasing iron intake since childhood

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  3 and 4 only b)  1 and 2 only c)  1 and 3 only d)  2 and 4 only
3.  The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) recently signed a currency swap agreement with the Central Bank of Sri Lanka. This would help both the countries in avoiding
a)  Balance of payment and liquidity crisis
b)  Low Inflation in the economies
c)  Adverse trade balance between both nations
d)  Low cross-border capital inflows




4.  Which of these are methods of ex-site conservation?
1.   Cryopreservation
2.  Seed banks
3.  Field Gene banks
4.  Home gardens



Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  3 and 4 only b)  1 and 2 only
c)  2, 3 and 4 only d)  All of the above




5.  A tiger reserve is generally zoned into core, buffer and transition areas. In the Core area, which of these activities are NOT permitted in India?
1.   Tourism
2.  Mining
3.  Human habitation
4.  Industries




http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  2    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    31                       
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  2 and 4 only
c)  2, 3 and 4 only
d)  All of the above




6.  Susceptibility to extinction will be highest in species which
1.   have fixed migratory routes in fixed
seasons
2.  have a narrow range of habitat
3.  feed at lowest levels in the food web

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above


7.   Consider the following minerals and their uses.
1.   Mercury is used in making electric switches.
2.  Phosphorous is used in making medicines.
3.  Potassium and Silver can be used in
photography.
4.  Manganese can be used in making disinfectants.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  3 and 4 only b)  1 and 2 only
c)  2, 3 and 4 only
d)  All of the above



8.  Marine algae have been used as manure in many countries because
a)  they contain very high biomass as compared to their weight
b)  they are rich in nutrients
c)  they help in decomposing the detritus present in the farms
d)  they produce agar that is highly fertile and keeps the soil moisture intact




9.  How is social forestry different from agro-forestry?
1.   In agro-forestry, trees are grown instead of crops on farms.
2.  In social forestry, NGOs take responsibility for afforestation of arid and fallow lands.
3.  While the community owns the
resources in social forestry, agro- forestry produce is privately owned.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 only
d)  3 only


10. Consider the following statements about the water cycle.

Assertion (A): While evaporation is greater over the oceans, rainfall is greater over the land.

Reason (R): Trade winds carry moisture laden winds from the oceans to land.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  3    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    31                       
In the context of the statements above, which of these is true?

a)  A and R both are true, and R is the correct explanation for A.
b)  A and R both are true, and R is the
NOT the correct explanation for A. c)  A is correct, R is incorrect.
d)  A is incorrect, R is correct.




11. Consider the following functions of forests.
1.   Absorption of atmospheric gases
2.  Storage of minerals and water
3.  Storage and release of radiant energy

These functions fall under which of the following categories?

a)  Protective functions b)  Regulative functions c)  Productive Functions
d)  Reproductive Functions




12. Which of these processes may lead to a loss of nutrients from the soil?
1.   Nutrient Immobilization
2.  Mineralization
3.  Leaching
4.  Nitrification

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.
13. Which of the following is/are free-living nitrogen fixing bacteria present in the soil?
1.   Rhizobium
2.  Clostridium
3.  Azotobacter
4.  Pseduomonas

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 4 only
b)  2, 3, and 4 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  1, 2 and 3 only




14. Consider the following about
Mycorrhizae.
1.   It is a symbiotic relation of fungi with plant roots.
2.  It helps in better absorption of minerals from soil.
3.  It can form mutualistic relation with blue-green algae to improve water absorption in plants.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 only
d)  3 only

a)  1 and 4 only
b)  2, 3, and 4 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  1, 2 and 3 only

15. Certain plants use C4 pathway of photosynthesis instead of C3 generally used by plants. What difference does a C4 pathway make to the plants?
1.   It is a more efficient way of
photosynthesis.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  4    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    31                       
2.  Plants can survive in low moisture conditions.
3.  Nutrient need from soil is lowered.
4.  They can survive in high temperature conditions.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 4 only
d)  All of the above




16. Main inputs of phosphorous as a nutrient in soil come from
1.   Rainfall
2.  Phosphorous fixing bacteria
3.  Weathering of soil
4.  Atmospheric gas exchanges with soil

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 4 only
d)  All of the above




17. Only 50 per cent of the energy of the total incident solar radiation is available to producers for absorption. Why is the other 50 per cent unavailable?
1.   It is lost in respiration and
assimilation by first level organisms.
2.  It is absorbed by gases or reflected by clouds in the atmosphere.

Which of the above is/are correct?

a)  1 only
b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2 d)  None




18. Consider the following statements about critical link species in a forest
ecosystem.
1.   A forest ecosystem has only a few critical link species.
2.  Loss of critical link species has disproportionate impact on the ecosystem.
3.  Critical link species are always found
at the edge of ecosystems.
4.  Critical link species are also known as Keystone species.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 4 only d)  2 only




19. During PM’s recent visit to Seoul, it was announced that India and Korea will strengthen their historic connection by enhancing linkages of Korean people with Ayodhya. What explains the linkages?
a)  Queen Suriratna, a princess from Ayodhya had travelled to South Korea to marry King Kim Suro
b)  The land of Ayodhya was donated to the then King of South Korea as a goodwill gesture who later returned the favour by gifting the land back

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  5    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    31                       
c)  King Suro of South Korea helped the Ayodhyan army to deal with invaders from the North-western mountains
d)  All of the above




20.Consider the following about the
Amaravati, Andhra Pradesh.
1.   It was ruled by Satavahanas.
2.  Hinduism, Buddhism and Jainism have all flourished in the region.
3.  All major rock-cut architectural schools were born in this region.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above


21. Consider the following about Ken and
Betwa rivers.
1.   Both are tributaries of Yamuna.
2.  Both are major rivers of
Bundelkhand region.
3.  Both will be interlinked together as per a government decision.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only d)  2 only


22. Which of the functions relating to the Parliament are performed by the President?
1.   Summoning the Houses
2.  Proroguing the Houses
3.  Adjournment Sine dine
4.  Dissolving lower house
5.  Addressing both houses

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 4 and 5 only b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1, 2, 4 and 5 only
d)  All of the above




23. The representative of each Union territory in the Rajya Sabha are indirectly elected by
a)  Members of an electoral college
specially constituted for this purpose b)  Members of Legislative assemblies
c)  Members of Local constitutional bodies
d)  MPs, MLAs and ward councillors
jointly from a Union Territory


24. A Member of Parliament ceases to hold his seat if
1.   He owns and runs a private commercial firm
2.  He holds any office of Profit under the Union or State government
3.  He is removed from the political
party on whose ticket he was elected
4.  He is expelled from the house.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  2, 3 and 4 only b)  1 and 3 only
c)  2 and 4 only
d)  All of the above


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  6    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    31                       


c)  Montague Chelmsford Act, 1919 d)  Independence of India Act, 1947
25. The Speaker of Lok Sabha can be
removed on
1.   A resolution passed by majority of the membership of Lok Sabha
2.  A resolution passed by special majority in Lok Sabha
3.  An enquiry by the Supreme Court
4.  An order of the President

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 only
b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  1, 3 and 4 only




26. Apart from the Supreme Court of India, which of the following is/are authorities empowered to interpret the constitution?
1.   Chief Justice, High Court
2.  Speaker, Lok Sabha
3.  Chairman, Rajya Sabha

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 only
d)  All of the above




27. The Institution of Speaker and Deputy Speaker in India originated under the provisions of
a)  Charter Act 1891
b)  Morley-Minto Act, 1909




28. Rule of law in Article 14 of the
Constitution implies that
1.   The state cannot treat citizens differently with respect to the same law.
2.  The state cannot punish citizens
except for violating the law.
3.  The state cannot confer any special socio-economic privilege on any individual.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  2 only
d)  1 only




29. Consider the following about Estimates
Committee.
1.   It is exclusively a committee of the lower house.
2.  Chairman of this committee is
invariably from the ruling party.
3.  The committee is guided by Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  2 only
d)  1 only


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  7    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    31                       


30. Administration is held accountable to the legislature by which of the following
devices?
1.   Financial Committees of the
Parliament
2.  Committee on delegated legislation
3.  Committee on Business advisory
4.  Question hour and zero hour in the
Parliament

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only
b)  1, 2 and 4 only c)  2 and 4 only
d)  All of the above




31. For a no-confidence motion to be admitted in Lok Sabha
1.   Speaker must give consent to it.
2.  Support of at least 50 members is necessary.
3.  Leader of Opposition must lead the motion.
4.  Both houses of Parliament must be in session.
5.  Prior permission from the President
must be obtained.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only
b)  1, 2 and 5 only c)  2, 3 and 4 only d)  2 only
32. What is the meaning of “popular
sovereignty”?
a)  Views and preferences of the majority (popular) are considered sovereign.
b)  A nation is sovereign in all respects by virtue of the sovereignty of its resident citizens.
c)  An area can be declared sovereign by the wish of the people.
d)  People are the ultimate source of the authority of their government.




33. The Source of power of “judicial review”
in the constitution flows from
a)  The doctrine of separation of power between legislature and judiciary
b)  The authority of the Supreme Court
and High courts to issue writs
(Article 32 and 226)
c)  Article 13 of the Constitution d)  The Basic structure of the
Constitution




34. Consider the following about All-India services.
1.   Service conditions are determined by the President.
2.  Services can be abolished only by a
constitutional amendment.
3.  UPSC is responsible for appointments to the posts in All- India services.
4.  Members of All-India services cannot be removed from services by Prime
Minister alone.



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  8    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    31                       
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 4 only b)  3 only
c)  2, 3 and 4 only
d)  2 and 4 only




35. In the Budgetary process, arrange the following in correct order.
1.   Vote on account
2.  Bill sent to Upper House.
3.  General Discussion on the Bill.
4.  Bill referred to select committee.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a) 3142 b) 1423 c) 3412 d)  3421



36. Consider the following about the
Economic Survey.
1.   It is published by the Ministry of
Finance.
2.  It is presented along with the budget to the Lok Sabha.
3.  It is not presented to Rajya Sabha.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  3 only
c)  2 and 3 only d)  1 only
37. Consider a situation where the incumbent executive has been found guilty of financial irregularities based on a CAG report as examined by the Public Accounts Committee. The ultimate responsibility to take appropriate action on this report lies on?
a)  Prime Minister of India
b)  President of India c)  Parliament
d)  Supreme Court




38. The International North–South Transport Corridor will directly connect India with which of these countries?
1.   Russia
2.  Europe
3.  Central Asia
4.  Iran
5.  Azerbaijan

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  2, 3 and 5 only b)  1, 3 and 4 only c)  1 and 4 only
d)  All of the above




39. Consider the following about the project
SETI being led by Stephen Hawking?
1.   It will be a human space mission to search for extra terrestrial intelligence.
2.  The project will rely on sending decrypted electromagnetic messages in space.
3.  The project has been undertaken in
joint collaboration with NASA.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  9    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    31                       
4.  It is financial backed by the UK Government.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 only
b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 4 only
d)  None of the above




40.After the death of Aurangzeb in 1707, Delhi could no longer function as an effective centre. What can be the reason(s)?
1.   Mughal governors (subedars)
asserted their authority over Mughal
Kingdoms.
2.  Zamindars started establishing regional kingdoms.
3.  After his Death, British immediately adopted the policy of ‘Paramountcy’.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




41. The reason(s) behind Battle of Plassey between the Nawab of Bengal and the British was/were
1.   British denied stopping trade
relations with India
2.  Bengal Nawab did not accept
‘subsidiary alliance’ enforced by the
British.
3.  East India Company had started interfering in the political matters of Bengal.
4.  British did not pay appropriate
revenue to Bengal Nawab.
5.  East India Company did not stop fortification in Bengal even after the farman of Bengal Nawab.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 3 only b)  4 and 5 only
c)  3, 4 and 5 only d)  All of the above



42. Consider the following about Gandhian ideology?
1.   Gandhi was opposed to the existing state because it was forced and based on centralization of authority.
2.  As Per Gandhi, an all powerful state
impeded the progress of an individual in society.
3.  Gandhi held that ‘State’ represents violence in organized and concentrated form.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  10    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    31                       
43. Which of these is/are NOT principle(s)
of United Nations?
1.   Some sovereigns are more equal than others.
2.  Member nations have rights but no obligations.
3.  All members shall settle their
international disputes by peaceful means.
4.  All members shall settle their
national disputes by peaceful means.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.
Reason (R): Suffering is caused by Ignorance which is due to attachment, greed and delusion.

In the context of the statements above, which of these is true?

a)  A and R both are true, and R is the correct explanation for A.
b)  A and R both are true, and R is the
NOT the correct explanation for A. c)  A is correct, R is incorrect.
d)  A is incorrect, R is correct.

a)  1 only
b)  2 and 3 only c)  3 and 4 only
d)  1, 2 and 4 only



44. Which of the following concerning
Wodeyar Dynasty is incorrect?
a)  After Tipu Sultan was killed in the Battle of Seringapatam, Mysore was placed under Wodeyars – the former ruling dynasty.
b)  The kingdom was incorporated into the Dominion of India after its independence from British rule.
c)  Under British rule, Wodeyar Dynasty was exempted from Subsidiary Alliance.
d)  None of the above




45. Consider the following statements about the teachings of Buddha.

Assertion (A): Every living being is in the state of suffering and none is exception to this.

46. In Jainism, Abhayadana was related with
a)  Feeding the poor and homeless
b)  Imparting knowledge to the ignorant c)  Giving protection to someone under
threat
d)  Selfless service given by the student to the teacher




47. In the later Vedic period, Bhagadudha was
a)  a local priest who performed sacrifices for Brahmin households
b)  an officer responsible for collection of taxes
c)  the village guard appointed by the
monarchy
d)  a jurist who settled civil disputes in the village



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  11    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    31                       
48. Gandhi suspended which of these movements calling it a ‘Himalayan Blunder’?
a)  Non-cooperation movement
b)  Satyagraha movement against
Rowlatt Act
c)  Quit India movement
d)  Civil Disobedience Movement




49. Consider the following statements about
Vaishnavism.

Assertion (A): Its spread contributed to the growth of regional literature.

Reason (R): It was adopted and followed by all then contemporary regional poets and prose writers.

In the context of the statements above, which of these is true?

a)  A and R both are true, and R is the correct explanation for A.
b)  A and R both are true, and R is the NOT
the correct explanation for A. c)  A is correct, R is incorrect.
d)  A is incorrect, R is correct.




50. The book 'One Part Woman' or Madhurobhagan was recently in news. Why?
a)  Its writer has won the SAARC Literary Award recently.
b)  The book was appreciated recently by the President of India for its depth
on the issues afflicting transgender in
India.
c)  It is the first Indian book written on the plight of transgender in ancient India.
d)  None of the above




51. NASA’s New Horizons spacecraft was in news recently because
a)  It is the first spacecraft to successfully fly by Pluto.
b)  It is first spacecraft to land safely on an asteroid orbiting the Sun.
c)  It recently escaped the solar system
to reach Kuiper belt.
d)  It spotted an extremely dwarf black hole in the solar system.



52. The “rarest of the rare” principle in handing out the death penalty was given by the Supreme Court in which case?
a)  Shatrughan Chauhan vs Union of
India
b)  Bachan Singh vs State of Punjab c)  Mithu vs State of Punjab
d)  Ladani vs Union of India




53. Consider the following about the BRICS New Development Bank.
1.   Agreement for establishing NDB was
made at Fortaleza.
2.  Bank will be headquartered in
Shanghai.
3.  Bank’s first President will be Kundapur Vaman Kamath from India.
4.  All member nations will have an
equal say in Bank’s management.
5.  All member nations will contribute equally to Bank’s start-up capital.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  12    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    31                       
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 , 4 and 5 only b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1, 2, 3 and 4 only
d)  All of the above




54. According to a survey of trust in national governments for 2014 conducted by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), India has secured second position amongst 40 countries. According to the survey change in trust levels can be affected by?
1.   Economic outlook
2.  Disasters
3.  Major scandals
4.  Election results

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 4 only b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1, 2 and 3 only d)  All of the above




55. You are a District Magistrate. You denied allotting a huge tender to an influential local businessman. To seek revenge, he is posting defamatory and offensive speeches against you on the internet. Which legal recourse can you take against him?
a)  Approach the State high court
accusing the businessman of abusing freedom of speech given under Article 19
b)  File a case in local police station under Section 66A of the Information Technology Act
c)  File a case with the local police
station under the IPC Section
499/500
d)  Both (b) and (c)




56. The 12th International Symposium on Antarctic Earth Sciences (ISAES) was recently inaugurated at a function in Goa. The theme(s) of the symposium is/are
1.   Conservation strategies for
Antarctica
2.  Plate movements in Antarctica
3.  Human habitation in Antarctica

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only d)  2 only




57. As per the terms arrived at in the Iran
Nuclear Deal
1.   Iran will not enrich any Uranium.
2.  Iran will be subject to oversight from
US Nuclear authorities.
3.  All previous nuclear installations will be shutdown in a period of time.
4.  Iran will not be able to share nuclear technology with any nation.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 4 only

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  13    
    



    




b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  None of the above
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    31                       


60.The government has decided to set up a trade facilitation council. Consider the following with reference to it.
1.   The council will be chaired by the
Union Commerce and Industry

58. The Defence Acquisition Council (DAC) that approves major defence related projects consist of
1.   Minister of State for Defence
2.  Cabinet Secretary
3.  Chiefs of Army, Navy and Air Staff
4.  Defence Secretary
5.  Director, Intelligence Bureau
6.  Director, RAW
7.   National Security Advisor

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2, 5, 6 and 7 only b)  1, 3 and 4 only
c)  2, 3, 4 and 7 only d)  All of the above




59. While driving in an urban area, you find out that the Air Quality Index (AQI) for the area is “X” coloured. Air of this quality may cause respiratory impact even on healthy people, and serious health impacts on people with lung/heart disease. Which colour is “X” most likely to be?
a)  Light Pink b)  Yellow
c)  Maroon
d)  Blue
Minister.
2.  It will be made a sub-organ of
SAARC.
3.  It will provide a single window mechanism for clearance of major exports and imports.
4.  It will include Ministers from states also.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 4 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  None of the above




61. Ottapayam situated in Kerala was recently in news. Why?
a)  India’s first defence industrial park
will be situated here.
b)  India’s biggest disabled friendly IT Park will be constructed here supported entirely by World Bank.
c)  The first NIMZ in South India will be built here.
d)  It will host the biggest International Environmental Conservation Conference held in India till date.








http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  14    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    31                       
62. Consider the following with reference to the National Pharmaceutical Pricing Policy (NPPP).
1.   Pharmaceutical companies cannot
revise the cost of drugs under the policy without permission from the National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority.
2.  It is applicable to all drugs on the national list on life-saving medicines.
3.  Drug pricing in the policy is fixed based on a formula.

Which of the above is/are correct?

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




63. A geographical indication (GI) is a name or sign used on certain products which corresponds to a specific geographical location or origin. Which of these are
GIs in India?
1.   Mysore Silk
2.  Darjeeling Tea
3.  Kancheepuram Saree
4.  Thanjavur Paintings

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 4 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  1, 2 and 4 only
64. Jansankhya Sthirata Kosh” (JSK) or the National Population Stabilisation Fund is under
a)  Ministry of Planning
b)  Ministry of Health and Family welfare
c)  Ministry of Statistics and Program
implementation
d)  None of the above




65. As per the Antarctica treaty
1.   No commercial activity is allowed in
Antarctica.
2.  Each member nation will adopt one of Antarctica’s endangered species.
3.  All claims to the Antarctica territory are void.
4.  Any scientific study needs the
approval of Scientific Committee on
Antarctic Research (SCAR).

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  2 and 4 only
c)  1, 3 and 4 only d)  All of the above




66. As compared to the unamended principal land Acquisition act passed in
2013, the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement (Amendment) Ordinance, 2015 relaxes provisions relating to which of the following categories?
1.   Social Impact assessment



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  15    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    31                       
2.  Restrictions on acquisition of multi- cropped land
3.  Consent for public private partnerships (PPPs) projects

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




67. Consider the following about the Stone chariot at Vittala Temple, Hampi.
1.   It is made of granite.
2.  An image of Garuda was originally enshrined within its sanctum.
3.  It is a monolithic structure.
4.  Its base platform is carved with mythical battle scenes.
5.  Two horses are positioned before the
chariot as if they are pulling it.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  2, 3 and 5 only
b)  1, 2, 3 and 4 only c)  1, 2 and 4 only
d)  1, 3 and 5 only




68. Consider the following about Sun
Temple, Konark.
1.   It is an example of Kalinga architecture.
2.  Temple was designed as a gigantic
chariot of Sun God.
3.  The alignment of the Sun Temple is on the east-west direction.
4.  It is a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
5.  The temple was originally built at the mouth of the river Chandrabhaga.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  2, 3 and 5 only
b)  1, 2, 3 and 4 only c)  1, 4 and 5 only
d)  All of the above


69. The Basilica of Bom Jesus located in Goa, India is an important cultural heritage because
a)  It is the oldest church in World.
b)  It contains the mortal remains of St.
Francis.
c)  It was constructed jointly by all colonial powers that came to India.
d)  While the exterior is baroque architecture, interior is highly contrastingly Hindu and Mughal architecture which is nowhere found in the world.


70. The famous Padmapani painting in the
Ajanta Caves depicts
a)  a bodhisattva with a blue lotus flower sitting among a crowd of devotees
b)  a feminine Buddhist Sangha being ordained by Gautama Buddha
c)  Buddha’s Mahaparinirvana being witnessed by his very close disciples
d)  Buddha conquering Mara of all
worldly passions


71. Cloudbursts can be caused by
1.   Excess of electrostatic induction in the clouds
2.  High jet stream velocity in the upper
atmosphere

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  16    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    31                       
3.  Mixing of warm air parcel with cooler air resulting in sudden condensation

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above


72. The Karnataka High Court has asked the
Karnataka Forest department to
consider banning eucalyptus plantations across the state. Why?
a)  It is not natural to the Karnataka
region and is affecting the biodiversity of the region.
b)  Tall eucalyptus trees do not allow
sufficient sunlight and nutrition to other forest trees.
c)  Large area of forest was already
replaced with monoculture eucalyptus and planting more trees would affect the species diversity of the region.
d)  The eucalyptus tree consumes a lot of water for its growth depleting groundwater levels.


73. Consider the following about GSLV Mark III developed by ISRO.
1.   It features an Indian cryogenic technology.
2.  It can launch communication satellites in space.
3.  It is presently being used for
commercial satellite launches by
ISRO.
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above


74. Presently space activities in India are guided by
1.   Satellite Communications Policy,
2000
2.  International Agreements
3.  Revised Remote Sensing Policy 2011

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above


75. What is/are the benefit(s) of having a separate and unified National Renewable Energy Act (NERA)?
1.   The Ministry of New and renewable energy need not depend on other ministries for necessary clearances.
2.  The law will clarify institutional mechanisms related with financing, monitoring, planning and support for renewable energy generation.

Which of the above is/are correct?

a)  1 only b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2 d)  None




http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  17    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    31                       
76. The “collective self-defence” doctrine presently being pushed by the Japanese government means
a)  Japan is not in favour of independent
armies for all nations
b)  Japan may wish to send troops abroad to rescue allies under attack
c)  Japan will intervene constructively in all international negotiations that have significant geo-strategic implications
d)  Japan will make military conscription compulsory for its citizens in larger national interest


77. Why fossils are generally found in low- lying areas?
a)  Faulting and folding of earth’s crust puts low-lying areas under very high temperature and pressure
b)  Low-lying areas are at a higher temperature than areas of higher altitude, hence more organic matter is converted to fossil fuels
c)  Deposition of sediments is carried by
rivers that also carry organic matter d)  Volcanic magma spreads only on
low-lying areas which is a significant
source of fossils
b)  Fold Mountains will be created in both the cases.
c)  Fold Mountains may be created in case 1 and volcanic mountains in case 2.
d)  Volcanic Mountains may be created in case 1 and Fold Mountains in case
2.


79. Most of the rivers in Africa cannot be navigated fully. Why?
a)  They follow highly tortuous and narrow beds.
b)  A large number of rivers flow through narrow rift valleys.
c)  They form waterfalls.
d)  River flow in most of the rivers is too less to become navigable.



80.Atmosphere is heated mainly from
1.   Solar insolation reflected back to upper troposphere by clouds
2.  Convection from heated surface of the earth
3.  Direct solar radiation

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.


78. Consider two geo-morphological cases.
1.   A continental plate colliding with an oceanic plate and the latter subsiding below the former.
2.  Two continental plates colliding.

Which of these outcomes is possible in both the cases?

a)  Volcanic mountains may be created in both the cases.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only d)  2 only




81. Consider the following about Katabatic winds.
1.   They are generally experienced during winter.
2.  They blow adjacent to Highlands.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  18    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    31                       


3.  These winds may increase the temperature and pressure of an area.
4.  The winds are very dry.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 4 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




82. How are tides a great aid in shipping and navigation?
1.   High tide increases the depth of water near the coasts.
2.  They take away the mud brought by rivers preventing silting of harbours.
3.  They make the coastline indented
which supports natural harbours.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




83. Some ports of even Polar Regions remain ice-free during winter. This is because of the
a)  Influence of Warm currents across the coasts
b)  Global warming and its effect on albedo of earth
c)  High salt content in these oceans
that prevent freezing and thawing d)  Dense fog and mist in these regions
that trap solar heat
84. Consider the following statements.
1.   All the nine planets (including Pluto) of the solar system revolve around the Sun in counter-clockwise direction.
2.  All planets in the solar system rotate in the same direction in which they revolve.

Which of the above is/are true?

a)  1 only b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None




85. Why is it that we always see one side of the moon while the other side always remains away from us?
a)  Relative positions of Moon in Earth’s
orbit around the Sun form a circle.
b)  Moon takes the same time to revolve around the earth and rotate on its own axis.
c)  Frequent eclipsing of the Moon by
the Sun and other planets d)  None of the above




86. Consider the following about latitudes and longitudes.
1.   Equator and Prime meridian are the largest circles that can be drawn on earth.
2.  All meridians are of equal length.
3.  Time zone of a place is determined both by longitude and latitude.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  19    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    31                       
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only d)  2 only




87. Vertical sun rays have a greater heating effect as compared to oblique rays because
1.   They cover shorter distance in
atmosphere to reach earth.
2.  They are spread over a larger area on earth.

Which of the above is/are correct?

a)  1 only b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None






88.Who decides what images appear in the currency notes that are printed by Reserve Bank of India for money supply in the economy?
a)  Union Minister of Finance b)  RBI Governor
c)  Director-General of Archaeological
Survey of India
d)  None of the above




89. Giffen goods are those goods that
a)  may show an inverse relationship of quantity consumed with rising
consumer income
b)  may show an unclear relationship of quantity consumed with rising consumer income
c)  are consumed in more quantity
because they are in greater demand in public
d)  are in greater demand because they
are in scarcity




90.In Economic theory and policy making,
‘Consumer Welfare’ is deemed to be maximized when
a)  every individual is able to purchase goods at the exact market price they were willing to pay
b)  a large number of individuals are
able to purchase goods at a much lower market price that what they were willing to pay
c)  all individuals attain an ideal state of having no demand for any more goods and services
d)  they are able to purchase goods beyond their means of earning




91. Real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of a country will rise if
1.   There is high inflation in the economy but no growth in production
2.  There is high growth in production but no inflation in the economy
3.  There is very little growth in production but heavy deflation in the economy
4.  There is very little deflation in the
economy but no growth in production

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  20    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    31                       
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 4 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only d)  2 and 4 only


92. How are employment and interest rates related in an economy?
a)  Generally higher interest rates impede a higher growth in employment numbers.
b)  Generally lower interest rates impede a higher growth in employment numbers.
c)  There is no relationship of interest rate and employment in an economy.
d)  Depending on the type of economy, any of the statements (a), (b) or (c) can be true.


93. The Reserve Bank of India draws its authority from
1.   Constitution of India
2.  Parliamentary Law
3.  Conventions and Customs
4.  Executive Council of Ministers

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 4 only b)  2 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  1, 2 and 3 only



94. Sterilization operation is undertaken by the Central bank of a country to prevent a shock mainly to the
a)  Money supply in the economy
b)  Foreign Exchange reserves c)  Bank deposits of Public
d)  Revenues of Government


95. The situation of liquidity trap occurs in the economy
1.   When foreign exchange reserves dry
up.
2.  When Bank deposits are low so as to cause a Bank default on its customers
3.  When interest rates are very low so that everyone anticipates a rise in interest rates
4.  When people don’t wish to hold any bonds

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 4 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only d)  3 and 4 only


96. The main objective(s) of the Public
Distribution System (PDS) was/were to
1.   Ensure optimum export of agricultural commodities
2.  To prevent any import of agricultural produce
3.  To ensure food security
4.  To ensure healthy meals are taken by each and every family in India

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 4 only b)  2 and 3 only
c)  3 only
d)  3 and 4 only


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  21    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    31                       


b)  GDP structure is changing to favour the Services sector more than the
97. Consider the following statements.

Assertion (A): Devaluation of currency may lead to improvement in trade balance.

Reason (R): Devaluation of currency leads to more competitive export prices.

In the context of the statements above, which of these is true?

a)  A and R both are true, and R is the correct explanation for A.
b)  A and R both are true, and R is the
NOT the correct explanation for A. c)  A is correct, R is incorrect.
d)  A is incorrect, R is correct.




98. In which of the following situations an expansion in the money supply may not lead to inflation?
1.   When economy is operating at a much lower level of production than its capacity
2.  When supply of goods meets the demands posed by the extra money supply

Which of the above is/are correct?

a)  1 only b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None




99. A country will NOT develop economically if
a)  Increasingly larger share of the GDP
is coming from the Primary sector
industrial sector
c)  Foreign capital inflows in the economy are not as strong as domestic investment
d)  Financial sector in the country is
becoming increasingly globalized and risky




100.          With reference to The Energy and Resources Institute, consider the following statements:
1.   It was formerly known as Tata
Energy Research Institute
2.  It is an autonomous research institution which works under the Ministry of Renewable and Non- Renewable Energy Sources, Gvernment of India

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 Only b)  2 Only c)  Both
d)  None






    

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  22    
    
