                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  


1.   Solution: d)

The first economic policy of the country 1948 - major highlights of the policy are given below:

    India will be a mixed economy.
    Some of the important industries were put under the Central List such as coal, power, railways, civil aviation, arms and ammunition, defence, etc.
    Some other industries (usually of medium category) were put under a State
List such as paper, medicines, textiles, cycles, rickshaws, two-wheelers, etc.
    Rest of the industries (not covered by either the central or the State Lists) were left open for private sector investment —with many of them having the provision of compulsory licensing.






2.   Solution: a)

http://www.cci.gov.in/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=12

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Competition_Commission_of_India




3.   Solution: d)

Basically, in 1990 and 1991, there were several inter-connected events which were growing unfavourable for the Indian economy.

    Due to the Gulf War (1990–91), the higher oil prices were fastly23 depleting
India’s foreign reserves.
    Sharp decline in the private remittances from the overseas Indian workers in the wake of the Gulf War, specially from the Gulf region.
    Inflation peaking at nearly 17 per cent.
    The gross fiscal deficit of the central government reaching 8.4 per cent of the
GDP.
    By the month of June 1991, India’s foreign exchange had declined to just two weeks of import coverage.






4.   Solution: a)


http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 1
                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  


Disinvestment is a process of selling government equities in public sector enterprises. Disinvestment in India is seen connected to three major inter-related areas, namely—

    A tool of public sector reforms
    A part of the economic reforms started mid-1991. It has to be done as a complementary part of the ‘de-reservation of industries’.
    Initially motivated by the need to raise resources for the budgetary allocations.

The approach towards public sector reforms in India has been much more cautious than that of the other developing countries. India did not follow the radical solution to it—under which outright privatisation of commercially viable PSUs is done and of the unviable ones is completely closed.




5.   Solution: a)

Disinvestment started in India with a high political caution—in a symbolic way known as the ‘token’ disinvestment. The general policy was to sell the shares of the PSUs maximum upto the 49 per cent (i.e. maintaining government ownership of the companies). But in practice, shares were sold to the tune of 5 –10 per cent only.

This phase of disinvestment though brought some extra funds to the government (which were used to fill up the fiscal deficit considering the proceeds as the ‘capital receipts’) it could not initiate any new element to the PSUs which could enhance their efficiency.

It remained the major criticism of this type of disinvestment, and the experts around the world started suggesting the Government to go for it in the way the ownership could be transferred from the government to the private sector.




6.   Solution: a)

The present disinvestment policy is based on the main ideology that:

    Citizens have every right to own part of the shares of Public Sector
Undertakings
    Public Sector Undertakings are the wealth of the Nation and this wealth should rest in the hands of the people, and
    While pursuing disinvestment, Government has to retain majority
shareholding, i.e. at least 51% and management control of the PSUs.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 2
                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  


The action plan for disinvestment in profit making government companies is:

    Already listed profitable PUSs (not meeting mandatory shareholding of 10%) are to be made compliant by ‘Offer for Sale’ by Government or by the PSUs through issue of fresh shares or a combination of both;
    Unlisted PSUs with no accumulated losses and having earned net profit in three preceding consecutive years are to be listed;
    Follow-on public offers would be considered taking into consideration the needs for capital investment of PSUs, on a case by case basis, and Government could simultaneously or independently offer a portion of its equity shareholding;
    In all cases of disinvestment, the Government would retain at least 51%
equity and the management control.




7.   Solution: a)

In simple words Gross Capital Formation is Investment. When people save, they
tend to invest. The percentage of the investment made each year out of the total GDP
is called  ross Capital Formation.
So, Rate of Gross Capital Formation is arrived as follows: Rate of Capital Formation
= (Investments /GDP) X 100

     The importance of the Gross Capital formation lies in the fact that this is that part of GDP which helps in the growth of the GDP itself. This is a must for achieving high rate of production, capital formation, changes in production techniques and changing in the outlook of the people themselves.

     To achieve, the Optimum rate of economic growth, the rate of capital formation should be above 40%. In India, the gross capital formation for the year of 2009-10 was 36.5% of the GDP. It was composed of 9.2% in Public Sector and 24.9% in Private sector. The investment from the Household sector was 11.7%. Investment from the corporate sector was 13.2%.




8.   Solution: d)

FDI is prohibited under Government as well as Automatic Route for the following sectors:

   Retail Trading

   Atomic Energy

http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 3
                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  


   Lottery Business

   Gambling and Betting

   Housing and Real Estate business

   Agriculture (excluding Floriculture, Horticulture, Development of Seeds, Animal Husbandry, Pisciculture and Cultivation of Vegetables, Mushrooms etc. under controlled conditions and services related to agro and allied sectors).

   Plantations (Other than Tea plantations).







9.   Solution: d)

FDI up to 100% is allowed under the automatic route in all activities/sectors except the following which require prior approval of the Government:

   Activities/items that require an Industrial License;

   Proposals in which the foreign collaborator has an existing financial /
technical collaboration in India in the 'same' field,

   Proposals for acquisition of shares in an existing Indian company in: Financial services sector and where Securities & Exchange Board of India (Substantial Acquisition of Shares and Takeovers ) Regulations, 1997 is attracted;

   All proposals falling outside notified sectoral policy/caps or under sectors in which FDI is not permitted.

FDI in sectors/activities to the extent permitted under automatic route does not require any prior approval either by the Government or RBI. The investors are only required to notify the Regional office concerned of RBI within 30 days of receipt of inward remittances and file the required documents with that office within 30 days
of issue of shares to foreign investors.













http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 4
                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  


10. Solution: c)

FDI in activities not covered under the automatic route requires prior Governme nt approval and are considered by the Foreign Investment Promotion Board (FIPB), Ministry of Finance. Application can be made in Form FC-IL; Plain paper applications carrying all relevant details are also accepted. No fee is payable.

General permission of RBI under FEMA.

Indian companies having foreign investment approval through FIPB route do not require any further clearance from RBI for receiving inward remittance and issue of shares to the foreign investors. The companies are required to notify the concerned Regional office of the RBI of receipt of inward remittances within 30 days of such receipt and within 30 days of issue of shares to the foreign investors or NRIs.




11. Solution: a)




12. Solution: d)







13. Solution: b)




14. Solution: a)




15. Solution: c)




16. Solution: c)




17. Solution: b)

http://www.thehindu.com/business/Economy/economic-survey-projects-worth-
rs-88-lakh-crore-stalled/article6941227.ece?ref=sliderNews




http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 5
                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  




18. Solution: a)

http://www.thehindu.com/business/Economy/rs-377-lakh-crore-subsidy-reaches-
only-very-few/article6941195.ece?ref=sliderNews







19. Solution: d)

In the aftermath of the global financial crisis in 2008, sovereign debt levels started to mount. The revelation that the fiscal deficit in Greece was much higher than stated earlier set off serious concerns in early 2010 about the sustainability of the debt. The downgrade of ratings led to a spiral of rising bond yields and further downgrade of government debt of other peripheral eurozone economies as well, that had high public debt or a build-up of bank lending or both.

Concerns intensified in early 2010 as cross-border holdings of sovereign debt and exposure of banks came to light. The financial markets quickly transmitted the shocks which not only led to a sharp rise in credit default swap (CDS) spreads but later impacted capital flows elsewhere.

    The underlying weaknesses of the zone have made it difficult to resolve the crisis
    The eurozone lacks a single fiscal authority capable of strict enforcement;
    Economies with different levels of competitiveness (and fiscal positions) have a single currency;
    These economies cannot adjust through a depreciation of the currency;
    There is no lender of last resort, i.e. a full-fledged central bank (as is RBI in
India and other economies).







20. Solution: a)

The process of globalization has been marked by a rising share of exports (as also imports) that reached 27.9 per cent for the world as a whole in 2010, with some countries showing much higher dependence of exports. The Database of the World
Bank show that the so called East Asian Miracle Economies was that an export-led,




http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 6
                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  


investment-fuelled strategy propelled growth and helped them acquire manufacturing capabilities.

This strategy was supported by a favourable exchange rate, cheap credit, and relatively low wages which helped to gain competitive advantage. Global dema nd for goods, particularly in the advanced markets, lent support to this growth strategy. As a result, these economies moved up the value chain in manufacturing.




21. Solution: b)

India’ energy dependence on imported energy sources, appears modest at 25.7 per cent in terms of total energy usage. (World Bank Database). However, this masks the fact that around 80 per cent of the crude oil consumed is imported, whereas the bulk of coal is domestically produced. Even with respect to coal, the country i s importing on the margin to meet domestic demand. On the other side, there is a large fraction
of population that has little or no access to commercial sources of energy and depends on traditional sources.

Rise in the price of oil in international markets has been the main source of high current account deficit. High international prices of fossil fuels also result in a higher import bill, which either gets passed on to the consumers, or results in higher subsidy thereby affecting fiscal health. That apart, the growing tensions in many oil-
producing economies are a source of vulnerability for the energy security of India. In this one area, the strategic advantage for India would lie in diversifying its energy sources.




22. Solution: d)

Organised Indian Money Market - Present since independence, its real development took place after the year 1985. Today there are eight instruments or components of the Indian money market especially designed to fulfill the short-term fund requirements of the different categories of the individuals, institutions or the firms and companies:

    Treasury Bills
    Call Money Market
    Certificate of Deposit
    Commercial Bills
    Commercial Papers
    Mutual Funds


http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 7
                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  


    Repo and Reverse Repo Markets.
    Cash Management Bill

Share market is part of the Capital market, not money market.




23. Solution: d)

At present Indian financial market has a number of regulators, precisely eleven— RBI, SEBI, FMC, NABARD, IRDA, SIDBI, NHB, SFCs, LDBI, CLB and Registrar of Cooperative Societies.

The Narasimhan Committee on Financial System (1991) has made a strong case for a single regulator for banks, financial institutions and the non-banking financial institutions in India.

Meanwhile, the Justice B N Srikrishna headed Financial Sector Legislative Reforms Commission (FSLRC) handed over its report end-March 2013 – in which it recommended that this would be replaced by a horizontal structure whereby the basic regulatory and monitoring functions of all areas would be done by a Unified Financial Agency (UFA).




24. Solution: a)

For growth to take place, investments are required in the form of productive assets. Such investments are long-term in nature. Funds for long-term purposes are raised either through borrowings from the banks, or the financial institutions, or through the security market by issuing shares or debentures.

Such funds are supplied by the long-term financial market, i.e. the capital market and the firms or the productive assets are set up in an economy. But only the setting up of firms does not guarantee production as these firms keep facing fund mismatches in the process of continued production.

There is another required segment of financial market which could supply timely funds to these firms so that they could continue their production process. Such funds are required usually for a short period (days, fortnights, few months) of time and
thus are considered as their working capital requirements. The segment of financial
market which caters to the short-term requirements of such funds for the enterprises is known as the money market or the working capital market of the economy.





http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 8
                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  




25. Solution: d)

Repos allow the banks and the financial institutions to borrow money from the RBI for the short-term (by selling Government Securities to the RBI). In reverse repos, the banks and financial institutions purchase Government securities from the RBI (basically here the RBI is borrowing from the banks and the financial institutions).
All the Government securities are dated and t he interest for the repo or reverse repo transactions are announced by the RBI from time to time.

The provision of repos and the reverse repos have been able to serve the liquidity evenness in the economy as the banks are able to get the required amount of funds out of it, and they can park surplus dle funds through it. These instruments have emerged as important tools in the management of the monetary and credit policy in the recent years.




26. Solution: a)

The call money market is an important segment of the money market where uncollateralized borrowing and lending of funds take place on overnight basis. Participants in the call money market in India currently include scheduled commercial banks (SCBs)- excluding regional rural banks), cooperative banks (other than land development banks), and primary dealers, both as borrowers and lenders. Prudential limits, in respect of both outstanding borrowing and lending transactions in the call money market for each of these entities, are specified by the RBI.




27. Solution: c)

OMOs are conducted by the RBI via the sale/purchase of government securities (G - Sec) to/from the market with the primary aim of modulating rupee liquidity conditions in the market. OMOs are an effective quantitative policy tool in the armoury of the RBI, but are constrained by the stock of government securities available with it at a point in time.




28. Solution: d)

http://www.goodreturns.in/classroom/2013/07/what-are-open-market-operation-
omos-191708.html


http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                         Page 9
                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  


OMOs are not related to Bank rate in any way since OMOs essentially depends on how much securities RBI is issuing/purchasing,  and how much the public is selling/purchasing.

But, if bank rates are very low and there is a lot of money supply in the economy, the effectiveness of the OMOs will reduce.

Similarly fiscal deficit too is not related to OMOs. But if there is high fiscal deficit, OMOs can hardly control inflation.




29. Solution: a)

Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) is the primary instrument of Reserve Bank of India for modulating liquidity and transmitting interest rate signals to the market. It refers to the difference between the two key rates viz. repo rate and reverse repo rate. Informally, Liquidity Adjustment Facility is also known as Liquidity Corridor.

Under Repo, the banks borrow money from RBI to meet short term needs by putting government securities (G-secs) as collateral. Under Reverse Repo, RBI borrows money from banks by lending securities. While repo injects liquidity into the system, the Reverse repo absorbs the liquidity from the system. RBI only announces Repo Rate. The Reverse Repo Rate is linked to Repo Rate and is 100 basis points (1%) below repo rate.  RBI makes decision regarding Repo Rate on the basis of prevalent market conditions and relevant factors.




30. Solution: b)

http://www.arthapedia.in/index.php?title=Marginal_Standing_Facility




31. Solution: a)

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exchange-traded_fund\




32. Solution: c)

A non-banking financial company (NBFC) is a company registered under the Companies Act, 1956 and is engaged in the business of loans and advances, acquisition of shares/ stock/ bonds/ debentures/ securities issued by government
or local authority or other securities of like marketable nature, leasing, hire -

http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 10
                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  


purchase, insurance business, chit business, but does not include any institution whose principal business is that of agriculture activity, industrial activity, sale/purchase/construction of immovable property.

A non-banking institution which is a company and which has its principal business of receiving deposits under any scheme or arrangement or any other manner, or lending in any manner is also a non-banking financial company (residuary non- banking company i.e. RNBC).

NBFCs are doing functions akin to that of banks, however there are a few differences:

    An NBFC cannot accept demand deposits (which are payable on demand), like the savings and current accounts.
    It is not a part of the payment and settlement system and as such cannot issue cheques to its customers




33. Solution: d)

RBI is the Central bank of India and performs these functions and fulfils the following roles:

    It is the issuing agency of the currency and coins other than rupee one currency and coin (which are issued by the Ministry of Finance itself with the signature of the Revenue Secretary on the note).
    Distributing agent for the currency and coins issued by the Government.
    Banker of the Government.
    Bank of the banks/Bank of the last resort.
    Announces the credit and monetary policy for the economy.
    Stabilising the rate of inflation.
    Stabilising the exchange rate of rupee.
    Keeper of the foreign currency reserves.
    Agent of the Government of India in the IMF.
    Performing a variety of developmental and promotional functions under which it did set up institutions like IDBI, SIDBI, NABARD, NHB, etc.




34. Solution: d)

Banks in India are required to hold a certain proportion of their deposits in the
form of cash.  However, actually Banks  don’t hold these as cash with themselves,


http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 11
                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  


but deposit such case with Reserve Bank of India (RBI) / currency chests, which is considered as  equivalent to holding cash with RBI. This minimum ratio (that is the part of the total deposits  to be held as cash) is stipulated by the RBI and is known as the CRR or  Cash Reserve Ratio.

Thus, When a bank’s deposits increase by Rs100, and if the cash reserve ratio is 6%, the banks will have to hold additional Rs 6 with  RBI and Bank will be able to use only Rs 94 for investments and lending / credit purpose. Therefore,  higher the  ratio (i.e. CRR), the lower is the amount that banks will be able to  use for lending and investment.  This power of RBI to reduce the lendable amount by increasing the
CRR,  makes it an instrument in the hands of a central bank through which it can control the amount that banks lend.  Thus, it is a tool used by RBI to control liquidity in the banking system.






35. Solution: a)

The statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) is the ratio (fixed by the RBI) of the total deposits of a bank which is to be maintained by the bank with itself in non-cash form prescribed by the Government.

The ratio of liquid assets to demand and time liabilities is known as Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR).  RBI is empowered to increase this ratio up to 40%.  An increase in SLR  also restrict the bank’s leverage position to pump more money into the economy.




36. Solution: d)

Bank Rate is the rate at which central bank of the country  (in India it is RBI)  allows finance to commercial banks. Bank Rate is a tool, which central bank  uses for short- term purposes. Any upward revision in Bank Rate by central bank is an indication that banks should also increase deposit rates as well as Base Rate / Benchmark
Prime Lending Rate.  Thus any revision in the Bank rate indicates that it is likely that interest rates on your deposits are likely to either go up or go down,  and it can also indicate  an increase or decrease in your EMI.

The clients who borrow through this route are the GoI, State governments, Banks, Financial Institutions, Co-operative Banks, NBFCs, etc. The rate has direct impact on




http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 12
                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  


the long-term lending activities of the concerned lending bodies operating in the
Indian financial system.




37. Solution: d)

The impact of CRR, SLR and bank rate has already been explained in some o f the explanations in previous questions.

For Reverse Repo rate - It is the rate of interest the RBI pays to its clients who offer short term loan to it.

It is reverse of the repo rate and this was started in November 1996 as part of Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) by the RBI. In practice, financial institutions operating in India park their surplus funds with the RBI for short-term period and earn money. It has a direct bearing on the interest rates charged by the banks and the financial institutions on their different forms of loans.

This tool was utilised by the RBI in the wake of over money supply with the Indian banks and lower loan disbursal to serve twin purposes of cutting down banks losses and the prevailing interest rate. It has emerged as a very important tool in direction of following cheap interest regime—the general policy of the RBI since reform process started.






38. Solution: a)

The President is elected not directly by the people but by members of electoral college consisting of:

    the elected members of both the Houses of Parliament;
    the elected members of the legislative assemblies of the states; and
    the elected members of the legislative assemblies of the Union Territories of
Delhi and Puducherry







39. Solution: d)

The nominated members of both of Houses of Parliament, the nominated members
of the state legislative assemblies, the members (both elected and nominated) of the

http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 13
                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  


state legislative councils (in case of the bicameral legislature) and the nominated members of the Legislative Assemblies of Delhi and Puducherry do not participate in the election of the President. Where an assembly is dissolved, the members cease to be qualified to vote in presidential election, even if fresh elections to the dissolved assembly are not held before the presidential election.

While electing and impeaching Vice-President, nominated members participate.




40. Solution: d)




































41. Solution: c)

The President is entitled to a number of privileges and immunities. He enjoys personal immunity from legal liability for his official acts. During his term of office, he is immune from any criminal proceedings, even in respect of his personal acts. He cannot be arrested or imprisoned. However, after giving two months’ notice, civil proceedings can be instituted against him during his term of office in respect of his
personal acts.






http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 14
                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  




42. Solution: d)

The President can be removed from office by a process of impeachment for ‘violation of the Constitution’. However, the Constitution does not define the meaning of the phrase ‘violation of the Constitution’.

The impeachment charges can be initiated by either House of Parliament. These charges should be signed by one-fourth members of the House (that framed the charges), and a 14 days’ notice should be given to the President. After the impeachment resolution is passed by a majority of two-thirds of the total membership of that House, it is sent to the other House, which should investigate the charges.

The President has the right to appear and to be represented at such investigation. If the other House also sustains the charges and passes the impeachment resolution by a majority of two-thirds of the total membership, then the President stands removed from his office from the date on which the bill is so passed.

Thus, an impeachment is a quasi-judicial procedure in the Parliament. In this context, two things should be noted: (a) the nominated members of either House of Parliament can participate in the impeachment of the President though they do not participate in his election; (b) the elected members of the legislative assemblies of states and the Union Territories of Delhi and Puducherry do not participate in the impeachment of the President though they participate in his election.

No President has so far been impeached.







43. Solution: d)

He appoints the prime minister and the other ministers. They hold office during his pleasure.

He appoints the attorney general of India and determines his remuneration. The attorney general holds office during the pleasure of the President.

He appoints the comptroller and auditor general of India, the chief election commissioner and other election commissioners, the chairman and members of the Union Public Service Commission, the governors of states, the chairman and
members of finance commission, and so on.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 15
                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  


He can seek any information relating to the administration of affairs of the Union, and proposals for legislation from the prime minister.




44. Solution: d)

He enjoys the following legislative powers.

    He can summon or prorogue the Parliament and dissolve the Lok Sabha. He can also summon a joint sitting of both the Houses of Parliament, which is presided over by the Speaker of the Lok Sabha.
    He can address the Parliament at the commencement of the first session after each general election and the first session of each year.
    He can send messages to the Houses of Parliament, whether with respect to a bill pending in the Parliament or otherwise.
    He can appoint any member of the Lok Sabha to preside over its proceedings when the offices of both the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker fall vacant. Similarly, he can also appoint any member of the Rajya Sabha to preside over its proceedings when the offices of both the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman fall vacant.









45. Solution: b)

The President has the veto power over the bills passed by the Parliament10, that is, he can withhold his assent to the bills. The object of conferring this power on the President is two-fold—(a) to prevent hasty and ill-considered legislation by the Parliament; and (b) to prevent legislation which may be unconstitutional.

The veto power enjoyed by the executive in modern states can be classified into the following four types:

    Absolute veto that is, withholding of assent to the bill passed by the legislature.
    Qualified veto, which can be overridden by the legislature with a higher majority.
    Suspensive veto, which can be over ridden by the legislature with an ordinary majority.
    Pocket veto that is, taking no action on the bill passed by the legislature.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 16
                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  


Of the above four, the President of India is vested with three—absolute veto, suspensive veto and pocket veto. There is no qualified veto in the case of Indian President; it is possessed by the American President.




46. Solution: a)

Suspensive Veto - The President exercises this veto when he returns a bill for reconsideration of the Parliament.

However, if the bill is passed again by the Parliament with or without amendments and again presented to the President, it is obligatory for the President to give his assent to the bill. This means that the presidential veto is overridden by a re -passage of the bill by the same ordinary majority (and not a higher majority as required in USA).

The President does not possess this veto in the case of money bills. The President can either give his assent to a money bill or withhold his assent to a money bill but
cannot return it for the reconsideration of the Parliament. Normally, the President
gives his assent to money bill as it is introduced in the Parliament with his previous permission.




47. Solution: d)




48. Solution: d)




49. Solution: d)




50. Solution: a)




51. Solution: c)

The ordinance-making power is the most important legislative power of the
President. It has been vested in him to deal with unforeseen or urgent matters. But, the exercise of this power is subject to the following limitations:




http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 17
                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  


    He can promulgate an ordinance only when both the Houses of Parliament are not in session or when either of the two Houses of Parliament is not in session. An ordinance can also be issued when only one House is in session because a law can be passed by both the Houses and not by one House alone. An ordinance made when both the Houses are in session is void. Thus, the power of the President to legislate by ordinance is not a parallel power of legislation.
    He can make an ordinance only when he is satisfied that the circumstances exist that render it necessary for him to take immediate action. In Cooper case, (1970), the Supreme Court held that the President’s satisfaction c an be questioned in a court on the ground of malafide. This means that the decision of the President to issue an ordinance can be questioned in a court on the ground that the President has prorogued one House or both Houses of Parliament deliberately with a view to promulgate an ordinance on a controversial subject, so as to bypass the parliamentary decision and thereby circumventing the authority of the Parliament.






52. Solution: b)

The Supreme Court examined the pardoning power of the President under different cases and laid down the following principles:

    The petitioner for mercy has no right to an oral hearing by the President.
    The President can examine the evidence afresh and take a view different from the view taken by the court.
    The power is to be exercised by the President on the advice of the union cabinet.
    The President is not bound to give reasons for his order.
    The President can afford relief not only from a sentence that he regards as unduly harsh but also from an evident mistake.
    There is no need for the Supreme Court to lay down specific guidelines for the exercise of power by the President.
    The exercise of power by the President is not subject to judicial review except
where the presidential decision is arbitrary, irrational, mala fide or discriminatory.
    Where the earlier petition for mercy has been rejected by the President, stay
cannot be obtained by filing another petition.




http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 18
                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  







53. Solution: a)

The President can act on his discretion (that is, without the advice of the ministers)
under the following situations:

    Appointment of Prime Minister when no party has a clear majority in the Lok Sabha or when the Prime Minister in office dies suddenly and there is no obvious successor.
    Dismissal of the council of ministers when it cannot prove the confidence of the Lok Sabha.
    Dissolution of the Lok Sabha if the council of ministers has lost its majority.









54. Solution: d)

To be eligible for election as Vice-President, a person should fulfil the following qualifications:

    He should be a citizen of India.
    He should have completed 35 years of age.
    He should be qualified for election as a member of the Rajya Sabha.
    He should not hold any office of profit under the Union government or any state government or any local authority or any other public authority.

But, a sitting President or Vice-President of the Union, the governor of any state and a mini-ster for the Union or any state is not deemed to hold any office of profit and hence qualified for being a candidate for Vice-President.






55. Solution: c)

The Constitution does not contain any specific procedure for the selection and appointment of the Prime Minister. Article 75 says only that the Prime Minister shall
be appointed by the president.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 19
                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  


However, this does not imply that the president is free to appoint any one as the Prime Minister. In accordance with the conventions of the parliamentary system of government, the President has to appoint the leader of the majority party in the Lok Sabha as the Prime Minister. But, when no party has a clear majority in the Lok Sabha, then the President may exercise his personal discretion in the selection and appointment of the Prime Minister.




In 1997, the Supreme Court held that a person who is not a member of either House of Parliament can be appointed as Prime Minister for six months, within which, he should become a member of either House of Parliament; otherwise, he ceases to be the Prime Minister.

Constitutionally, the Prime Minister may be a member of any of the two Houses of parliament. For example, three Prime Ministers, Indira Gandhi (1966), Deve Gowda (1996) and Manmohan Singh (2004), were members of the Rajya Sabha. In Britain, on the other hand, the Prime Minister should definitely be a member of the Lower House (House of Commons).






45. Solution: d)

The Prime Minister enjoys the following powers as head of the Union council of ministers:

    He recommends persons who can be appointed as ministers by the president.
The President can appoint only those persons as ministers who are recommended by the Prime Minister.
    He allocates and reshuffles various portfolios among the ministers.
    He can ask a minister to resign or advise the President to dismiss him in case of difference of opinion.
    He presides over the meeting of council of ministers and influences its decisions.
    He guides, directs, controls, and coordinates the activities of all the ministers.
    He can bring about the collapse of the council of ministers by resigning from office.

Since the Prime Minister stands at the head of the council of ministers, the other ministers cannot function when the Prime Minister resigns or dies. In other words,
the resignation or death of an incumbent Prime Minister automatically dissolves the


http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 20
                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  


council of ministers and thereby generates a vacuum. The resignation or death of any other minister, on the other hand, merely creates a vacancy which the Prime Minister may or may not like to fill.




56. Solution: d)

Article 74 provides for a council of ministers with the Prime Minister at the head to aid and advise the President in the exercise of his functions. The 42nd and 44th Constitutional Amendment Acts have made the advice binding on the President. Further, the nature of advice tendered by ministers to the President cannot be enquired by any court. This provision emphasises the intimate and the confidential relationship between the President and the ministers.

In 1971, the Supreme Court held that ‘even after the dissolution of the Lok Sabha, the council of ministers does not cease to hold office. Article 74 is mandatory and, therefore, the president cannot exercise the executive power without the aid and advise of the council of ministers. Any exercise of executive power without the aid and advice will be unconstitutional as being violative of Article 74’.

Again in 1974, the court held that ‘wherever the Constitution requires the satisfaction of the President, the satisfaction is not the personal satisfaction of the President but it is the satisfaction of the council of ministers with whose aid and on whose advice the President exercises his powers and functions.




57. Solution: a)

The ministers of state can either be given independent charge of ministries/departments or can be attached to cabinet ministers. In case of attachment, they may either be given the charge of departments of the ministries headed by the cabinet ministers or allotted specific items of work related to the ministries headed by cabinet ministers. In both the cases, they work under the supervision and guidance as well as under the overall charge and responsibility of the cabinet ministers. In case of independent charge, they perform the same functions and exercise the same powers in relation to their ministries/departments as cabinet ministers do.

However, they are not members of the cabinet and do not attend the cabinet meetings unless specially invited when something related to their
ministries/departments are considered by the cabinet.




http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 21
                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  


Next in rank are the deputy ministers. They are not given independent charge of ministries/departments. They are attached to the cabinet ministers or ministers of state and assist them in their administrative, political, and parliamentary duties. They are not members of the cabinet and do not attend cabinet meetings.




58. Solution: d)

The word ‘cabinet; was inserted in Article 352 of the Constitution in 1978 by the 44th Constitutional Amendment Act. Thus, it did not find a place in the original text of the Constitution.

Now also, Article 352 only defines the cabinet saying that it is ‘the council consisting of the prime minister and other ministers of cabinet rank appointed under Article 75’ and does not describe its powers and functions. In other words, its role in our
politico-administrative system is based on the conventions of parliamentary
government as developed in Britain.







59. Solution: d)
    They are set up by the Prime Minister according to the exigencies of the time and requirements of the situation. Hence, their number, nomenclature, and composition varies from time to time.
    Their membership varies from three to eight. They usually include only Cabinet Ministers. However, the non-cabinet Ministers are not debarred from their membership.
    They not only include the Ministers in charge of subjects covered by them but also include other senior Ministers.
    They are mostly headed by the Prime Minister. Sometimes other Cabinet Ministers, particularly the Home Minister or the Finance Minister, also acts as their Chairman. But, in case the Prime Minister is a member of a committee, he invariably presides over it.









60. Solution: a)



http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 22
                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  


Cabinet Committees not only sort out issues and formulate proposals for the consideration of the Cabinet, but also take decisions. However, the Cabinet can review their decisions. It means that the PM too can review their decisions.

They are an organisational device to reduce the enormous workload of the Ca binet. They also facilitate in-depth examination of policy issues and effective coordination. They are based on the principles of division of labour and effective delegation.






61. Solution: b)

Though the President of India is not a member of either House of Parliament and does not sit in the Parliament to attend its meetings, he is an integral part of the Parliament. This is because a bill passed by both the Houses of Parliament cannot become law without the President’s assent. He also performs certain functions relating to the proceedings of the Parliament, for example, he summons and prorogues both the Houses, dissolves the Lok Sabha, addresses both the Houses, issues ordinances when they are not in session, and so on.

In this respect, the framers of the Indian Constitution relied on the British pattern rather than the American pattern. In Britain, the Parliament consists of the Crown (King or Queen), the House of Lords (Upper House) and the House of Commons (Lower House). By contrast, the American president is not an integral part of the legislature. In USA, the legislature, which is known as Congress, consists of the Senate (Upper House) and the House of Representatives (Lower House).






62. Solution: b)

The maximum strength of the Rajya Sabha is fixed at 250, out of which, 238 are to be the representatives of the states and union territories (4 members elected indirectly) and 12 are nominated by the president.

Out of the seven union territories, only two (Delhi and Puducherry) have representation in Rajya Sabha. The populations of other five union territories are too
small to have any representative in the Rajya Sabha.







http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 23
                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  




63. Solution: a)

Though the Constitution has adopted the system of proportional representation in the case of Rajya Sabha, it has not preferred the same system in the case of Lok Sabha. Instead, it has adopted the system of territorial representation for the election of members to the Lok Sabha.

Under territorial representation, every member of the legislature represents a geographical area known as a constituency. From each constituency, only one representative is elected. Hence such a constituency is known as single -member constituency. In this system, a candidate who secures majority of votes is declared elected. This simple majority system of representation does not represent the whole electorate. In other words, it does not secure due representation to minorities (small groups).




64. Solution: d)

The system of proportional representation aims at removing the defects of territorial representation. Under this system, all sections of the people get representation in proportion to their number. Even the smallest section of the population gets its due share of representation in the legislature.

There are two kinds of proportional representation, namely, singl e transferable vote system and list system. In India, the first kind is adopted for the election of members to the Rajya Sabha and state legislative council and for electing the President and the Vice-President.

Though some members of the Constituent Assembly had advocated the system of proportional representation for the election of members to the Lok Sabha, the Constitution has not adopted the system due to two reasons.

    Difficulty for the voters to understand the system (which is complicated) due to low literacy scale in the country.
    Unsuitability to the parliamentary government due to the tendency of the system to multiply political parties leading to instability in government.




65. Solution: a)





http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 24
                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  


On the question whether a member is subject to any of the disqua lifications under RPA 1951, the president’s decision is final. However, he should obtain the opinion of the election commission and act accordingly.

The question of disqualification under the Tenth Schedule is decided by the Chairman in the case of Rajya Sabha and Speaker in the case of Lok Sabha (and not by the president of India). In 1992, the Supreme Court ruled that the decision of the Chairman/Speaker  in this regard is subject to judicial review.






66. Solution: c)

Every member of either House of Parliament, before taking his seat in the House, has to make and subscribe to an oath or affirmation before the President or some person appointed by him for this purpose. In his oath or affirmation, a member of
Parliament swears:

    to bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India;
    to uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India; and
    to faithfully discharge the duty upon which he is about to enter. Option 2 is part of oath taken by a Minister.
Option 3 is that taken by the President of India.







67. Solution: d)

The Speaker is elected by the Lok Sabha from amongst its members (as soon as may be, after its first sitting). Whenever the office of the Speaker falls vacant, the Lok Sabha elects another member to fill the vacancy. The date of election of the Speake r is fixed by the President.

When a resolution for the removal of the Speaker is under consideration of the House, he cannot preside at the sitting of the House, though he may be present. However, he can speak and take part in the proceedings of the House at such a time and vote in the first instance, though not in the case of an equality of votes.

It should be noted here that, whenever the Lok Sabha is dissolved, the Speaker does not vacate his office and continues till the newly- elected Lok Sabha meets.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 25
                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  


The Speaker is the head of the Lok Sabha, and its representative. He is the guardian of powers and privileges of the members, the House as a whole and its committees. He is the principal spokesman of the House, and his decision in all Parliamentary matters is final.






68. Solution: a)

The Speaker is the head of the Lok Sabha, and its representative. He is the guardian of powers and privileges of the members, the House as a whole and its committees. He is the principal spokesman of the House, and his decision in all Parliamentary matters is final. He is thus much more than merely the presiding officer of the Lok Sabha. In these capacities, he is vested with vast, varied and vital responsibilities and enjoys great honour, high dignity and supreme authority within the House.

The Speaker of the Lok Sabha derives his powers and duties from three sources, that is, the Constitution of India, the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business of Lok Sabha, and Parliamentary Conventions (residuary powers that are unwritten or unspecified in the Rules).






69. Solution: a)

The LS Speaker presides over a joint setting of the two Houses of Parliament. Such a sitting is summoned by the President to settle a deadlock between the two Houses on a bill.

He can allow a ‘secret’ sitting of the House at the request of the Leader of the House. When the House sits in secret, no stranger can be present in the chamber, lobby or galleries except with the permission of the Speaker.

He decides whether a bill is a money bill or not and his decision on this question is final. When a money bill is transmitted to the Rajya Sabha for recommendation and presented to the President for assent, the Speaker endorses on the bill his certificate that it is a money bill.

He decides the questions of disqualification of a member of the Lok Sabha, arising on the ground of defection under the provisions of the Tenth Schedule. In 1992, the




http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 26
                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  


Supreme Court ruled that the decision of the Speaker in this regard is subject to judicial review.






70. Solution: c)

The LS Speaker is provided with a security of tenure. He can be removed only by a resolution passed by the Lok Sabha by an absolute majority (i.e, a majority of the total members of the House) and not by an ordinary majority (i.e, a majority of the members present and voting in the House).

This motion of removal can be considered and discussed only when it has the support of at least 50 members.




71. Solution: d)

The bill amends the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 in order to regulate the mining sector in the country.

Key provisions of the bill

    Addition of a new 4th Schedule in to parent Act in order to include bauxite, iron ore, limestone and manganese ore as notified minerals.
    Creation of prospecting license-cum-mining lease as a new category of mining license. It is defined as a two stage-concession for the purpose of undertaking prospecting operations followed by mining operations.
    Maximum area for mining- increase the area limits for mining, instead of providing additional leases as per parent Act’s area limitation.
    Lease period- Mining leases will be granted for a lease period of 50 years for all minerals other than coal, lignite and atomic minerals. Lease period for coal and lignite remains unchanged.





72. Solution: a)
    Objective is to bring out a totally error-free and authenticated electoral roll throughout the country.
    For the authentication purpose, Electoral Photo Identity Card (EPIC) data of
electors will be linked with Aadhar data.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 27
                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  


    It also focuses to improve the image quality of electors al ong with sorting issues like corrections of errors. Facility to link Aadhar number will be provided to electors through sms, email, mobile application and National Voters Service Portal using web services through ECI website.
    Electors also can link their Aadhar number by making a call at 1950 to state call centres. Under NERPAP, collection and feeding of Aadhar will also be done by Electoral Registration Officer.
    In this regard special Camps will be organized, Voter Facilitation Centres, e - Seva centres and Citizen Service Centres. While Booth Level Officers will conduct door-to-door surveys to collect the details.






73. Solution: a)

Eutelsat’s satellite is part of its 35-member commercial network. It will provide services like mobile, internet, video and other communications services to expand its reach into the Americas. While, ABS new satellite will serve its customers in Africa, Europe and the Middle East.

These satellites are fitted with lightweight, all-electric engines rather than conventional chemical propulsion systems. These electric engines allow satellites to produce electric propulsion in order to reach and remain fixed in particular orbit. Electric propulsion from these satellites consumes less fuel compared with satellite having chemical propulsion. Thus making satellites lighter in weight and further reducing cost of launch.





74. Solution: a)

Following has happened in the area of taxation in the recent Budget:

    No change in the Tax slab on personal income.
    Wealth tax abolished.
    Additional 2% surcharge for the super-rich with income more than Rs. 1 crore.
    For next 4 years, corporate tax has been reduced to 25 percent from present 30 percent. Service tax increased to14 per cent.
    Apart from CSR, 100% tax exemption for contribution to Swachch Bharat
Abhiyan.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 28
                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  












75. Solution: a)

http://www.thehindu.com/business/budget/mudra-bankto-fund-the-missing-
middle/article6946797.ece




76. Solution: d)

Some of the Initiatives launched are:

    Under the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan, six crore toilets across the country will be built.
    By 2020, housing for all.
    Visa on Arrival (VoA) facility to be increased for 150 countries from present
43 countries.
    As an alternative to purchasing gold, Sovereign Gold Bond will be launched.
    In order to facilitate depositors of gold to earn interest and jewellers to obtain loans on their metal accounts new scheme will be launched.
    Forward Markets Commission (FMC) will be merged with the Securities and
Exchange Board of India (SEBI).









77. Solution: a)

http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/monkey-cage/wp/2014/07/17/what-the-
new-bank-of-brics-is-all-about/







78. Solution: a)

http://www.finance.mp.gov.in/14fc_press_note_eng.pdf



http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 29
                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  


Refer to first two pages only.









79. Solution: a)

In the Air Brake system, compressed air is used for operating the brake system. These brakes can be the conventional types or directly mounted on the bogies of the coaches. The latest design is the Disc Brake System (DBS) found in LHB coaches and is similar to what is found in automobiles.

DBS is micro processor controlled and an advanced version of Air Brake system. It is essential for high speeds of 160kmph plus. It is superior in terms of reduced braking distance, higher wheel life due to reduced frequency of wheel turning, and reduced maintenance, less braking noise and higher efficiency due to simple brake rigging.

PIB FEATURES http://pib.nic.in/newsite/efeatures.aspx












80. Solution: b)

http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/indias-climate-dilemma




81. Solution: b)




82. Solution: b)




83. Solution: d)




84. Solution: d)


http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 30
                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  




85. Solution: d)




86. Solution: d)

http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/budget-2015-suresh-prabhu-promises-
green-clean-indian-railways







87. Solution: a)

http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/agriculture-wrong-prescription-right-
diagnosis

In the budget, Jaitley increased the farm credit corpus from Rs 8 lakh crore to Rs 8.5 lakh crore and announced the setting up of a Unified National Agriculture Market to provide farmers better price for their produce.

But, around 94 per cent of the existing farm credit corpus goes directly to agro -based industries and not to the farmers. So when the finance minister said Rs 8.5 lakh crore will be given as farm credit, he actually meant that the farmers would get only Rs
50,000 crore or six per cent of the corpus.









88. Solution: a)

http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/findings-economic-survey-2015-are-
cause-worry







89. Solution: c)

http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/earth-s-natural-cooling-process-offset-
global-warming-past-decade-0\


http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 31
                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  







90. Solution: a)

http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/these-mobile-weather-stations-can-help-
cope-floods-landslides




91. Solution: b)

Pursuant to the resolution adopted on 29-05-2007 by the National Development Council (NDC), to reorient the current agricultural development strategies to meet the needs of the farmers and for fresh efforts by the Central and State Governments to rejuvenate the agricultural sector so as to achieve 4% annual growth during the
11th Five Year Plan, a new State Plan Scheme of Additional Central Assistance (ACA) for agriculture and allied sectors, namely, Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) was launched during 2007-08 with an envisaged outlay of Rs. 25,000 crore for the Plan period.

It requires the States to prepare District and State Agriculture Plans for creation of such infrastructure, which are essential to catalyse the existing production scenario for achieving higher production. Additional Central Assistance (ACA) is made available to the States as 100% grants.

The RKVY Guidelines recognize and build on the need for convergence and integration of the various programmes implemented at District/State level into District Agriculture Plans (DAPs) and State Agriculture Plan (SAP). Each district is required to formulate a District Agriculture Plan by including the resources available from other existing schemes, District, State or Central Schemes such as Backwa rd Region Grant Fund (BRGF), Swarnajayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY),
National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (NREGS), Bharat Nirman and tied
and untied grants from the Central and State Finance Commissions etc. The District Agriculture Plans are not to be the usual aggregation of the existing schemes but would aim at moving towards projecting the requirements for development of agriculture and allied sectors of the district. These plans present the vision for agriculture and allied sectors within the overall development perspective of the district. The District Agriculture Plans would reflect the financial requirement and the sources of financing the agriculture development plans in a comprehensive way. The DAP will include animal husbandry and fisher y, minor irrigation projects, rural development works, agricultural marketing schemes and schemes for water
harvesting and conservation, keeping in view the natural resources and

http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 32
                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  


technological possibilities in each district. Each State is further required to prepare a comprehensive State Agricultural Plan (SAP) by integrating the DAPs. The State will have to indicate resources that can flow from the State to the district.

During XII Plan, RKVY funding will be provided through three streams viz. production growth (35%), infrastructure & Assets and sub-schemes (20%). The remaining 10% will be is provisioned as flexi fund from which states can undertake either production growth or infrastructure & assets projects depending upon States needs & priorities.  Looking at the requirement of increasing investment, Government has recently done way with 35% requirement in production stream thus paving the way for 100% allocation in investments for infrastructure buildings
& creation of assets.

The States have been provided flexibility and autonomy in the process of selection, planning, approval and execution of schemes to make investments in interventions as per their priorities and agro-climatic requirements so that the outcomes are as envisaged in the RKVY objectives.  The projects of the State Governments are approved by the State Level Sanctioning Committees (SLSCs) under the Chairmanship of Chief Secretary of the respective States.   The funds are routed through the State Agriculture Department, which is the nodal Department for the scheme.




http://rkvy.nic.in/SubSchemes-Iframe.html

Refer Page No. 88-90 of India – 2015 for more details.




92. Solution: a)

The Mission has been continued during 12th Five Year Plan with inclusion of coarse cereals crops and commercial crops (sugarcane, jute, cotton). The Mission has target of additional production of 25 million tonnes of foodgrains comprising 10 million tonnes of rice, 8 million tonnes of wheat, 4 million tonnes of pulses and 3 million tonnes of coarse cereals by the end of 12th Five Year Plan.




93. Solutions: c)

National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) seeks to transform Indian agriculture into a climate resilient production system through suitable adaptation
and mitigation measures in domains of both crops and animal husbandry. NMSA as


http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 33
                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  


a programmatic intervention focuses on promotion of location specific integrated/composite  farming systems; resource conservation technologies; comprehensive soil health management; efficient on-farm water management and mainstreaming rainfed technologies.


NMSA identifies 10 key dimensions namely seed & culture water, pest, nutrient, farming practices, credit, insurance, market, information and livelihood diversification for promoting suitable agricultural practices that covers both adaption and mitigation measures through four functional areas, namely, Research
and Development, Technologies, Products and Practices, Infrastructure and Capacity building. During XII Five Year Plan, these dimensions have been embedded and mainstreamed into Missions/Programmes/Schemes of Ministry of Agriculture including NMSA through a process of restructuring of various schemes/missions implemented during XI Five Year Plan and convergence with other related programmes of Central/State Governments.




94. Solution: b)

Agriculture cooperatives distribute around 16% of agricultural credit in India. For more info refer Page No. – 95, India – 2015




95. Solution: b)

The tractor density in India is 16 tractors per 1000 hectares whereas world average is
19.

Please refer page no. 98, India – 2015

Some interesting articles on farm mechanization in India:

http://www.thehindubusinessline.com/opinion/farm-mechanisation-indian- style/article4921271.ece

http://www.thehindu.com/business/Industry/talking-business-india-is-still-in-
early-stages-of-farm-mechanisation/article6345284.ece




96. Solution: b)

The National School of Drama is one of the foremost theatre training institutions in
the world and the only one of its kind in India. It was set up by the Sangeet Natak

http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 34
                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  


Akademi as one of its constituent units in 1959. In 1975, it became an independent entity and was registered as an autonomous organization under the Societies Registration Act XXI of 1860, fully financed by the Ministry of Culture, Government of India.

http://nsd.gov.in/delhi/index.php/about-nsd/




97. Solution: c)

Sahitya Akademi in 1996, instituted a Fellowship in the name of the great scholar and aesthete Dr. Ananda Coomaraswamy to be offered to scholars from Asian countries to pursue literary projects of their choice.

http://sahitya-akademi.gov.in/sahitya- akademi/fellows/sahitya_akademi_fellowship.jsp#anand

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ananda_Coomaraswamy




98. Solution: d)

Other four cities where they are located are: Udaipur, Allahabad, Nagpur a nd
Kolkata

99. Solution:

In order to promote tourism, Tourist Visa on Arrival (TVOA) scheme was introduced for the nationals of five countries, namely, Japan, Singapore, Finland, Luxembourg and New Zealand with effect from 01.01.2010 for one year. The scheme has been found to be useful by the foreign nationals.

Visa on Arrival Facility is available for holders of passport of following countries

Australia, Brazil, Cambodia, Cook Islands, Djibouti, Fiji, Finland, Germany, Guyana, Indonesia, Israel, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kiribati, Laos, Luxembourg, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia, Myanmar, Nauru,
New Zealand,Niue Island, Norway, Oman, Palau, Palestine, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Republic of Korea,
Russia, Samoa, Singapore, Solomon Islands,Thailand,  Tonga, Tuvalu, UAE, Ukraine,
USA, Vanuatu, Vietnam.

Visa on Arrival is not applicable to Diplomatic/Official  Passports.




http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 35
                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  


100.     Solution: d)

Background of the National Statistical Commission (NSC)

A Commission set up by the Government in January 2000 under the Chairmanship of Dr. C. Rangarajan reviewed the statistical system and the entire gamut of Official Statistics in the country. The Rangarajan Commission submitted its  report to the Government in August 2001. One of the key recommendations of this Commission was to establish a permanent National Commission on Statistics to serve as a nodal and empowered body for all core statistical activities of the country, evolve, monitor and enforce statistical priorities and standards and to ensure statistical co-ordination among the different agencies involved. The Rangarajan Commission also recommended that the Commission be set up initially through a Government order.

Rangarajan Commission Report

In line with the recommendations  of the Rangarajan Commission, the Government of India ordered the setting up of a permanent National Statistical Commission
(NSC) vide Notification No. 85 dated 1st June 2005published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part-III-Section 4.




The NSC is mandated to perform the following functions, namely: -

a.   to identify the core statistics, which are of national importance and are critical to the development of the economy;




b.   to constitute professional committees or working groups to assist the
Commission on various technical issues;




c.   to evolve national policies and priorities relating to the statistical system;




d.  to evolve standard statistical concepts, definitions, classifications and methodologies in different areas in statistics and lay down national quality standards on core statistics;



e.   to evolve national strategies for the collection, tabulation and dissemination of core statistics, including the release calendar for various data sets;

http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 36
                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  





f.   to evolve national strategies for human resource development on official statistics including information technology and communication needs of the statistical system;




g.   to evolve measures for improving public trust in official statistics;




h.  to evolve measures for effective co-ordination with State Governments and Union Territory Administrations on statistical activities including strengthening of existing institutional mechanisms;




i.    to exercise statistical co-ordination between Ministries, Departments and other agencies of the Central Government;




j.    to exercise statistical audit over the statistical activities to ensure quality and integrity of the statistical products;




k.   to recommend to the Central Government, or any State Government, as the case may be, measures to effectively implement the standards, strategies and other measures evolved under clauses (c) to (h);




l.    to advise the Government on the requirement of legislative measures on statistical matters including the statute for the National Statistical Commission; and

m. to monitor and review the functioning of the statistical system in the light of the laid down policies, standards and methodologies and recommend measures for enhanced performance.

Powers of the NSC

The Commission has the requisite autonomy to discharge its functions effectively and efficiently. In particular, the Commission has the powers to: -



http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 37
                  Insights Mock Tests –  2015: Solutions –  Test - 16                  


     require production of any document which in the opinion of the
Commission will serve or may serve statistical purposes;




     require statistical agencies and institutions to provide details of statistical activities, including concepts and definitions used, methodologies followed, quality standards adopted, sampling and non-sampling errors, etc. in respect of core statistics;




     require attendance of any person including any public servant on matters connected with core statistics; and



     issuing notices for examination of witnesses and documents or any matters connected with core statistics.











































http://www.insightsonindia.com                 INSIGHTS                                                                      Page 38
