


    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    30                       




INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK PRELIMINARY EXAM - 2015

INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST - 30
GENERAL STUDIES
PAPER-I
Time Allowed: 2 Hours                                                                                              Maximum Marks: 200

INSTRUCTIONS
1.   IMMEDITELY AFTER THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE EXAMINATION, YOU SHOULD
CHECK THAT THIS TEST BOOKLET DOES NOT HAVE ANY UNPRINTED OR TORN OR MISSING PAGES OR ITEMS, ETC. IF SO, GET IT REPLACED BY A COMPLETE TEST BOOKLET.
2.  You have to enter your Roll Number on the Test Booklet in the Box provided alongside. DO NOT Write anything else on the Test Booklet.
4.  This  Test  Booklet  contains  100  items  (questions).  Each  item  is  printed  only  in  English.  Each  item comprises  four  responses  (answers).  You  will  select  the response  which  you  want  to mark  on the Answer Sheet. In case you feel that there is more than one correct response, mark the response which you consider the best. In any case, choose ONLY ONE response for each item.
5.  You have to mark all your responses ONLY on the separate Answer Sheet provided.  See directions in
the Answer Sheet.
6.  All items carry equal marks.

7.  Before you proceed to mark in the Answer Sheet the response to various items in the Test Booklet, you have  to  fill  in  some  particulars  in  the  Answer  Sheet  as  per  instructions  sent  to  you  with  your Admission Certificate.
8.  After you have completed filling in all your responses on the Answer Sheet and the examination has concluded, you should hand over to the Invigilator only the Answer Sheet. You are permitted to take away with you the Test Booklet.
9.  Sheets for rough work are appended in the Test Booklet at the end.
10.  Penalty for wrong answers :
THERE WILL BE PENALTY FOR WRONG ANSWERS MARKED BY A CANDIDATE IN THE OBJECTIVE TYPE QUESTION PAPERS.
(i)    There are four alternatives for the answer to every question. For each question for which a wrong answer has been given by the candidate, one-third of the marks assigned to that question will be deducted as penalty.
(ii)   If a candidate gives more than one answer, it will be treated as a wrong answer even if one of the given  answers  happens  to be correct  and there will be same  penalty  as above  to that question.
(iii)     If a question is left blank, i.e., no answer is given by the candidate, there will be no penalty for that question.


http://www.insightsonindia.com

INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST SERIES FOR CIVIL SERVICES PRELIMINARY EXAM 2015




http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Page  1    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    30                       




1.   Jayaprakash Narayan’s Concept of Total
Revolution was aimed at
a)  Exposing the totalitarian nature of the incumbent government
b)  Removing landlessness from rural areas completely by Bhoodan and forced acquisitions
c)  Bringing a change in the existing
society in tune with the ideals of the
Sarvodaya
d)  Strengthening the local self- governing institutions on Gandhian lines enabling them to counter increasing centralization in governance




2.  In India the term ‘Buddhist circuit’ can be used to refer to
1.   Racing track in Noida
2.  Sarnath-Gaya-Varansi region
3.  Old Mahayana scriptures found in
Veshali

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above



3.  Consider the following lines. “Thou hast made me endless, such is thy
pleasure. This frail vessel thou emptiest again and again, and fillest it ever with fresh life.
This little flute of a reed thou hast carried over hills and dales, and hast breathed through it melodies eternally new........

Thy infinite gifts come to me only on these very small hands of mine. Ages pass, and still thou pourest, and still there is room to fill.”

These are from the poems written in

a.   Savitri: A Legend and a Symbol - by
Sri Aurbindo
b.  Mappings by Vikram Seth
c.   Gitanjali - by Rabindranath Tagore d.  The Golden Threshold – by Sarojini
Naidu




4.  Consider the following about the recently released Socio-economic Caste Census (SECC).
1.   Majority of households in India are
deprived as per SECC.
2.  Majority of households are male- headed.
3.  Over one-third of population living in rural areas is illiterate.
4.  Landlessness is now rare in rural
India.




Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 4 only d)  3 and 4 only


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  2    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    30                       
5.  There has been a proposal to utilize the Foreign Exchange reserves for financing infrastructure projects. Why is there concern about using Forex for such projects?
1.   Infrastructure projects are long-term and risky in nature.
2.  Enough Forex reserves are needed to avert a Balance of Payment crisis situation.

Which of the above is/are correct?

a)  1 only b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2 d)  None


6.  The Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act,
2006, also called as the Forest Rights Act (FRA), 2006 confers which of the following rights on tribals?
1.   Rights over forest land patches
2.  Rights over minor produce from forests
3.  Rights over timber produce from forest
4.  Rights over the wildlife in the forests

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2, 3 and 4 only c)  1 and 4 only
d)  All of the above
7.   Consider the following about the state of malnourishment in India as per recently released data by UNICEF.
1.   Underweight Children
2.  Underweight adolescent girls
3.  Stunted Children

Majority of children (girls where applicable) in
India fall under which of the above categories?

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only d)  2 only


8.  When we refer to the stabilizing market forces we generally refer to
a)  Forces of Supply and demand
b)  Perfect competition in the market
c)  Optimizing behaviour of individuals d)  All of the above


9.  Consider the following about
Rakhigarhi.
1.   The site is the largest known city of the Indus civilization.
2.  It is older than Harappa and
Mohenjodaro sites.
3.  It is situated on the dry bed of the
Sarasvati river.
4.  The site does not have urban features like standards, coins, drainage system.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  2 and 4 only
c)  1, 2 and 3 only
d)  1, 3 and 4 only




http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  3    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    30                       
10. In the recent visit of Prime Minister to the Central Asia republics, concerns were raised on terrorist activities from these republics as
a)  Many from the security agencies of
the Central Asian republics are joining terrorist outfits
b)  There is an apprehension of State sponsored terrorism
c)  There is an apprehension of
Military sponsored terrorism
d)  The Central Asian republics are the main base for all the terrorist activities being run in West Asia


11. Which of these authorities is responsible for GDP data calculation & which authority is responsible for revising GDP calculation methodology?
1.   Central government
2.  Economic Adviser to Finance
Ministry
3.  RBI
4.  Central Statistical Office

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   3 and 1 b.  3 and 2 c.   4 and 1
d.  4 does both.


12. The Indian constitution protects the rights of minorities because
1.   In an electoral democracy, the will of the majority prevails over the minority.
2.  All minority classes are socio-
economically vulnerable India.

Which of the above is/are true?
a.   1 only b.  2 only
c.   Both 1 and 2 d.  None




13. The recent Chinese stock market crash was due to
a.   Poor state of economic reforms in
China
b.  Slack regulation of stock markets by the Chinese government
c.   The contagion of the Greece crisis
d.  None of the above




14. Consider the following.
1.   Linfa
2.  Chan-Hom
3.  Nangka

How the above are related to China?

a.   These are recently erupted volcanoes in China.
b.  These are typhoons that have
recently either hit China or are nearing around it.
c.   These are parts of the remote
Southern Province of China that borders Aksai China that were recently in news due to heightened cross-border infiltrations.
d.  None of the above


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  4    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    30                       
15. Why is the Akash missile highly useful for the Indian army that has recently inducted it?
1.   It is a surface-to-air missile, so it can
hit targets from land.
2.  It can cruise at supersonic speeds.
3.   It is capable to neutralise aerial targets like cruise missiles, fighter jets and air-to-    surface missiles.
4.  It can engage multiple targets
simultaneously and can travel in multiple directions.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 2 only b.  3 and 4 only
c.   1, 2 and 3 only d.  All of the above




16. Uttarakhand has become the first Indian state to install a system to detect earthquakes and disseminate warnings. It is able to give advance warning for earthquakes because
1.   The system is capable of detecting harmless P waves that arrive earlier than          destructive S waves.
2.  It has been deployed at the possible focuses of past earthquake regions in
Uttarakhand.

Which of the above is/are true?

a.   1 only b.  2 only
c.   Both 1 and 2
d.  None
17. India and United States have signed inter-governmental agreement to implement the Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA). It will help both countries to
1.   Promote transparency on tax matters
2.  Curb offshore tax evasions
3.  Avoid problems related to double taxation of firms

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 and 3 only
d.  All of the above


18. India should be economically interested in Kazakhastan because
1.   It is the World’s largest producer of
Uranium.
2.  It can benefit fertilizer sector in India due to its abundance of natural gas.
3.  Its hydrocarbon reserves can
supplement the oil economy of
India.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 and 3 only
d.  All of the above


19. Union Government has decided to develop all villages located within 10 kilometres vicinity of the international border on a priority basis with the help of
1.   Swachh Bharat Abhiyaan

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  5    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    30                       


2.  Promotion of sports activities in border areas
3.  Promotion of border tourism
4.  Protection of heritage sites

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 and 4 only
d.  All of the above




20.Japan’s Meiji-era sites historically contributed in
a.   Japan’s evolution from feudalism to
an industrialised modern economy b.  Development of fishing industry in
Japan
c.   Tourism growth led by heritage conservation in Japan
d.  Sparking the technological
innovation in Japan




21. In the Phillips curve what is the relationship between rate of unemployment and inflation in the short-run?
a.   Unemployment and inflation are not related to each other.
b.  Decreasing Unemployment rate leads to lower inflation in the economy.
c.   Decreasing Unemployment rate
requires higher inflation in the economy.
d.  Inflation can grow even at constant levels of unemployment in the
economy.
22. The Reserve Bank of India exercises
which of the following types of control over banks?
1.   RBI sets the interest rates offered
by all domestic banks in India.
2.  RBI can supersede strategic decisions of the Board of Governors of Public Sector            Banks in India.
3.  RBI regulates mergers and
acquisition of banks.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 and 3 only
d.  All of the above



23. With regard to the Currency system in India, which of the following practices is followed?
a.   Level of currency volume is pegged at the amount of Gold reserves in the country
b.  Level of currency circulation is delinked from the level of metallic gold in the country
c.   Fresh currency cannot be printed if it is not backed by a metallic form of wealth
d.  Fresh currency cannot be printed if it is not backed by foreign exchange reserves


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  6    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    30                       
24. The calculation of national income covers which of the following?
1.   Government consumption expenditure
2.  Net exports
3.  Gross capital formation

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 and 3 only
d.  All of the above


25. Why are subsidies given to general public by the government inflationary in nature?
1.   It increases the disposable income of people.
2.  It does not tackle the supply side of goods.
3.  It inflates the fiscal deficit of the
government leading to greater money supply.
4.  It distorts market mechanisms of
pricing.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 4 only b.  2 and 3 only
c.   1, 3 and 4 only d.  All of the above




26. The difference between interest rates between India and other countries can affect which of the following in India?
1.   Currency exchange rate
2.  Investment in the country
3.  NRI deposits

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 and 3 only
d.  All of the above




27. What are ‘transfer payments’ given to the public by the government?
a.   Payment for services rendered in
present times
b.  Payment that is not linked to the services in the present, and is a reward for services rendered in the past
c.   Payment that is not linked to any
service provided to government d.  Both (b) and (c)




28. The success of the Gold monetization scheme will depend on
1.   The public perception of gold as an asset
2.  Inflation in the economy
3.  Ease of conversion of Gold into more liquid assets
4.  Level of financial inclusion in the
economy

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 4 only
c.   1, 3 and 4 only d.  All of the above


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  7    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    30                       


29. How does the state government exercise control over the local self-governing
bodies?
1.   By enacting laws, rules and regulations
2.  By providing for provisions for regular elections
3.  By releasing finances for development projects
4.  By appointing the chairman and
members of Panchayats and Ward councils

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only
c.   1, 3 and 4 only d.  1 and 3 only


30. The constituent assembly of India
1.   Was elected based on universal adult franchise
2.  Elected and appointed the Prime Minister and other ministers in the first government
3.  Enacted laws until the first official
Parliament was elected
4.  Was restricted in its powers by an order of the British government
5.  Supervised the functioning of the
Supreme Court and other subordinate courts

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1, 2 and 4 only b.  2, 3 and 5 only c.   1 and 3 only
d.  All of the above
31. Consider the following.
1.   Government resigns if it fails to enact a public bill in Parliament.
2.  Prime Minister is a member of Lok
Sabha.
3.  The council of Ministers reflects the socio-economic diversity of India.

Which of these conventions has/have been codified into rules/regulations/laws/provisions?

a.   1 only
b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 and 3 only
d.  None of the above




32. Abolition of the legislative council in a state requires
a.   the consent of the President and
Governor concerned
b.  the consent of the Parliament and the state legislature concerned
c.   the consent of the State government and State legislature
d.  the consent of Parliament, Governor and State legislature concerned




33. Which of the following can NOT be forced on Indian citizens?
1.   Singing national anthem
2.  Showing allegiance to all national sports teams
3.  Healthy habits like regulated diets, exercise and Yoga

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  8    
    



    




a.   1 only
b.  2 and 3 only c.   3 only
d.  None of the above
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    30                       




36. Providing for reservation of women in which of the following bodies will NOT require a constitutional amendment?
1.   Lok Sabha
2.  Rajya Sabha
34. Consider the following statements.

Assertion (A): The Constitution of India derives its authority from the Parliament of India.

Reason (R): It was enacted by the constituent assembly of India which had legal and democratic authority.

In the context of the statements above, which of these is true?

a)  A and R both are true, and R is the correct explanation for A.
b)  A and R both are true, and R is the
NOT the correct explanation for A. c)  A is correct, R is incorrect.
d)  A is incorrect, R is correct.




35. Consider the following about Public
Interest litigation (PIL).
1.   PIL is a legal instrument.
2.  It can be entertained by both administrative and judicial bodies.
3.  Representatives of victims can also file a PIL.
4.  PIL can be filed only in social and environmental cases.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1, 2 and 4 only b.  2 and 3 only
c.   3 only
d.  3 and 4 only
3.  State Legislative Assembly
4.  State Legislative Council
5.  Political parties

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   All of the above b.  3 and 4 only
c.   5 only
d.  None of the above


37. Match these schedules of Constitution to what they contain.
1.   First Schedule – List of names of All
States and Union Territories
2.  Second Schedule – Powers of
President, Governor and Judges
3.  Fourth Schedule – Allocation of seats in Rajya Sabha
4.  Seventh Schedule – Division of
powers between Legislative, Executive and     Judiciary

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1, 2 and 4 only b.  2 and 4 only
c.   1 and 3 only
d.  All of the above

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  9    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    30                       
38. Parliament exercises control over the administration because
a.   the executive is collectively responsible to the legislature
b.  it is the constitutional mandate of the representatives to command and control administrative affairs
c.   executive branch of the government
is subordinate to the legislative branch of the government
d.  administration is not directly controlled by the executive




39. Consider the following statements about the term of Lok Sabha.
1.   The President of India can reduce the term of Lok Sabha.
2.  The speaker of Lok Sabha by himself
cannot shorten or extend the term of a Lok        Sabha.
3.  Term of Lok Sabha can be extended
during emergency.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 and 3 only
d.  All of the above




40.Arrange the ranks of the following functionaries from higher to lower in the order of precedence.
1.   Governor of a state within the state
2.  Speaker of Lok Sabha
3.  Former President
4.  Chief Minister of a State outside a state
Choose the correct order using the codes below.

a. 3124 b. 1324 c. 2134 d.  3241




41. Article 355 of the Indian Constitution provides that ‘It shall be the duty of the Union to protect every State against external aggression and internal disturbance’. This shows the
a.   Federal character of the Indian constitution
b.  Quasi-federal Character of Indian polity
c.   Democratic character of Indian
polity
d.  Unity and territorial integrity of
India


42. Lok Adalats are a useful to instrument to reduce the burden on Judiciary in India. Which of the following types of cases can be handled by Lok Adalat?
1.   Consumer grievance against food
standards in rural processed products
2.  Cases involving property disputes
3.  Cases in involving Pension and other transfer payment rights
4.  Cases involving road accidents

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 and 4 only
d.  All of the above


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  10    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    30                       


amendments, but the bill is not passed in case of disagreement
43. Consider the following about Service
tax.
1.   It is an indirect tax.
2.  It is levied by the Central government.
3.  It is applicable to manufacturing as well as services sector in India.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 and 3 only d.  2 only




44. Which of the following is fixed by the
Constitution of India?
1.   Allowances of the President and
Governor
2.  Maximum Size of Council of
Ministers
3.  Manner of election of the Sarpanch of the Gram Panchayat.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 and 3 only
d.  All of the above




45. If the Rajya Sabha does not agree to the provisions of the Annual Budget then
a.   it returns the bill to the Lok Sabha with proposed amendments, which
then passes it or rejects the proposed
b.  it is sent to the President for re- consideration and then transferred to Lok Sabha for consideration
c.   it is sent to a joint select committee of the Parliament for re-examination and re-introduction in Lok Sabha
d.  None of the above




46. USA has recently granted Tunisia a major Non-NATO Ally (MNNA) status. This would allow both countries to
a.   improve economic ties, reinforce trade and reinvigorate mutual investment
b.  enhance military cooperation
c.   negotiate security contracts and exchange confidential information
d.  improve mutual governance related matters


47. Consider the following.
1.   She holds the record for the most spacewalks by a woman.
2.  She holds the world record for the most spacewalk time by a woman astronaut.
3.  She is the first Indian woman astronaut to serve NASA.

Which of the above is/are true about Sunita
Williams?

a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 and 3 only
d.  All of the above


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  11    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    30                       
48. Full Shanghai Corporation Organization (SCO) membership to India will have significant benefits in
1.   Combating terrorism
2.  Opening up trade, energy sector and strategic transit routes
3.  Resolving strictly bilateral land
border disputes

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 and 3 only
d.  All of the above




49. Consider the following about the Regional Anti-terrorist Structure (RATS) of the Shanghai Corporation Organization (SCO).
1.   It is headquartered in Beijing, China.
2.  It is a permanent organ of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization.
3.  It deals with extremism and separatism too.
4.  All member-states contribute to intelligence gathering in RATS.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 4 only b.  2 and 3 only
c.   2, 3 and 4 only
d.  All of the above
50. Which of the following crops do NOT
need rich soil for its production?
1.   Barley
2.  Millets
3.  Rice
4.  Tea

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1, 2 and 4 only b.  2 and 3 only
c.   2, 3 and 4 only d.  1, 3 and 4 only




51. Pillars erected under the regime of Ashok bear which of the following characteristics?
1.   They contain lessons in Dharma.
2.  They are monolithic.
3.  All pillars have been made by heavy metals.
4.  They have been erected outside India too.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1, 3 and 4 only b.  2 and 3 only
c.   2, 3 and 4 only d.  1 and 2 only




52. Consider the following statements.
1.   Asia has the highest mean elevation among all continents.
2.  The distance of the deepest point in
the Ocean from mean sea level is greater than that of the highest point
on land.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  12    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    30                       
3.  All the open oceans of the world have the same mean sea level.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 and 3 only
d.  All of the above




53. After the Arab Spring, which of the following West Asian or Middle-eastern countries turned democratic?
1.   Tunisia
2.  Libya
3.  Egypt
4.  Turkey
5.  Lebanon

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1, 2 and 3 only b.  2 and 3 only
c.   4 and 5 only
d.  2, 3, 4 and 5 only



54. Consider the following objectives.
1.   Protection of Intellectual property rights.
2.  Promotion of resource flow between nations.
3.  Ensuring technological
modernization of nations to specialize world trade.

Which of the above come under the mandate of the World Trade Organization (WTO)?

a.   1 and 2 only
b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 and 3 only d.  2 only




55. In a conference recently, the PM talked about technologies being highly developed in ancient India. Which of these technologies was the first to be implemented in ancient India?
a.   Technology of mass flight
b.  Technology of plastic surgery
c.   Technology of surgery without the use of hands and instruments
d.  Transplantation of organs between members of the same family




56. Consider the following about China type of climate.
1.   High rainfall throughout the year
2.  Low temperature variation in summer and winter
3.  Distinct dry period
4.  Very cold winters

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 and 4 only d.  3 and 4 only




57. Consider the following about Coke.
1.   It is used in coal as well as nuclear power plants.
2.  It can be used to remove silica content of the iron ore.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  13    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    30                       
3.  Coke contains higher percentage of carbon by weight that coal.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.
a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 and 3 only
d.  None of the above

a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 and 3 only d.  3 only




58. Which of the following factors contribute to formation of Roaring Forties?
1.   Air being displaced from
the Equator towards the South Pole
2.  Earth's rotation
3.  Easterlies
4.  Ocean currents

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 and 4 only
d.  All of the above



59. Why was Tripura involved in the Indian freedom struggle?
1.   The Tripura tribals were forced to
pay high land rent by the British.
2.  Many tribals of Tripura were part of the Indian British army that were involved in 1857 mutiny.
3.  The princely state of Tripura was occupied by the British.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

60.Methane found in mines is dangerous for the workers because
1.   When mixed with air it can become explosive.
2.  It can be poisonous even in open
mines.
3.  Methane mixed with mine water can become toxic for human consumption.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 only
d.  All of the above




61. Boiler industries do not use hard water for their operations. Why?
a.   Hard water can result in scaling and cracking of boilers.
b.  Hard water blocks boiler operation.
c.   Minerals in hard water react with boiler metal and replace it.
d.  It erodes boiler metals at a very fast
pace.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  14    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    30                       


62. Keystone species are important in an ecosystem because
a.   They determine the genetic diversity of an ecological community.
b.  They are important in determining the ability of a large number of other species to persist in the community.
c.   They are found at the edge of an
ecosystem and signal the shift in ecosystems.
d.  They are rare in the ecosystem and stand at the top of the food web.


63. Anti-cyclonic conditions can be formed when
1.   Atmospheric pressure is high.
2.  Temperature is low.
3.  Rainfall is high and persistent.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 only
d.  All of the above


64. The principal gases dissolved in Magma is/are
1.   Water vapour
2.  Methane
3.  Carbon dioxide
4.  Sulphur dioxide
5.  Ozone

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 2 only
b.  2, 3 and 4 only c.   1 and 3 only
d.  3, 4 and 5 only
65. A rectangular drainage pattern develops
where
a.   strongly jointed rock terrain is found b.  soft and hard rocks exist parallel to
each other
c.   river channels follow the slope of the terrain
d.  streams flow in two parallel directions from a central peak




66. The Brahmaputra River carries a large volume of water and silt in India, but carries a smaller amount of both water and silt while coming from Tibet. Why?
1.   Tibet is a cold and dry area.
2.  Brahmputra forms many riverine islands in Tibet.
3.  In India it passes from the North-
eastern region which is a region of high rainfall.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 and 3 only
d.  All of the above


67. Consider the following statements about rivers in Peninsular India.
1.   The main water divide in Peninsular India is formed by the Western Ghats.
2.  The drainage basin of Peninsular
Rivers is smaller than Himalayan
Rivers.
3.  Peninsular rivers also flow in rift valleys and form estuaries.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  15    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    30                       
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 and 3 only
d.  All of the above


68. Pressure and wind system of an area depends on which of the following factors?
1.   Latitude
2.  Altitude
3.  Distance from sea
4.  Ocean currents
5.  Relief features

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1, 2 and 3 only b.  2 and 3 only
c.   1 and 5 only
d.  All of the above




69. A characteristic feature of the cold weather season over the northern plains is the inflow of cyclonic disturbances from the west and the northwest. Consider the following about it.
1.   These are low-pressure systems
which originate over the
Mediterranean Sea and western Asia.
2.  They cause winter rains over the plains and snowfall in the Mountains.
3.  They help in the cultivation of ‘rabi’
crops.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.
a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 and 3 only
d.  All of the above




70. Why are the western slopes of the Western Ghats covered with thick forests and not the eastern slopes?
a.   Eastern slopes are regions of high
pressure that repel clouds which results in lesser rainfall
b.  Soil in Eastern slopes is less fertile
than that of western slopes
c.   Lesser number of rivers are found on the eastern side which results in lesser evaporation and precipitation
d.  Eastern slope falls in the rain shadow area




71. Which of these Indian plants have anti- microbial and anti-biotic properties?
1.   Neem
2.  Tulsi
3.  Arjun
4.  Jamun

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 4 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 and 3 only d.  1 only


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  16    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    30                       
72. In Geographical terms a ‘Fault’ is
1.   A linear break in rocks of the earth’s crust in Horizontal or vertical direction
2.  A break in rocks in Oblique direction
3.  Bend in the rock strata

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 and 3 only d.  1 only




73. Consider the following about the oceanic resources that lie beyond the Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ)
1.   It can be exploited only by the
countries that border the EEZ.
2.  No individual country can utilize these resources without the concurrence of
international institutions.

Which of the above is/are correct?

a.   1 only b.  2 only
c.   Both 1 and 2
d.  None




74. The Sundarban Delta derives its name from
a.   it being the world’s largest delta
b.  a local sundari tree which grows in marshy areas
c.   its magnificent beauty that is localy
called sundar
d.  it being a large forest nearing a gulf
75. Which of the following are examples of
‘stock’ resources?
1.   Extracting hydrogen from water to produce energy
2.  Extracting shale gas for diversifying energy basket
3.  Employing natural gas to produce
electrical energy

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 and 3 only d.  1 only




76. As the District Agriculture Advisor you have visited a dry area and find the soil to be sub-standard for production of crops. You will recommend which of the following to improve the productivity of the soil?
1.   Make the soil more acidic
2.  Use mulching for improving soil nutrients
3.  Tighten the soil

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 and 3 only d.  2 only



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  17    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    30                       
77. Developing countries face the problem of environmental degradation even more starkly than the developed countries because of
1.   Over-population
2.  High incidence of Poverty
3.  High consumption per capita
4.  Capacity deficit in controlling factors like forest fires, invasion of unwanted
ecological elements

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   4 only
d.  1, 2 and 4 only




78. Forests and wastelands belonging to both government and private
individuals and communities are known
as
a.   Reserved Forests b.  Protected Forests
c.   National classed reserves d.  Unclassed forests




79. Under ‘Gramdan’ movement spread by
Vinoba Bhave
1.   Any land greater than the legal ceiling was forfeited by Zamindars to the             government.
2.  Villages were distributed to landless
poor people.
3.  Villages were instructed to abandon living spaces demarcated on the basis of  caste.
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 and 3 only d.  2 only




80.Ashoka’s concept of Dhamma included
1.   Prohibition of animal sacrifices
2.  Efficient organization of administration for social welfare
3.  Avoiding expensive and meaningless ceremonies
4.  Service to father and mother

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 2 only
b.  2, 3 and 4 only c.   1 and 3 only
d.  All of the above




81. Which of the following distinguish
Mathura school art from Gandhara art?
1.   Mathura art developed completely on indigenous lines unlike Gandhara
art.
2.  The Buddha images under Mathura art exhibited spiritual expressions which was            largely absent in the Gandhara school.
3.  Mathura school also carved the images of other deities unlike Gandhara school.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  18    
    



    




a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 and 3 only
d.  All of the above
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    30                       



84. Champaran movement was started in
1917 in Bihar due to
a.   High land rent demanded by the
Britishers from the tenants
b.  Lack of security of tenure for tenants

82. Consider the following statements about administration in Sangam age.
1.   Hereditary monarchy was the form of government.
2.  There was no separate military wing in the administration.
3.  The state did not involve itself in
foreign trade.
4.  The state did not rely on land revenue for income.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 4 only
c.   All of the above
d.  1 only




83. The famous Chinese pilgrim, Fahien visited India during the reign of Chandragupta II. The main purpose of his visit was to
a.   Understand the functioning of monarchical government in Gupta empire
b.  Experience the culture and heritage of India and write a literary piece on it
c.   See the land of the Buddha and to collect Buddhist manuscripts from India
d.  None of the above
working in British plantations
c.   farmers of that region being forced to grow indigo on their land
d.  farmers not being paid rent for using
their land for plantation crops




85. In Hindu temples architecture, ‘Vahana’
is that part of the temple which is
a.   the mount or vehicle of the temple’s main deity
b.  portico or colonnaded hall at the entrance of the temple
c.   a mountain-like spire at the front of the temple
d.  rhythmically projecting symmetrical
walls near the Garbhgriha of the temple


86. Persian invasions by Cyrus and others had which of the following implications for India?
1.   Boost in Indo-Iranian commerce
2.  Kharoshti, an Iranian writing became popular in north-western India.
3.  It helped temporarily avert invasion by Alexander.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 and 3 only
d.  All of the above


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  19    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    30                       
87. Consider the following statements.
1.   Samudragupta annexed all his conquered territories of South India.
2.  The North Indian conquests of
Samudragupta did not result in the expansion of the Gupta Empire.
3.  Feats of the Gupta Empire are only
recorded in the writings of foreign visitors to India.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 and 3 only
d.  None of the above




88.Grant of pattas by zamindars to farmers was a main feature of the Permanent Settlement system. This grant was widely not successful because
a.   British government later opposed the
move of granting pattas to farmers b.  A very large number of farmers did
not register themselves for the grant c.   There was a nexus between British
officials and Zamindars who allotted
land amongst themselves
d.  The zamindars were not officially accountable to the British government for grant of pattas




89. The Chalukyan administration was characterized by
1.   High centralization in administration
2.  Absence of Village autonomy
3.  Maritime power and small standing army
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 and 3 only
d.  All of the above




90.The English East India Company wanted their first trading centre to be set-up at Surat. The permission was however refused by the Mughal emperor there because
a.   The Mughal Emperor was against the
trade practices of the British
b.  There was portugese pressure on the
Emperor
c.   He was not interested in foreign trade and investment
d.  The British did not promise adequate
revenue from the trading centre to the Emperor






91. In the British-French rivalry to take control of Indian trade resulted in French failure. Which of the following can be the possible causes of the failure of the French?
1.   Commercial and naval superiority of
the British
2.  England’s victory in the European wars
3.  Lack of support of French from any
Mughal emperor

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  20    
    



    




a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 and 3 only
d.  All of the above



92. The Poona pact of 1932
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    30                       


94. The Vernacular Press Act passed in 1878 ensured that
a.   nothing would be published by the English government in any vernacular newspaper
b.  nothing seditious could be published
that affects the territorial integrity of
1.   Was a formal outcome of the Third
Round Table Conference
2.  Ensured reservation for depressed classes in all public institutions
3.  Provided for the British government to take welfare measures for the depressed classes

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.
British India
c.   the vernacular newspapers were not exposed to pre-censorship by the British government
d.  no Indian national freedom fighter could establish a vernacular press company in India




95. Consider the following statements.
a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 only
d.  None of the above




93. In 1854, Sir Charles Wood sent a comprehensive dispatch as a grand plan on education. The plan laid emphasis on
1.   Education in vernacular languages
2.  Provision of education only by public institutions
3.  Westernization of Indian education

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 and 3 only
d.  3 only

Assertion (A): Local self-government bodies were not recognized officially till Indian
Independence.

Reason (R): The British did not enact any special legislation for the governance of  local bodies.

In the context of the statements above, which of these is true?

a)  A and R both are true, and R is the correct explanation for A.
b)  A and R both are true, and R is the
NOT the correct explanation for A. c)  A is correct, R is incorrect.
d)  A is incorrect, R is correct.






http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  21    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    30                       
96. In the Parliament of Religions held in Chicago (USA) in 1893, Swami Vivekananda gave the message of
a.   Essential unity of all religions
b.  Superiority of Indian culture over all other cultures in the world
c.   A classless society guided by core
human values d.   All of the above




97. Even though the moderates were not very popular among the extremists, they succeeded on a number of fronts. They were successful at
1.   popularizing the ideas of democracy,
civil liberties and representative institutions
2.  explained British exploitation of the
Indian economy
3.  getting the legislative councils expanded for Indian benefit

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 and 3 only
d.  All of the above




98. The Home Rule Movement of 1916 did
NOT emphasize
1.   Revival of Swadeshi
2.  Participation of Indians in self- governing institutions for India
3.  Complete erosion of British
sovereignty over India
4.  Separate electorates for all communities of India
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   1 and 2 only b.  2 and 3 only c.   1 and 3 only d.  3 and 4 only




99. When Warren Hastings assumed the administration of Bengal in 1772, he found it in utter chaos and thus abolished the ‘dual system’. After the abolition of the dual system
a.   The East India Company acted both
as Diwan and collector of revenue by its own agents
b.  The British handed over financial
powers to Mughal administration and focussed only on revenue collection
c.   The British handed financial
administration to the Mughals and fixed a share from revenue for every year
d.  None of the above




100.          On what grounds do the National and State government have control over religious education imparted in minority institutions?
a)  On grounds of protecting the
culture of minorities
b)  On grounds of promoting scientific temper in society
c)  On grounds of national unity and integrity
d)  The government cannot control
religious education imparted in minority institutions.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  22    
    



    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    -­‐    30                       


































































http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  23    
    
