
INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK PRELIMINARY EXAM - 2015


INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST - 23

GENERAL STUDIES

PAPER-I

Time Allowed: 1.5 Hours                                                                                       Maximum Marks: 150


INSTRUCTIONS
1.   IMMEDITELY AFTER THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE EXAMINATION, YOU SHOULD
CHECK  THAT  THIS  TEST  BOOKLET  DOES  NOT  HAVE  ANY  UNPRINTED  OR  TORN  OR MISSING PAGES OR ITEMS, ETC. IF SO, GET IT REPLACED BY A COMPLETE TEST BOOKLET.
2.  You have to enter your Roll Number on the Test I Booklet in the Box provided alongside. DO NOT write anything else on the Test Booklet.
4.  This Test Booklet contains 75 items (questions). Each item is printed only in English. Each item comprises four responses (answers). You will select the response which you want to mark on the Answer Sheet. In case you feel that there is more than one correct response, mark the response which you consider the best. In any case, choose ONLY ONE response for each item.
5.  You have to mark all your responses ONLY on the separate Answer Sheet provided.  See directions in the
Answer Sheet.
6.  All items carry equal marks.

7.  Before you proceed to mark in the Answer Sheet the response to various items in the Test Booklet, you have to fill in some particulars in the Answer Sheet as per instructions sent to you with your Admission Certificate.

8.  After you have completed filling in all your responses on the Answer Sheet and the examination has concluded, you should hand over to the Invigilator only the Answer Sheet. You are permitted to take away with you the Test Booklet.

9.  Sheets for rough work are appended in the Test Booklet at the end.
10.  Penalty for wrong answers :
THERE WILL BE PENALTY FOR WRONG ANSWERS MARKED BY A CANDIDATE IN THE OBJECTIVE TYPE QUESTION PAPERS.
(i)   There are four alternatives for the answer to every question. For each question for which a wrong answer has been given by the candidate, one-third of the marks assigned to that question will be deducted as penalty.
(ii)   If a candidate gives more than one answer, it will be treated as a wrong answer even if one of the given answers happens to be correct and there will be same penalty as above to that question.
(iii)     If a question is left blank, i.e., no answer is given by the candidate, there will be no penalty for that question.


http://insightsonindia.com


INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST SERIES FOR CIVIL SERVICES PRELIMINARY EXAM 2015





http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                         Page 1
1.   Recently the Union government cancelled licences of nearly 9,000
Non-Governmental  Organisations in
an order issued by the Ministry of Home affairs. This was done because a)  an off late IB report had
recommended banning all NGOs that receive foreign funding
b)  these NGOs were involved in anti- developmental activities in various parts of India
c)   these NGOs flouted governmental
norms and accepted projects radically different that what they were licensed for
d)  these NGOs failed to file their annual returns and details of foreign funds received when asked by the government


2.   Consider the following statements about Swayambhunath  Stupa located in Kathmandu.
1.   It is world‟s youngest Buddhist
shrine.
2.   It is one of the seven UNESCO- listed world heritage sites of South Asia.
3.   It has been built out of one single large rock.
4.  The Indian government funds the conservation of this shrine.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2, 3 and 4 only c)   1 and 4 only
d)  None of the above


3.   Climate change will affect wildlife directly and indirectly as it may lead to change in
1.   Weather patterns
2.   Food that the wildlife feeds on
3.   Habitat of the Wildlife
4.  Species composition of a particular region

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2, 3 and 4 only c)   1 and 4 only
d)  All of the above


4.  India and Japan have recently signed a Five-point action agenda to increase bilateral trade and investment between the two nations. But, in some areas cooperation is not there. These areas are
1.   Building Industrial townships in
India
2.   Strategic sectors
3.   IT Sector
4.  Agriculture

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  3 and 4 only c)   4 only
d)  All of the above


5.   In which of the following forms/ways FDI can be incentivized in the host country?
1.   Export Processing zones
2.   Special Economic zones
3.   Preferential tariffs
4.  Liberalising security markets

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 3 only b)  2 and 3 only
c)   1, 3 and 4 only d)  1 and 2 only

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                       Page 2



6.  A Kathakali performance begins with the kelikottu, calling the audience to attention followed by the todayam. It is a)  a devotional number performed
where one or two characters invoke
the blessings of the gods
b)  the musicians and drummers holding the stage entertaining the audience with an exhibition of their skills in melappada
c)   an orchestra which is also used in other traditional performing arts of Kerala
d)  a pure dance sequence where the
actor is at great liberty to express himself and display his skills


7.   The Government has proposed to bring certain changes in the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. Consider the following statements about the Act.
1.   It covers only the Central government agencies/bodies and PSUs.
2.   The offences punishable under this
act can be tried by special Judges only.
3.   Police does not have powers to investigate offences under this particular Act.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)   2 and 3 only d)  2 only


8.  The total precipitation of Siberian climate is determined by factors such as
1.   Altitude
2.   Latitude
3.   Proximity to poles
4.  Amount of exposure to influence by westerlies
5.   Temperate monsoons on the eastern side of continents

Choose the correct answer from the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only
b)  2, 4 and 5 only c)   1, 2 and 3 only d)  All of the above


9.  The soils of coniferous forests are leached, acidic and poor because
1.   The evergreen leaves of these
forests provide little leaves for humus formation
2.   decomposition rate of biomass is
low at cold temperatures in coniferous forests

Which of the above is correct?

a)  1 only b)  2 only
c)   Both 1 and 2 d)  None


10. The Cool temperate Eastern margin (laurential) type climate is an intermediate type of climate between British and Siberian type climate. This type of climate is not found in the Southern hemisphere because
a)  only a small section of the southern hemisphere extends beyond 40 degrees latitude
b)  the influence of westerlies is less stronger because of the large sea portion in southern hemisphere
c)   a large number of warm currents
are present in the southern hemisphere ocean in comparison to the cold currents found at same latitude in Northern hemispheres
d)  None of the above

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                       Page 3



11. The mission of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) is to
a)  promote policies that will improve the economic and social well-being of people around the world.
b)  promote policies that will improve
the economic and social well-being of its member nations.
c)   promote effective trade policies that help lower down trade barriers for its member nations across the
world
d)  promote effective trade policies that help lower down trade barriers for international trade to flourish


12. Recently some of the eminent Indian personalities have received highest civilian awards from some foreign government. These personalities are
1.   CNR Rao
2.   Yashwant Sinha
3.   Kumar Mangalam Birla
4.  LK Advani

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only
c)   2, 3 and 4 only d)  All of the above


13. Krishi Vigyaan Kendras (KVKs) work to support agricultural extension services to farmers in India. Which of the following come under their mandate?
1.   Education & training of farmers,
entrepreneurs and voluntary organizations
2.   On farm demonstration of new
technologies
3.   Conducting research on Genetically
Modified Organisms (GMOs)

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)   2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above


14. Consider the following about the “Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005”.
1.   Minors are not entitled to relief under the law.
2.   Law can be applicable even to unmarried couples.
3.   The complaint can be filed against
both men and women.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)   2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above


15. Changes in crude oil prices have a
bearing on Indian Economy‟s
1.   Current Account Deficit
2.   Inflation levels
3.   Interest rates
4.  Exchange rate of Indian rupee

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 3 and 4 only b)  1, 2 and 4 only c)   1 and 4 only
d)  2 and 3 only



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                       Page 4
16. Bharat Bill Payment System (BBPS) is an integrated bill payment system
in India offering interoperable and accessible bill payment service to customers. Consider the following about it.
1.   Its nodal body will be a private agency nominated by the government.
2.   It will also protect consumers from frauds and mischief on e-commerce transactions.
3.   No agents will be involved in BBPS.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)   2 and 3 only d)  2 only


17. RBI recently allowed Indian
companies to issue rupee-denominated bonds abroad. This is a move towards
a)  Full capital account convertibility b)  Full current account convertibility c)   Liberalization of Industrial policy
in India
d)  Great autonomy of foreign exchange markets in India


18. „Target Olympic Podium Scheme‟ (TOP Scheme) launched recently under the National Sports Development Fund (NSDF) will identify athletes from which of the following disciplines?
1.   Sailing
2.   Wrestling
3.   Archery
4.  Boxing
5.   Athletics

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 3, and 5 only
b)  2 and 4 only
c)   2, 3, 4 and 5 only d)  All of the above


19. Wind is caused due to difference in temperature and pressure between two regions. Factors affecting wind movement can be
1.   Latitude
2.   Proximity of water bodies
3.   Land undulations
4.  Rotation of earth

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2, and 4 only b)  2 and 4 only
c)   1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above


20. Recently the Central Marine Fish Research Institute (CMFRI), Kochi has begun the genetic profiling of The Indian Mackerel, an important food fish commonly consumed in South Asia. Consider the following about it.
1.   The fish is commonly found in
warm shallow waters.
2.   Regions of maximum population are along the coasts of the Indian and West Pacific oceans.
3.   No inter-species genetic distinction is found between these fishes collected within the Northern hemisphere.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                       Page 5
21. When you crack your knuckle it produces popping sound. This happens because
a)  A cavity/bubble is formed in the
suddenly expanded joint volume b)  the fluid between the joint gets
compressed at high pressure and produces sound
c)   the bones of knuckles counter act
against each other
d)  the tissues of knuckles counter act against each other


22. Eastern Patagonia is a large arid region. Its aridity can be attributed to
1.   Climatic barrier of Southern Andes
2.   Frequent and strong influence of westerlies
3.   nearby cold currents

Choose the correct answer from the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 only
d)  All of the above


23. The meeting of the warm Gulf stream and cold Labrador current on coastal waters of the nearby island (Newfoundland) produces
1.   Mist and Fog
2.   atmospheric storms
3.   Apt fishing grounds
4.  frontal systems

Choose the correct answer from the codes below.

a)  1 and 4 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 2 only
d)  1, 2 and 3 only
24. The Kathak dance combines the elements of and is inspired from?
1.   Vaishnavite cult of 15th century in
India
2.   The emergence of Raslila in the
Braj region
3.   Durbar style impetus from Hindu courts

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above


25. Consider the following statements about Kathak dance form.
1.   It the only classical dance of India having links with Muslim culture.
2.   It is the only form of classical dance wedded to Hindustani or the North Indian music.

Which of the above is/are true?

a)  1 only b)  2 only
c)   Both 1 and 2 d)  None


26.   Arrange these countries/entities in descending order in their contribution to cumulative global CO2.
1.   USA
2.   China
3.   India
4.  EU
5.   Russia

Choose the correct order from the codes given below.

a) 14253 b) 41523 c)   45123
d)  12345

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                       Page 6



27. In winter, a steep pressure gradient is set up between the cold interiors of Mongolia and Siberia, and the warmer pacific coastlands. As a consequence of this
1.   The continental polar stream flows outwards as the North-west monsoon.
2.   There is heavy rain on the
windward slopes.
3.   Temperature inversion occurs near the cold interiors.

Choose the correct answer from the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only d)  1 only


28. The Southern continents also have violent local storms, which though not as severe as typhoons or cyclones, are nevertheless significant. In this context, the Southerly Buster is
1.   a cold wind blowing along the coast of Wales
2.   accompanied by heavy thunder and rain
3.   leads to the formation of local
typhoons

Choose the correct answer from the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only d)  1 only


29. Lai Haraoba is one of the main festivals still performed in Manipur. Consider the following about it.
1.   It was conceived after the post-
vaishnavite period.
2.   It is also the earliest form of dance which forms the basis of all stylised dances in Manipur.
3.   The principal performers in this re-
enact the theme of the creation of the world.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above


30. The cool temperate western margins
1.   remain under the permanent influence of westerlies
2.   do not suffer from any cyclonic
activity
3.   are not visited by heat waves

Choose the correct answer from the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 only
d)  All of the above


31. Barley, a member of the grass family, is a major cereal grain. It can be used as
1.   Algicide
2.   Fish feed
3.   Preservative
4.  a cure for cardiovascular diseases

Choose the correct answer from the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 4 only
c)   1, 2 and 3 only
d)  1 and 4 only

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                       Page 7
32. Which of the following are related to
Hindustani Classical music?
1.   Sruti
2.   Saptak
3.   Antara Gandhara
4.  Moorcchanas
5.   Gramas

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 4 only b)  3 and 5 only
c)   1 and 2 only
d)  All of the above


33. A characteristic contribution of India to musical rhythm is the tala. Tala is a a)  scale of melodies
b)  cyclic arrangement of time units
c)   subsidiary notes of a basic scale of music
d)  unit difference between the various
consecutive pitches within a scale


34. Consider the following about Thumri form of singing.
1.   It is not lyrical in its structure and
presentation.
2.   It is essentially a love song.
3.   Musical grammar is not adhered to in Thumri.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only d)  2 only


35. Tappa is a popular type heard in concerts in India. It consists of song uttered in
1.   fast note patterns
2.   very simple compositions
3.   ragas where strong ragas like
bhairavi don‟t find a place

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only d)  1 only


36. Which of the following musical forms come under the Carnatic classical music?
1.   Gitam
2.   Suladi
3.   Svarajati
4.  Kirtanam
5.   Kriti
6.  Pada

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only
b)  All except 2 and 3 c)   All of the above
d)  4 only


37. Consider the following about United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD).
1.   It is governed by its member
states.
2.   Member states are elected by UN General Assembly.
3.   UNCTAD organizes the World Investment Forum every year to bring greater investment in developing economies.
4.  It conducts cutting-edge research and analysis in the field of investment for sustainable development.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                       Page 8
a)  1 and 3 only b)  2 and 3 only
c)   1, 3 and 4 only d)  1 and 4 only


38. In the Natya Shastra, compiled by Bharat Muni dated 200 B.C.-200 A.D., musical instruments have been divided into four main categories on the basis of how sound is produced. These are
1.   Ghana Vadya
2.   Tata Vadya
3.   Sushira Vadya
4.  Reki Vadya
5.   Adoor Vadya

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  2, 4 and 5 only b)  3 and 4 only
c)   1, 2 and 3 only d)  All of the above


39. Consider the following about Bhavai - a traditional theatre form.
1.   It belongs to the region of Madhya
Pradesh.
2.   It is an entirely romantic play centred around love and affection.
3.   It is associated with local deities and their popular legends.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 only
c)   3 only
d)  None of the above



40. Krishnattam, folk theatre of Kerala, came into existence in the middle of
17th century A.D. under the patronage of King Manavada of Calicut. Consider
the following about it.
1.   It is a cycle of eight plays performed for eight consecutive days.
2.   The episodes are based on the
theme of Lord Krishna.
3.   Themes depict victory of good over evil.
4.  Dashavatar performers wear masks
in this theatre.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 3 only b)  2 and 4 only
c)   All of the above
d)  None of the above



41. Consider the following features of folk theatres.
1.   performed by various castes to appease and worship spirits
2.   colourful costume and beautiful headgears
3.   Also called as God‟s dance

Which local theatre has these features?

a)  Koodiyaattam b)  Theyyam
c)   Mudiyettu
d)  Yakshagaana



42. Consider the following about Therukoothu, the most popular form of folk drama of Tamil Nadu.
1.   It is performed to achieve rain harvest.
2.   It is based on the lives of Ravana.
3.   It cannot be performed at temples.
4.  It also draws inspiration from
Puranas.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                       Page 9
a)  1, 2 and 3 only b)  2 and 4 only
c)   1 only
d)  None of the above


43. Consider the following about the art of puppetry in India.
1.   The earliest reference to the art of
puppetry is found in
Natyashashtra.
2.   They are mostly based on epics and legends.
3.   Rod puppetry is not practiced in
India.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only d)  2 only


44. In Performance in Services, an International Comparison (year on year) tells us that
1.   India‟s service sector grew fastest
for the period 2001-13.
2.   Service sector in U.S. has suffered from instances of negative growth in last one decade.
3.   India is the only nation that has
able to maintain a positive growth rate in services sector since the economic recession of 2008.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above
45. As accepted internationally,  which of the following factors differentiates Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) from portfolio investment?
a)  Control of ownership b)  Origin of investment c)   Entity of Investment
d)  Outgoing and Incoming


46. Manipur dance has a large repertoire of popular forms. Some of them are
1.   Ras
2.   Sankirtana
3.   Thang-ta
4.  Parengs

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 3 and 4 only b)  2 and 4 only
c)   1, 2 and 3 only d)  All of the above


47. Consider the following about the
Sattriya dance form.
1.   It was conceived to propagate
Vaishnava faith.
2.   It has not been influenced by
Assamese local folk dances.
3.   The dance form is secular in character.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only d)  1 only








http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 10
48. The Services sector had the highest share in Gross capital formation (GCF) in the Economy for the last two financial years. Which of the following sub-sectors contributed for GCF the most?
1.   Real estate
2.   Ownership of dwelling
3.   Professional services

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above


49. Decision-making in OECD is vested in the OECD council which consists of
1.   One representative from each
member country
2.   Elected representatives from five member countries by rotation
3.   A representative of European
Commission
4.  Secretary-general of UN

Choose the correct answer from the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only d)  2 and 4 only


50. At present, India is engaged in bilateral Free Trade Agreement (FTA) negotiations with which of the following countries?
1.   Canada
2.   Thailand
3.   Zimbabwe
4.  Israel
5.   New Zealand
6.  Australia
Choose the correct answer from the codes below.

a)  All except 2 and 3 b)  All except 1 and 6 c)   All except 3
d)  All except 4 and 5




51. Which of the following is NOT covered under a Free Trade Agreement (FTA)?
1.   Free movement of people across the border of two countries
2.   Reducing trade barrier for services
3.   Coordination in fiscal and monetary policy

Choose the correct answer from the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above


52. Consider the following statements about the World Travel & Tourism Council (WTTC).
1.   It is an inter-governmental  body.
2.   It includes representation from the private sector too.
3.   WTTC campaigns for governments to implement policies that ensure the business environment is conducive to the growth of Travel & Tourism.

Choose the correct answer from the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 11
53. The Chhau dances of Orissa is a form of Indian
a)  tribal martial dance
b)  narration of legends of local heroes, kings and deities
c)   folk theatre
d)  dance in leaping and crouching in twirling patterns


54. The folk music and dances of agricultural communities celebrate the rhythms of daily life. Together these dances have formed a vast reservoir from which the classical dances have drawn sustenance. The classical dances are
1.   Sattriya
2.   Kuchipudi
3.   Odissi
4.  Bhavai

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   3 and 4 only
d)  1, 2 and 3 only


55. Consider the following about Natyashashtra, an ancient Indian treatise on performing arts.
1.   It is traditionally attributed to the Sage Bharata.
2.   It deals with stage design, music, dance, makeup, and primarily with aspects of stagecraft.
3.   The Natya Shastra is based upon the Gandharva Veda.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above


56. In an international comparison of tourist performance, the nations which have the highest international tourist arrivals and highest international tourist receipts (income) respectively are
a)  USA and France b)  India and USA
c)   India and Spain d)  France and USA


57. Consider the following about the Intergovernmental  Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).
1.   It is an agency under the UN.
2.   Membership of IPCC is open to all members of United Nations Environment Program (UNEP).
3.   The IPCC does not carry out its own
original research.
4.  The ultimate objective of the UNFCCC is to stabilize greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a sustainable level.

Choose the correct answer from the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 4 only
d)  All of the above


58. The ecological overshoot problem essentially means
a)  the ecological footprint is larger
than the biocapacity of the population
b)  unsustainable ecology due to anthropogenic emissions
c)   increasing population of lower trophic levels in an ecosystem overshooting the higher trophic levels
d)  None of the above


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 12






59. Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) recently successfully tested an indigenous cryogenic engine. Consider the following about a cryogenic engine.
1.   It is more efficient as it provides more thrust for every kilogram of propellant             burnt.
2.   Cryogenic fuels are extremely clean
as they give out only water while burning.
3.   It can be used in interplanetary probes and manned space missions by India.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)   2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above


60. Consider the following about some of the regional songs and their roles in communities.
1.   Bhuta song in Kerala is used to ward away evil ghosts and spirits.
2.   Bhakha form of folk music in Jammu is sung when harvesting is done.
3.   Sana Lamok in Manipur is sung to
evoke the spirit of the presiding deity.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above
61. The Gulf type of climate is the best for growing cotton because it has
1.   more than six months frost free
2.   frequent light rain showers
3.   long bright sunshine periods

Choose the correct answer from the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above


62. Bharatnatyam dance is known to be ekaharya because
a)  one dancer takes on many roles in a single performance
b)  It is performed music and dance as
offerings to the deities, in the temple courtyards
c)   It is an abstract piece combining pure dance with the recitation of sound syllables.
d)  the raga, singer and dancer flow in
one synchronic rhythm


63. The logo for International Day of Yoga has recently been approved by the Government of India. Consider the following about the elements of the logo.
1.   Folding of both hands in the logo reflects the union of individual consciousness      with universal consciousness.
2.   The brown leaves in the logo
symbolise the earth element.
3.   The sun in the logo symbolise the source of energy and inspiration.
4.  The logo has also been adopted by
the United Nations General
Assembly (UNGA).

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 13
a)  1, 2 and 3 only b)  1 and 3 only
c)   2 and 4 only
d)  All of the above


64. The National Green Tribunal (NGT)
has recently ordered a complete ban on burning of any kind of garbage, leaves, plastic waste and rubber in the open in Delhi-National Capital Region (NCR). What harmful gaseous emissions can come out of such burning?
1.   Dioxins
2.   Furan
3.   Nitrogen oxides
4.  Methane
5.   Hydrochloric acid

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  All except 3 and 5 b)  All except 1 and 2 c)   All except 5
d)  All except 4


65. FDI equity inflows in Services sector cumulatively since 2000 has been highest in
a)  Construction development
b)  Hotel & Tourism
c)   Telecommunications
d)  Computer Software and Hardware


66. Which two sub-sectors had the highest share in India‟s major export services in the last two financial years?
1.   Computer services
2.   Professional and consulting services
3.   R&D services
4.  Business services

Choose the correct answer from the codes below.

a)  1 and 2
b)  2 and 3 c)   1 and 4 d)  2 and 4


67. Delhi‟s Indira Gandhi International Airport (IGIA) has been adjudged the world‟s best airport for the year 2014. It is run by the Delhi International Airport Limited (DIAL) which is
a)  a joint venture between Delhi Government and Central government - Airport Authority of India
b)  run solely by the Central government – Directorate General of Civil Aviation
c)   a private agency licensed by the
Central government
d)  a joint venture between the Airport Authority of India and a private sector firm


68. Consider the following statements about the Nuclear energy status of India.
1.   India is among the leading producers of Nuclear energy in the World.
2.   No nuclear power project in India
has been built with indigenous technology.
3.   While only Central government can sanction nuclear projects, state governments can also initiate standalone nuclear projects.
4.  There is no Thorium based
operational nuclear power plant in
India.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  3 and 4 only c)   4 only
d)  None of the above


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 14



69. The outstanding feature of Carnatic music is its „X‟ system, in the concept of which, the ideal or 'absolute music' is reached, and the highly developed and  intricate „Y‟ system, which  has made it extremely scientific and systematic and unique in all respects. Here X and Y are
a)  Sruti and Tala
b)  Raga and Tala c)   Sruti and Raga
d)  Prabandhas and Raga


70. Consider the following matches of regional music to the region they belong to.
1.   Rasiya Geet – Rajasthan
2.   Pankhida – Punjab
3.   Lotia – Rajasthan
4.  Mando – Goa

Choose the correct matches from the above using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  3 and 4 only c)   1 and 4 only d)  2 and 3 only



71. In the regional song Laman sung in
Himachal Pradesh
a)  Local boys and girls sing the song in replies to each other from different mountain peaks.
b)  women sing folk songs during early rainy season
c)   family members sing every time a new one is born in the family
d)  local deity is worshipped and
praised for better harvests the next season
72. Powada is the traditional folk art from Maharashtra. Consider the following about it.
1.   In this narratives are always odes in
praise of an individual hero or an incident or place.
2.   the tempo is fast and controlled by the main singer
3.   It is sung on the third day after the
new moon or amavasya of shraavana month.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above





73. India has been following action- oriented policies to bring rapid development to its people while purposefully addressing climate change. Which of these stands have been taken by India at global forums?
1.   Historical responsibilities of developed countries and equity in access to global atmospheric resources should continue to be the basis of defining mitigation commitments.
2.   The responsibility of providing climate related financial assistance to the developing countries lies with the developed countries.
3.   The developed countries should
provide free climate related technology transfer to developing countries without the intellectual property rights price-tag.

Choose the correct answer from the codes below.



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 15
a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above



74. Consider the following about the Clean
Development Mechanism (CDM).
1.   It has been defined under the Kyoto protocol.
2.   Developed countries can get
emission reduction credits by supporting environment friendly projects in developing countries.
3.   One company can trade emission
certificates with another company in the same developing country under CDM.

Choose the correct answer from the codes below.
a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above



75. The Warm temperate Eastern Margin
(China type) climate is
1.   strongly influenced by maritime influence
2.   a modified form of monsoonal
climate
3.   typified by a cool dry winter
4.  scarce in rainfall

Choose the correct answer from the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 3 only b)  2 and 3 only
c)   1, 3 and 4 only
d)  All of the above








































http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                    Page 16
