


    
                       




INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK PRELIMINARY EXAM - 2015

INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST - 29
GENERAL STUDIES
PAPER-I
Time Allowed: 2 Hours                                                                                              Maximum Marks: 200

INSTRUCTIONS
1.   IMMEDITELY AFTER THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE EXAMINATION, YOU SHOULD
CHECK THAT THIS TEST BOOKLET DOES NOT HAVE ANY UNPRINTED OR TORN OR MISSING PAGES OR ITEMS, ETC. IF SO, GET IT REPLACED BY A COMPLETE TEST BOOKLET.
2.  You have to enter your Roll Number on the Test Booklet in the Box provided alongside. DO NOT Write anything else on the Test Booklet.
4.  This  Test  Booklet  contains  100  items  (questions).  Each  item  is printed  only  in  English.  Each  item comprises  four  responses  (answers).  You  will  select  the  response  which  you  want  to  mark  on  the Answer Sheet. In case you feel that there is more than one correct response, mark the response which you consider the best. In any case, choose ONLY ONE response for each item.
5.  You have to mark all your responses ONLY on the separate Answer Sheet provided.  See directions in
the Answer Sheet.
6.  All items carry equal marks.

7.  Before you proceed to mark in the Answer Sheet the response to various items in the Test Booklet, you have to fill in some particulars in the Answer Sheet as per instructions sent to you with your Admission Certificate.
8.  After you have completed filling in all your responses on the Answer Sheet and the examination  has concluded, you should hand over to the Invigilator only the Answer Sheet. You are permitted to take away with you the Test Booklet.
9.  Sheets for rough work are appended in the Test Booklet at the end.
10.  Penalty for wrong answers :
THERE WILL BE PENALTY FOR WRONG ANSWERS MARKED BY A CANDIDATE IN THE OBJECTIVE TYPE QUESTION PAPERS.
(i)    There are four alternatives for the answer to every question. For each question for which a wrong answer has been given by the candidate, one-third of the marks assigned to that question will be deducted as penalty.
(ii)   If a candidate gives more than one answer, it will be treated as a wrong answer even if one of the  given  answers  happens  to be  correct  and  there  will  be  same  penalty  as  above  to that question.
(iii)     If a question is left blank, i.e., no answer is given by the candidate, there will be no penalty for that question.


http://www.insightsonindia.com

INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST SERIES FOR CIVIL SERVICES PRELIMINARY EXAM 2015







http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Page  1    
    



    
                       




1.   RBI has recently raised concerns about
‘Algorithmic trading or High frequency trading’ in stock markets disturbing their stability. What is algorithmic trading?
a)  using a computer program to trade
in the stock market based on a certain set of instructions
b)  using random electronic equity purchases in the stock market to make them more volatile
c)  done by a big cartel of the stock
market that buy or sell stocks based on previously agreed set of instructions
d)  purchasing and selling stocks at a very high frequency




2.  The Supreme Court has recently given a ruling against using Mediation in rape cases. Consider the following about mediation – an alternative dispute resolution mechanism.
1.   Consent of all parties is required to start mediation.
2.  Decision arrived after mediation can be enforced in a court of law.
3.  Only a court of law can appoint the
mediator.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above
3.  The BCIM corridor is one of the major joint economic initiatives of India and China. The BCIM corridor will pass through
1.   Kunming
2.  Mandalay
3.  Xinjiang
4.  Dhaka
5.  Kolkata

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2, 4 and 5 only b)  4 and 5 only
c)  1, 2, 3 and 5 only d)  1, 2, 3 and 4 only




4.  The issue of IIM autonomy has been in news lately. Consider the following about the governance of IIMs presently.
1.   It has been established by executive order.
2.  The MHRD has no say in the appointments of Directors of the IIMs.
3.  No changes in the educational
curriculum of IIMs can be made without approval            from the government.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 only
d)  1 and 3 only


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  2    
    



    




5.  Which of the following benefits are being given to Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana.
1.   Grant for each house constructed
under the scheme
2.  Subsidy on the interest rates for housing loans
3.  Scheme is applicable to lower income
groups only
                       




7.   Premiers/PMs/Presidents from which of these countries have visited India in the past one year?
1.   USA
2.  Japan
3.  China
4.  Russia
5.  France
4.  Transgender and widows will be given preference in the allocation of benefits.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 3 only b)  1 and 3 only
c)  2 and 4 only
d)  All of the above




6.  What is meant by ‘Competitive monetary easing policy’?
a)  Nations competing to attract investment by lowering interest rates in the economy
b)  Nations competing to liberalize banking rules in order to attract greater investment in the financial sector
c)  Competition between states of the
same federation to increase money supply in the economy
d)  Nations competing to attract
investment by giving grater sops to investors
Choose the correct answer using the codes
below.

a)  1, 2, 4 and 5 only b)  2, 3 and 4 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




8.  Mobile number portability will be available nationally now. How would the consumers benefit from this move by TRAI and the government?
1.   Consumers can keep their existing
mobile phone numbers while shifting between States and circles.
2.  Consumers can keep existing mobile
phone numbers while changing between   operators.
3.  Consumers can keep existing mobile
phone numbers while changing between   operators, states and circles.

Which of the above is/are true?

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above






http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  3    
    



    
                       





9.  In a court proceeding, DNA tests are allowed to be used as evidence in which of the following cases?
1.   Minor Civil maintenance cases
2.  Paternity and maternity disputes
3.  Certain criminal cases

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




10. Green climate fund would be made available to which of the following bodies/ organizations/ agencies in India for mitigating climate change?
1.   Governmental development agencies
like NABARD
2.  Rural development centred NGOs
3.  Private organizations with a high investment in corporate social responsibility
4.  Grass root agencies affiliated with
local government

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 4 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 4 only
d)  1 only
11. Mercury poisoning in humans can happen in which of the following ways?
1.   Consumption of fish
2.  Breathing contaminated air
3.  Improper disposal of fluorescent lamps
4.  Emission from coal based power
plants

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  3 and 4 only
c)  2, 3 and 4 only d)  All of the above




12. To generate awareness about a digital India across India, the “Digital India week” was to be organized at
1.   Gram Panchayats
2.  Post Offices
3.  Community Service Centres
4.  Schools

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  3 and 4 only b)  1 and 2 only
c)  1, 2 and 3 only d)  All of the above






http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  4    
    



    




13. The Russian city of ‘Ufa’ was recently in news because
a)  a new Palaeolithic age monument has been found that shed greater light on human evolution
b)  abundant reserves of shale gas have been discovered that are very near to the surface
c)  the Shanghai Corporation
                       




2.  All member nations will have equal decision-making power in AIIB, whereas in IMF  and WB its rests on their economic size and global economic contributions.
3.  Membership of the AIIB is open only to Asian nations, unlike in IMF and WB.
Organization (SCO) meeting where India is attending as a member
d)  the SCO and BRICS summits were
recently hosted here




14. The term ‘troika’ has been widely used in the negotiations concerning the Greece crisis. The troika consists of
1.   International Monetary Fund
2.  World Bank
3.  European Union
4.  European Commission
5.  European Central Bank

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 3 b)  2, 3 and 5 c)  2, 4 and 5 d)  1, 4 and 5




15. How does the newly established Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) differ from the IMF and World Bank (WB)?
1.   No nation holds veto power in the
AIIB, unlike in IMF and WB.
Choose the correct answer using the codes
below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 only
d)  None of the above




16. In a recent World Bank report, the context of poverty has been said to deplete a person’s thinking bandwidth to make rational decisions. This finding is rooted in
a)  Anthropological studies
b)  Genetic studies
c)  Behavioural economics d)  Psychological economics




17. Consider the following about the Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI).
1.   It is an autonomous society not
controlled by the Government of
India.
2.  It is subordinate to International
Cricket Council.
3.  It comes under the purview of the
RTI Act.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  5    
    



    




a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  1 only
                       




3.  The American SC does not have any powers of judicial review, unlike with the            Indian SC.
Choose the correct answer using the codes
below.

18. Consider the following about the institution of Lokayukta.
1.   A state is not legally obliged to create the institution of Lokayukta.
2.  Powers of Lokayukta vary from state to state.
3.  Only a serving or retired Supreme
Court judge can be appointed as a
Lokayukta.
4.  A Lokayukta can also investigate cases pertaining to Central civil servants.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 4 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  2 only
d)  1, 2 and 3 only




19. Which of the following correctly understate the difference(s) between the Indian and American (USA) Supreme Court?
1.   While the Indian SC’s jurisdiction
extends to constitutional, civil and criminal   cases; the American SC’s jurisdiction is confined to constitutional cases only.
2.  The American SC does not defend
the fundamental rights of citizens, unlike the            Indian SC.
a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only d)  1 only




20.The Saraswati River is often called as
‘antarvahini’ or ‘gupt’. Why?
a)  The river does not flow any longer in India.
b)  The river flows underground invisible to human eyes and does not come to surface at all.
c)  The river surfaces only at one
location and flows underground in the rest of the territory.
d)  The river has been lost since
ancient times and not recovered till date.




21. Consider the following about Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT) mission.
1.   The mission supports cities to
become smart cities.
2.  Centre will allocate finances to states based on a central plan to which every state should confirm.
3.  Urban local bodies implementing the mission will get funding directly
from the  Centre.



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  6    
    



    




4.  The mission has been merged with JNNURM, a previous mission for urban cities.

Choose the correct answer using the codes
                       




2.  It will allow students movement from one degree programme to another.
3.  Students can take courses of their
choice, and even acquire more
below.


a)  1 and 4 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  1 only
d)  All of the above
than the         required credits.
4.  Students can choose interdisciplinary courses.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.


22. Consider the following statements: Assertion (A): A national emergency converts
the federal structure into a unitary one without a formal amendment of the Constitution.

Reason (R): During an Emergency, the Central government becomes all powerful and    the states go into the total control of the Centre.

In the context of the statements above, which of these is true?

a)  A and R both are true, and R is the correct explanation for A.
b)  A and R both are true, and R is the
NOT the correct explanation for A. c)  A is correct, R is incorrect.
d)  A and R both are incorrect.




23. UGC has recently issued guidelines to implement the choice based credit system across the country. What benefits will a student derive from it?
1.   It will allow students to transfer credits earned in one institution
to another.
a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 4 only
d)  All of the above




24. Consider the following about Centrally sponsored schemes and Central sector schemes?
1.   Both are formulated by Central government.
2.  Centrally sponsored schemes are framed from Union list, whereas Central sector     schemes from state list.
3.  Both are implemented by state governments.
4.  Centre provides funding to the states only in the case of Central sector schemes.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 4 only
d)  All of the above




http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  7    
    



    







25. The Credit Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005 (Cicra) deals with which of the following?
1.   Banks that default on their loans
2.  Companies that analyze credit
history of individuals and companies
3.  Foreign institutional investors that provide credit to Indian companies
                       




b)  scholarships to meritorious students in pursuing higher education
c)  compulsory leadership
development courses in all higher educational universities
d)  growth opportunities for children
from BPL families by way of
Central assistance and mentor support

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only d)  2 only




26. High lead exposure in human beings has been associated with
1.   Learning disabilities
2.  Breakdown of nervous system
3.  Attention deficit disorder
4.  Fertility problems in both men and women

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 3 only b)  1 and 4 only
c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




27. The scheme called ‘Swayam’ provides for a)  a mass-scale online open
educational course platform




28. The government of Greece will be conducting a referendum concerning the Greece crisis. What would people of Greece vote for?
a)  Whether to be in the Eurozone or
not
b)  Whether to accept the harsh austerity conditions imposed on Greece or not
c)  Whether to revert back to Greece’s
old currency drachma or not d)  All of the above




29. The Union government has come up with a special scheme called ‘Udaan’ for girl students. Consider the following about it.
1.   It is a mentoring and scholarship
scheme.
2.  It is aimed at enabling meritorious girl students to transit from schools to technical   education.
3.  The scheme also provides for the use of free online resources to enhance teaching      and learning
in senior secondary schools.




http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  8    
    



    
Choose the correct answer using the codes
below.
                       




d)  All of the above

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




30. Situated in Antarctica, the Ross Sea is often called as ‘the last ocean’ of the World. Why?
a)  It is in a pristine condition
b)  It harbours the marine bio- diversity that is the last to form on earth.
c)  It is the oldest undivided ocean on earth which was not lost after its formation and exists till date.
d)  As per Scientific predictions, it was formed out of the first molecules of vapour formed on earth.




31. The U.N. has described Sabar Shouchagar (Toilets for All) as a unique model for improved sanitation because
1.   The model achieved the first defecation free district in India.
2.  The model involved the community and faith based organization on board.
3.  The model relied completely on
private support and donations.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only
c)  2 and 3 only

32. Some time ago, the RBI withdrew pre-
2005 notes from circulation. This was done because
1.   Pre-2005 notes had lesser security
features.
2.  Fake currency from circulation could be removed this way.
3.  Black money could be flushed out of the economy.
4.  It would reduce cash hoarding.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 3 only b)  1 and 4 only
c)  2, 3 and 4 only
d)  All of the above






33. In South Asia, arrange the following countries in decreasing order of the Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) that they receive.
1.   India
2.  Iran
3.  Bangladesh
4.  Pakistan
5.  Sri Lanka
Choose the correct order from the codes below. a)  12345
b)  14325
c)  51234 d)  12435

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  9    
    



    




34. Consider the following about Essential
Services Maintenance Act (ESMA).
1.   It is a central law.
2.  Each state has a separate ESMA.
                       




3.  The first human mission to have transmitted information from an asteroid orbiting      the Sun
3.  Both Central and State governments can enforce ESMA.
4.  The government cannot order
private operators to restore essential services.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.
Choose the correct answer using the codes
below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above

a)  1, 2 and 3 only b)  1 and 4 only
c)  2, 3 and 4 only d)  1 and 2 only




35. The scheme GIAN – Global Initiative for
Academic Network is concerned with a)  forming a network of highly
acclaimed Indian researchers
working abroad
b)  intensive collaboration between the best Indian and foreign universities for research and academic exchange
c)  bringing world class educators
from across the globe to teach in
India
d)  None of the above



36. A European mission Rosetta was recently in news. Rosetta is
1.   The first spacecraft that landed on a comet
2.  The first spacecraft to orbit a comet

37. Jayprakash Narayan was associated with which of the following movements in India?
1.   Nav Nirman Andolan, Gujarat
2.  Bihar Movement
3.  Non-cooperation Movement
4.  Civil Disobedience Movement
5.  Champaran Movement

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 5 only b)  3 and 4 only
c)  1, 2, 3 and 4 only d)  All of the above




38. The Nabakalebar festival was in news recently because
a)  It is to be promoted through
Incredible India campaign
b)  The festival attracted largest number of devotees from all over India
c)  It is being observed after a period
of almost two decades in Odisha d)  Both (a) and (c)



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  10    
    



    







39. Consider the following about Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) or PM’s Agriculture Irrigation Scheme.
1.   It aims at providing irrigation
facilities to every village in the country.
2.  The scheme will be directly implemented by the Centre.
3.  The scheme will de-incentivize
groundwater irrigation through financial incentives.
                       




c)  1, 2, 3 and 4 only d)  All of the above




41. The 44th constitutional amendment brought some changes in the powers of PM in declaring emergency. What was the change brought?
a)  A national emergency can be declared by the President only on the concurrence of the cabinet and not merely on the advice of the prime minister
b)  The President can declare national
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only d)  1 only




40.Consider the following about Euro zone and European Union
1.   Euro zone is an Economic entity, and EU is a Politico-economic entity.
2.  Euro zone has a common currency, EU doesn’t.
3.  Euro zone follows a common monetary policy, EU doesn’t.
4.  Both the EU and Euro zone have a
single market.
5.  EU has a supra-national
Parliament, Euro zone doesn’t.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 5 only b)  3 and 4 only
emergency only after the concurrence of the cabinet and Parliament
c)  If a house was not in session, only then the President could declare national emergency on the advice of the Prime Minister
d)  The PM could only advice
declaring internal emergency to the President; for external emergency the concurrence of the Parliament was needed




42. World Bank has recently approved an additional loan of 650 million dollars for India’s Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor (DFC) Project. It passes
through the states of
1.   UP
2.  Punjab
3.  Haryana
4.  Bihar
5.  Jharkhand
6.  West Bengal

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  11    
    



    
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2, 4 and 6 only b)  1, 4, 5 and 6 only c)  5 and 6 only
d)  All of the above




43. Union Cabinet has recently approved setting up of an Online National Agriculture Market. How will this
benefit farmers in the country?
                       







45. Consider the following statements.
1.   Insulting the Indian National Flag entails disqualification for contesting elections to
Parliament and State
Legislatures.
2.  A candidate cannot stand for election from more than one Parliamentary constituency.
3.  All cases of disqualification of MPs
are dealt by the speaker.
1.   Farmers will be able to sell their produce in mandis as well as online.
2.  Farmers can buy agricultural produce online.
3.  Creation of godowns and facilitate transportation of the farm produce after the            online trade

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




44. A campaign called `Pade Bharat, Badhe Bharat’ has been launched by the Government of India to ensure better learning levels
a)  in primary education
b)  in secondary and adult education c)  in adult primary education with
special focus on women
d)  in higher secondary school with special focus on adolescent girl students

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only d)  1 only




46. A member of the House in Parliament can be asked by the speaker to stop speaking and let another member speak. This is known as
a)  crossing the floor by the MP
b)  maintaining the decorum by the speaker
c)  yielding the floor
d)  speech adjournment




47. You are a student in a local university and have filed a nomination paper for contesting Panchayat elections. The State Election Commission would deem your nomination valid only if
1.   You have obtained an approval
letter from your university
2.  You have a voter ID card

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  12    
    



    




3.  You have already held some leadership position in the college/university.
                       


Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only d)  2 only




48. Which of the following statements regarding the advisory jurisdiction of the Supreme Court are correct?
1.   It is binding on the Supreme Court
to give advice to the President every time it is            referred to.
2.  The opinion tendered by the
Supreme Court is binding on the
President.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 only b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2 d)  None




49. Which of the following come under the jurisdiction of both the Supreme Court and High courts?
1.   Disputes between the Centre and
the States
2.  Disputes between the States
3.  Issuing writs to enforce fundamental rights
4.  Judicial review of administrative
acts
b)  1 and 3 only c)  3 only
d)  3 and 4 only




50. The ban on pre-censorship of newspapers by the country in the country is based on
a)  special provisions made under
Article 19 of the constitution
b)  the rule of law in the constitution of India
c)  explicit freedom given to media or any people’s forum in the constitution
d)  a ruling of Supreme Court which interpreted Article 19 of the constitution in a wider sense




51. Who among the following is/are appointed by the Vice-President of India?
1.   Vice-chairperson, NITI Ayog
2.  Chief Minister of a Union Territory
3.  Members, Finance Commission

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 only
d)  None of the above

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  13    
    



    




52. In the Kesavananda Bharati case, the Supreme Court came out with the ‘basic structure doctrine’. What are the implications of this doctrine for the constitution and the powers of the Parliament?
1.   Not every provision of the
constitution can be amended by the
Parliament.
2.  No constitutional body established immediately after the commencement of the
constitution can be scrapped.
3.  The powers of Parliament and courts can neither be expanded nor contracted.
                       




54. Who among the following can vote in the elections to Lok Sabha, Rajya Sabha as well as State Legislative Council?
a)  Registered voters of the country
b)  Elected members of State
Legislative Assembly
c)  President and Attorney-general d)  Chief Minister of a state




55. Which of the following constitutional offices cannot be held by the same individual for successive terms or more than one term?
1.   Office of the President of India
2.  Office of the Comptroller and

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 only
b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




53. Consider the following with reference to election outcomes in India.
1.   Majority of votes by a political
party necessarily mean majority of seats.
2.  Majority of seats garnered by a
political party necessarily mean majority of votes.

Which of the above is/are true?

a)  1 only b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2 d)  None
Auditor General of India
3.  Office of the Chairman, Rajya
Sabha
4.  Office of the Governor
5.  Office of the Chief Election
Commissioner

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only
b)  1, 3 and 5 only c)  2 and 5 only
d)  2, 3, 4 and 5 only




56. Consider the following statements.
1.   The British sovereign appointed the last Governor General of free India.
2.  The constituent assembly was composed on a British given formula.
3.  India joining commonwealth
nations after independence meant


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  14    
    



    




that India         continued to be a dominion state of the British.
                       




b)  it is trying to bring down inflation in the country
c)  it is expanding the money supply
Choose the correct answer using the codes
below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




57. Consider the following about Elections in India.
1.   The recommendation for elections is made by the Government of India.
2.  The announcement of elections is
done by the Election Commission of India.
3.  The model code of conduct is enforced by the Government of India.
4.  The election conducting machinery
is not controlled by the government.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only
b)  1, 3 and 4 only c)  2 only
d)  1, 2 and 4 only




58. If the Central bank, RBI, reduces the Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) as a policy measure, it means
a)  it is trying to counter the growing
fiscal deficit
in the economy
d)  it is trying to push up the interest rates in the economy




59. What does the term ‘money multiplier’
in banking terminology connote?
a)  money injected in the economy increases with time
b)  money injected in the economy
helps in credit creation more than the amount of money
c)  money becomes more and more
liquid with time as it changes hands in the long-run
d)  money coming from foreign
sources has a greater multiplier effect on the economy than domestic sources




60.What is known as the ‘Gandhian’ way of economic planning or ‘Gandhian’ economic philosophy relies on
1.   Self-sufficient villages
2.  Labour intensive activities
3.  Swaraj or Self-rule

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  15    
    



    






61. A firm in the economy faces diminishing marginal product of labour as it tries to
                       




3.  WPI is calculated by RBI, whereas CPI is calculated by Department of Statistics.
increase output in the short-run. What does it mean?
a)  With fixed set of machines, employing any additional labour in the firm is unproductive.
b)  The productivity of labour
decreases due to additional workload
c)  The output produced by each additional worker reduces as the output is expanded with fixed set of factors of production
d)  None of the above




62. Recently some International firms have been found to breach anti-trust laws existing in several countries. What is the equivalent of an anti-trust law in India?
a)  Foreign Exchange Management
Act
b)  Foreign Contribution Regulation
Act
c)  Competition Act d)  Companies Act




63. Which of the following correctly understates the difference between a Consumer Price Index (CPI) and Wholesale Price Index (WPI)?
1.   CPI does not includes all the goods
that WPI includes
2.  WPI does not include inflation in the services sector, CPI does.
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only d)  2 only




64. Gross Domestic Product of India will
NOT increase in the short-run if
1.   the government continues to have a high fiscal deficit
2.  there is inflation in the economy
3.  the monetary policy is loose
4.  the government liberalises the external sector

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 4 only
c)  All of the above
d)  None of the above




65. The Vedas in India were used for which of the following purposes?
1.   In religious rituals and sacrifices
2.  For seeking answers to mythical questions
3.  For deciding appropriate governance structures in local kingdoms

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  16    
    



    




a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




66. Bhakti trend during the medieval ages did NOT believe in
1.   Worship of humanity
                       







68. Which of the following phenomenon can lead to thunderstorms?
1.   When warm moist air collides with cooler air
2.  Heavy orographic rain
3.  Rapid upwards movement of warm, moist air
2.  Caste system
3.  Conceptual erudition
4.  Ascetic approach to poetry

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 4 only c)  3 only
d)  2 and 3 only


67. Suppose you have a barometer and you are moving in a vechile to a nearby region. You notice that the reading of
the barometer is going down. What all it can possible indicate?
1.   Storm
2.  Rainfall
3.  Cyclone
4.  Increasing temperature

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 4 only c)  2 and 3 only d)  1 and 4 only
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




69. The phenomenon of mirage occurs when
1.   when the ground is very hot and the air is cool
2.  when the ground and air both are very hot
3.  When there is refraction of
sunlight
4.  When there is presence of a water body near the mirage

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  2 and 3 only
c)  1, 3 and 4 only
d)  2 and 4 only








http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  17    
    



    







70. Consider the following about sunspots.
1.   They are temporary dark spots appearing on the Sun.
                       




1.   Mimansa
2.  Gnana
3.  Samkhya
4.  Carvaka
2.  They correspond to regions of strong magnetic field intensity.
3.  Sunspots are cooler than the surrounding regions of the Sun.
4.  Sunspots can result in change in weather and climate on earth.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 only
b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 4 only d)  3 only

a)  1 and 3 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  2 and 4 only
d)  All of the above




71. The antigens in the human body serve which of the following purposes?
1.   They trigger the immune system in the body.
2.  They act as anti-toxicants in case you ingest a poison.
3.  They kill free radicals in the body
keeping you healthy.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 2 only d)  1 only



72. ‘Karma’ as a means of liberation has been depicted in which of these philosophies?

73. Consider the following about Anuvrata movement.
1.   The movement was started by
Buddhist monks after Buddha left his body.
2.  The movement emphasized on
idol worship.
3.  The movement propagated the practice of dharma.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 only
b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 2 only d)  3 only




74. Consider the following about Gamma and X-rays.
1.   Both are electromagnetic
radiation.
2.  They differ only in the amount of energy they carry.
3.  While X-ray can penetrate matter, Gamma ray cannot.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  18    
    



    




4.  Radioactive materials that emit gamma radiation and X-rays
constitute both an     external and
                       




3.  This movement gave birth to the mantra of ‘Purna Swaraj’.
internal hazard to humans.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 only
b)  2 and 4 only
c)  1, 2 and 4 only d)  1 and 3 only




75. Consider the following about the use of musical instruments in Indian music.
1.   Sitar is the main instrument of
Carnatic music.
2.  Veena is used in Hindustani music.
3.  Flutes are used both in Carnatic and Hindustani music.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  3 only
d)  None of the above


76. Which of the following were the consequences of the Non-cooperation movement?
1.   The British were forced to negotiate on the power of the Indian members in the
Central legislative assembly.
2.  It organized Indian struggle for freedom.
Choose the correct answer using the codes
below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only d)  2 only




77. A European company was recently fined heavily for 2010 Mexico oil spill. Which of the following can be the adverse consequences of oil spill in oceans?
1.   Large scale death of sea birds
2.  Dead sea corals
3.  Unbalanced food web
4.  Decline in the population of dolphins

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 4 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




78. USA and Cuba have renewed diplomatic ties recently after almost five decades of vacuum in relationships. Why were the ties between US and Cuba severed after
1960s?
1.   Cuba was a communist regime.
2.  Cuban revolution deteriorated the ties between USA and Cuba.
3.  Cuba did not agree to join the US
led cold war alliance.



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  19    
    



    
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




79. Presently India is a ‘lower middle income’ category country as per the World Bank. The World Bank defines such economic categories based on
a)  Gross National Income in US
Dollars
                       




d)  provided for special status to the Euopean recruits and downgraded the position of Indian sepoys




81. Consider the following statements about
Swami Dayanand Saraswati.
1.   He was a scholar of Sanskrit.
2.  He was the first Indian who preached the gospel of ‘Swadeshi’.
3.  He started the ‘Suddhi
Movement’.
4.  As per him, Vedas contained all truth humanity needed to know.
b)  Per capita Gross National Income in US Dollars
c)  Poverty rate, Index of Inequality
and Overall National Income d)  Economic size, Economic
potential and population of a
country




80.The General Services Establishment Act intensified the discontent already present in the sepoys which then became a factor leading to the 1857 mutiny. The Act
a)  ordered all recruits of Bengal army
to be ready for service both within and outside India and even overseas
b)  mandated a solider to be recruited
from every peasant family in the villages
c)  provided for a salary cut for the sepoys and increased the taxes on the Indian peasants
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 4 only c)  1 and 4 only
d)  All of the above




82. Which of the following factors did NOT help fuel the nationalist movement in pre-independent India?
1.   Indian press and literature
2.  Indian contact with the European
Countries
3.  Modern methods of transport and communication
4.  Racial discrimination by the
British

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 4 only
d)  All factors contributed.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  20    
    



    







83. Which of the following is/are related with the relationship between the
faction of moderates and extremists as
                       




2.  Dandi March
3.  Poona Pact
4.  Official demand for Pakistan by
Muslim league
far as the Indian national movement is concerned?
1.   Surat Split 1907
2.  Lucknow Pact 1916
3.  August declaration 1917
4.  Lahore Session Congress 1929

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only
c)  All of the above
d)  1, 3 and 4 only

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 4 only
d)  1, 2 and 4 only




84. Which of the following statements with reference to the Jalianwala Bagh tragedy
1919 is INCORRECT?
a)  People gathered at Jalianwala Bagh to peacefully protest against the arrest of their leaders.
b)  The area was under curfew at that
time.
c)  Rabindranath tagore renounced his knighthood in protest of this incident.
d)  Shooting of the masses without prior warning by Militay commanders was permissible under the law at that time.




85. Chronologically, which of these events transpired after the First Round Table Conference?
1.   Gandhi-Irwin Pact

86. Cripps Mission was sent to India by the
British because
a)  they wanted Indian support to defeat Japan in the Second World War.
b)  after the failure of Third round
table conference, British PM
promised Indian leaders so
c)  British wanted to negotiate the
‘two-nation’ theory with Indian leaders
d)  British wanted the support of the
Princely state armies to defeat
Burma






87. The system of Mansabdari in medieval
India was concerned with
1.   Improving administration in remote areas
2.  Increasing revenue collection for
the Mughals
3.  Recruitment to the army

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  21    
    



    




a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  2 only
d)  3 only




88.Buddhism was patronized more than Hinduism by some of the Greek rulers in India because
a)  Greeks did not want to conquer
any Indian territories with war and violence
                       




90.Which of the following statements is/are correct concerning the population of Asian elephants found in India?
1.   They can be found in dry thorn
forests as well as swamps and grasslands.
2.  They are found only in Southern
and Western India.
3.  They are an endangered species in
India.
4.  They cannot survive in moist and rainy places.
b)  Greeks did not believe in idol worship, the concepts of penance and renunciation
c)  Greeks did not believe in the
concept of castes and rituals in
Hinduism
d)  Greeks found embracing Buddhism as a simple tool to assimilate and access the Indian culture and society prevailing at that time




89. Which of the following types of micro- organisms can NOT be used in Indian industries?
1.   Fungi
2.  Yeast
3.  Bacteria
4.  Micro-algae

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 only b)  3 only
c)  2 and 4 only
d)  All can be used.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 only b)  3 only
c)  2 and 4 only d)  1 and 4 only



91. In Industrial terminology, ‘Sunrise industries’ are those which
1.   are emerging in nature
2.  work for the conservation of environment
3.  focus on technologies related to solar power generation
4.  are heavily subsidized by the government
5.  are populated with people from the
most neglected sections of the society

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 only
b)  1, 3 and 4 only c)  3, 4 and 5 only
d)  2, 3, 4 and 5 only


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  22    
    



    









92. The first successful modern textile mill was established in Mumbai in 1854. Which of the following geographical and industrial factors were responsible for
it?
1.   Warm climate
                       




94. Why are the oceanic trenches very helpful in the study of plate movement?
1.   They are the deepest part of the ocean.
2.  They are associated with active volcanoes.
3.  Strong earthquakes are more
common in this region than the surrounding ocean     floor.
2.  Abundance of Moisture in atmosphere
3.  Availability of raw material nearby
4.  Availability of skilled labour in the region

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  3 and 4 only
c)  1, 2 and 3 only d)  All of the above



93. With reference to the human
population, the ‘natural growth rate’ of a country means
a)  population growth without positive or negative intervention by the government
b)  difference between birth and death rate barring cases of unnatural deaths
c)  population growth that would
have been possible without the use of family planning devices
d)  difference between birth and
death rate of a country

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above



95. The Tundra region supports only low growing plants because
1.   the growing season is short in
Tundra
2.  the regions are mostly water logged
3.  duration of day light is little in some seasons
4.  sub soil is permanently frozen

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 4 only b)  1 and 3 only
c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above







http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  23    
    



    




96. Mizo hills in the eastern part of India are a)  a northern extension of Arakan
ranges of Myanmar
b)  an eastward extension of
Chotanagpur plateau
c)  a northward projection of Eastern
Himalays
d)  a northward projection of
Bangladeshi mountain ranges
                       







99. Change in which of the following factors may lead to change in the amount of insolation received on earth from the Sun?
1.   High increase in cloud cover
2.  Wobbling of earth
3.  Decrease in land cover on earth




97. When you enter a car or a bus, during summers, where windows are closed, you feel more heat than outside. This is because of
a)  Heating effect of the
electromagnetic portion of Sun’s rays
b)  Trapping of infrared radiation
inside the Car
c)  Increase in ultraviolet radiation inside the car
d)  Concentration of Sun’s rays passing from the glass




98. Which of the following factors affect the spatial and vertical temperature distribution in ocean waters?
1.   Latitude
2.  Continentality
3.  Direction of Wind
4.  Ocean currents

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 4 only
c)  2, 3 and 4 only
d)  All of the above

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




100.          “One striking feature of these paintings is the verdant greenery it depicts. The style is naturalistic, and great attention is paid to detail. The foliage depicted is vast and varied. This is made noticeable by using multiple shades of green. These paintings feature flowering plants and creepers, leafless trees, rivulets and brooks.”

To which of the following paintings does above description refer?

a)  Kangra School of Painting b)  Kerala School of Painting c)  Rajput School of Painting d)  None of the above


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  24    
    
