



INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK PRELIMINARY EXAM - 2015


INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST - 26
GENERAL STUDIES
PAPER-I
Time Allowed: 2 Hours                                                                                         Maximum Marks: 200

INSTRUCTIONS
1.   IMMEDITELY AFTER THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE EXAMINATION, YOU SHOULD
CHECK THAT THIS TEST BOOKLET DOES NOT HAVE ANY UNPRINTED OR TORN OR MISSING
PAGES OR ITEMS, ETC. IF SO, GET IT REPLACED BY A COMPLETE TEST BOOKLET.
2.  You have to enter your Roll Number on the Test Booklet in the Box provided alongside. DO NOT Write anything else on the Test Booklet.

4.  This Test Booklet contains 100 items (questions).  Each item is printed only in English. Each item comprises four responses (answers). You will select the response which you want to mark on the Answer Sheet. In case you feel that there is more than one correct response, mark the respo nse which you consider the best. In any case, choose ONLY ONE response for each item.
5.  You have to mark all your responses ONLY on the separate Answer Sheet provided.  See directions in the Answer Sheet.
6.  All items carry equal marks.

7.  Before you proceed to mark in the Answer Sheet the response to various items in the Test Booklet, you have  to  fill  in  some  particulars  in  the  Answer  Sheet  as  per  instructions  sent  to  you  with  your Admission Certificate.

8.  After you have completed filling in all your responses on the Answer Sheet and the examination has concluded, you should hand over to the Invigilator only the Answer Sheet. You are permitted to take away with you the Test Booklet.

9.  Sheets for rough work are appended in the Test Booklet at the end.
10. Penalty for wrong answers :
THERE WILL BE PENALTY FOR WRONG ANSWERS MARKED BY A CANDIDATE IN THE OBJECTIVE TYPE QUESTION PAPERS.
(i)    There are four alternatives for the answer to every question. For each question for which a wrong answer has been given by the candidate, one-third of the marks assigned to that question will be deducted as penalty.
(ii)   If a candidate gives more than one answer, it will be treated as a wrong answer even if one of the given answers happens to be correct and there will be same penalty as above to that question.
(iii)    If a question is left blank, i.e., no answer is given by the candidate, there will be no penalty for that question.


http://www.insightsonindia.com

INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST SERIES FOR CIVIL SERVICES PRELIMINARY EXAM 2015


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 1


1.   The President recently gave his assent to re-promulgate the Land Acquisition ordinance as per provisions of Article
123 of Indian Constitution. When can the President re-promulgate an ordinance?
a)  when it is in public interest and any of the houses fail to pass the bill
b)  when any of the houses has not reassembled before the expiry of the ordinance
c)   when in an emergency, it is required in public interest
d)  when the bill is rejected by both the houses despite the government pushing for the bill




2.   The WHO Framework Convention on
Tobacco Control (WHO FCTC) provides for
1.   Banning of tobacco products in all countries party to the convention
2.   Eliminating illicit trade of tobacco
products
3.   Alternative livelihoods to tobacco farmers

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  3 only
c)   2 only
d)  1 and 3 only
3.   Monosodium glutamate (MSG) is added artificially to packaged food to enhance flavour, also found in the popular product Maggi. Consider the following about it.
1.   It occurs naturally in many
agricultural products.
2.   Large doses of MSG can cause headaches.
3.   It is a major factor in causing obesity



Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  3 only
c)   2 only
d)  1 and 3 only







4.   Consider the following about OPCW (Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons).
1.   It is an inter-governmental organization headquartered in Hague.
2.   One of its mandates is to destroy
the global chemical weapons stockpile.
3.   It operates directly under the aegis
of United Nations Security Council
(UNSC).
4.   India is not a signatory to the
Convention on Chemical weapons



Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 2
a)  1 and 2 only b)  3 and 4 only c)   2 and 4 only d)  1 and 3 only




5.   Tripura government has recently decided to withdraw the Armed Forces Special Powers Act (AFSPA),
1958 entirely from the state. Consider the following about AFSPA.
1.   Only the Governor of a state can declare an area to come under AFSPA.
2.   The Act makes local civilian administration accountable to the military.
3.   It can be withdrawn from an area only after the consent of the Central government and Indian armed forces.
4.   AFSPA cannot be applicable in a
state during emergency.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  3 only
c)   1 only
d)  1 and 4 only




6.   A new study has warned that Glaciers in the Everest region of the Himalayas could shrink drastically due to global warming. What consequences can this have?
1.   It will affect snowfall and rain in
the Himalayan region.
2.   It will greatly affect the farming and hydropower generation downstream of   the Himalayan peaks.
3.   It can lead to avalanches in this region.
4.   It will reduce the albedo of the earth.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only
b)  1, 3 and 4 only c)   2 and 4 only
d)  All of the above




7.   Consider the following about the Foreign Investment Promotion Board (FIPB), India.
1.   It approves all FDIs under the automatic route.
2.   It is headed by the Union Minister of Finance.
3.   It is a sub-committee of the Cabinet
Committee on Economic Affairs.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  3 only
c)   1 only
d)  None of the above



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 3
8.   Consider the following statements:
1.   A double layer Blu-Ray disc can hold upto 50 GB of data
2.   Unlike DVDs, which use a red laser to read and write data, Blu-ray uses a blue laser
3.   Unlike DVDs, where data is stored between layers of two polycarbonate layers, in Blu-ray data is stored on top of a 1.1-mm- thick polycarbonate layer
4.   Blu-ray discs are far thinner than
DVDs

Which of the above statements is/are incorrect?

a)  1 Only b)  2 Only c)   3 Only d)  4 Only




9.   With reference to Poona Pact, consider the following statements:
1.   Mahatma Gandhi objected to the
provision of separate electorates for the Scheduled (formerly “untouchable”) Castes
2.   The Pact was the result of the communal award of Aug. 4, 1932, made by the British government

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 Only b)  2 Only c)   Both
d)  None
10. Consider the following about cabinet committees.
1.   They are set up by the Prime
Minister.
2.   All committees are ad hoc in nature.
3.   They cannot take a final decision on matters referred to them by cabinet.
4.   Cabinet committees are also known as Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM).

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only
b)  2, 3 and 4 only c)   1 only
d)  3 only




11. Triticale, a high yield and rich protein content cereal is a
a)  Wheat and Rye hybrid
b)  Wheat and Maize hybrid c)   Maize and Rye Hybrid
d)  Rice and Rye Hybrid




12. Consider the following statements:
1.   The Lion Capital represents four roaring lions back to back facing the four cardinal directions
2.   The round abacus in the Lion Capital is decorated with four dharmachakras or wheels of law, alternating with an elephant, a bull, a horse and a tiger

Which of the above statements is/are correct?


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 4
a)  1 Only b)  2 Only c)   Both
d)  None




13. Primary sector of the economy includes activities
a)  That are based on natural resources b)  Where a good is produced by
exploiting natural resources
c)   That do not require skilled manpower
d)  That produce only intermediary
goods




14. Game theory concerns itself with the a)  Study of conflict and cooperation
between intelligent rational decision-makers
b)  Study of irrational behaviour of
human beings
c)   Study of computer simulation models of military strategy
d)  Defence strategy of nations in maritime zones




15. Ministry of Earth Sciences has developed a SMS-based alert system for which of the following disasters?
1.   Heavy rains
2.   Cyclones
3.   Storms
4.   Earthquakes
5.   Avalanche

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.
a)  1, 2 and 3 only b)  2, 3 and 4 only c)   1 and 4 only
d)  All of the above




16. Consider the following statements
1.   Gandhara art was a product of the combination of Hellenistic, West Asiatic and native elements
2.   In Gandhara Art, most of the
images represent Buddha as seated in the typically Indian Yogic posture

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 Only b)  2 Only c)   Both
d)  None




17. Urban lake pollution has become a major problem in metro cities. Which of the following biological measures can be used to counter urban lake pollution?
1.   Spraying enzymes
2.   Using bacteria that consume the biological load in water
3.   Introducing exotic fishes in the lake

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 5
18. Periodically, banks have to submit information to the RBI on
1.   How much they are lending
2.   Who are they lending to
3.   What interest rate are they lending at
4.   How much deposits do they have

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 3 only b)  3 and 4 only
c)   2 and 4 only
d)  All of the above




19. With reference to Jainism and its principles, consider the following statements:
1.   Samyak Darshana means seeing (hearing, feeling, etc.) things properly, and avoiding preconceptions and superstitions that get in the way of seeing clearly
2.   Samyak jnana means having an
accurate and sufficient knowledge of the real universe

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 Only b)  2 Only c)   Both
d)  None


20. Honeybees are critical to food production because
a)  They are responsible for pollinating a large number of crops
b)  They act as bio-pesticides killing
harmful bacteria in the fields
c)   Their secretion acts as bio-fertilizer for the crops
d)  Beehives can be used to ward off
unwanted insects from the fields




21. Pankhida and Lotia are two song traditions sung by peasants and women respectively in which of the following states?
a)  Maharashtra
b)  Punjab
c)   Rajasthan d)  Bihar




22. The ozone hole over the Arctic would have been 40 per cent bigger today if ozone-depleting chemicals had not been banned in the 1980s, suggests a new research. Ozone depletion can affect
1.   Plant development and growth
2.   Amount of phytoplankton in the oceans
3.   The natural balance of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above


23. „Urban heat  island effect‟ that increases the effective temperature of cities is caused due to
1.   Paved ground
2.   Lack of tree cover

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 6
3.   Air pollution
4.   Tall buildings

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 3 only b)  3 and 4 only
c)   1 and 2 only
d)  All of the above


24. Money is accepted as a medium of exchange for goods and services in India because
1.   It carries intrinsic value.
2.   It is used by banks.
3.   It carries legal authority.
4.   It is the most abundant resource.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 3 only b)  3 only
c)   2 and 4 only
d)  All of the above




25. The unseasonal rain and hailstorm in India this year damaged rabi crops, wheat especially. This is speculated to increase international wheat prices. How?
1.   Better quality wheat is available internationally at prices that are cheaper than in India.
2.   India contributes substantially to
global wheat exports.

Which of the above is/are correct reason(s)?

a)  1 only b)  2 only
c)   Both 1 and 2 d)  None


26. Consider the following statements
1.   She helped to establish the
Women's Indian Association (WIA)
in 1917
2.   In 1925, she presided over the annual session of Indian National Congress at Cawnpore (now Kanpur)
3.   In 1931, she participated in the Round table conference with Gandhi and Madan Mohan Malaviya

In the above statements, „She‟ refers to which
of the following freedom fighters?

a)  Annie Besant b)  Kamala Nehru c)   Sarojini Naidu
d)  Vijaya Lakshmi Pandit




27. In the context of environment conservation, what is „rebound effect‟? a)  Supposedly environment friendly
techniques causing damage to the
environment
b)  Reduction in expected gains from new technologies that increase the efficiency of resource use
c)   Lack of adaptation of ecological
systems to the changes introduced by human beings
d)  None of the above

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 7
28. With reference to the Third Battle of Panipath, consider the following statements:
1.   It was fought between Marathas and force of Ahmad Shah Abdali
2.   The outcome of the War resulted in
restoration of Mughal Empire to
Shah Alam II

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 Only b)  2 Only c)   Both
d)  None


29. The recent recovery in India‟s growth rate can be attributed to which of the following factors?
1.   Revision in the methodology of
GDP calculation
2.   Substantial increase in gross capital formation
3.   Increase in manufacturing growth rate

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




30. The incidence of cancer has grown over the last decade in India. The following regions lead in a particular type of cancer. Match these regions with the possible major causes of cancer in them.
1.   Punjab – Pollution and use of pesticides
2.   West Bengal – High use of tobacco
products
3.   North-eastern region – Household burning of firewood
4.   Coastal India – diet rich in spice and salt

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only
b)  1, 3 and 4 only c)   2 and 4 only
d)  All of the above


31. The Union government will be implementing the recommendations made by the Kasturirangan panel on conservation of Western Ghats soon. Which of the following important recommendations were made by the panel?
1.   Polluting industries should be banned in entire Western Ghats region.
2.   All projects under Ecologically Sensitive Areas (ESA) will require prior-informed consent and no- objection from the Gram Sabha.
3.   Establishment of an over-arching authority to regulate development in the  region.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)   2 only
d)  None of the above


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 8



32. In banking terminology, what does
„collateral‟ mean?
a)  the person who takes the guarantee
for the lender‟s repayment ability
b)  amount of loan that goes in purchasing physical assets
c)   an asset against which the lender
obtains the loan
d)  credit history of the lender




33. Hatha Yoga is a popular system in Indian Yogic practices. In this „Hatha‟ refers to
a)  The two symmetrical sides of the
human body
b)  Concentration of the mind in the kundalini
c)   The two opposite currents that regulate all processes in our body
d)  The essence of all physical postures that lead to greater human health




34. Car provides protection during a thunderstorm and lightning because of a)  The elevation of the car from the
ground soil
b)  Its rubber tyres that insulate the car from ground
c)   The metallic body of car
d)  The insulating material present in seats, handles and window




35. Which of the following are examples of a physical process, denaturation?
1.   Boiling of egg
2.   Curdling of milk
3.   Formation of tea

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 2 only
d)  All of the above




36. The National – Highway – 3 rund through which of the following states?
1.   Uttar Pradesh
2.   Madhya Pradesh
3.   Maharashtra
4.   Chhattisgarh
5.   Rajasthan

Choose the correct answer from the codes given below:

a)  1,2,3 and 4 Only b)  1,2 and 3 Only
c)   1,2,3 and 4 Only
d)  All




37. Consider the following about the role and powers of the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
1.   He is the head and representative
of the Lok Sabha.
2.   His decision in all Parliamentary matters is final.
3.   He is the final interpreter of the provisions of the Constitution of India within the house.
4.   He appoints the chairman of all the parliamentary committees of the Lok Sabha and supervises their
functioning.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 9
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  2 only
b)  2, 3 and 4 only c)   1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




38. If too much of organic matter is added to a water body, it may lead to
1.   Reduction of dissolved oxygen
2.   Algal boom
3.   Greenhouse emission from the water body
4.   Loss of aquatic life in the water
body

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 4 only b)  2 and 3 only
c)   1 and 4 only
d)  All of the above




39. Recently inflation is at a five year low in the Indian economy. This can be attributed to
1.   Good rainfall
2.   Fall in price rise rate of food items
3.   Cheaper manufactured goods
4.   Fall in prices of fuel and power

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 4 only b)  3 and 4 only
c)   1 and 2 only
d)  2, 3 and 4 only



40. Which of the following is/are forms of dance-drama or folk theatre performed in various parts of India?
1.   Yakshagana of Karnataka
2.   Theyyam of Kerala
3.   Tamasha of Maharashtra
4.   The Bengali Jatra

Choose the answer using the codes below:

a)  1,2 and 3 Only b)  2,3 and 4 Only c)   1, 3 and 4 Only d)  All


41. The new way of calculating headline
GDP growth rate in India is based on
a)  GDP at factor price at market prices b)  GDP at market prices
c)   GDP at constant prices
d)  GDP at factor price at constant prices




42. You are suffering with acidity in the stomach. Which of the following
is/are most likely to cure your acidity?
1.   Antacid
2.   Amla
3.   Curd
4.   Spinach

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  2 and 4 only
c)   1, 3 and 4 only
d)  1 only


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                 Page 10
43. Consider the following statements:
1.   He is widely regarded as a key figure in literary renaissance of Bengal as well as India
2.   From 1858, until his retirement in
1891, he served as a deputy magistrate and deputy collector in the Government of British India

To whom do the above descriptions refer to?

a)  Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar b)  Rabindranath Tagore
c)   Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay d)  Ram Mohan Roy




44. With reference to Non-Cooperation movement, consider the following statements:
1.   The movement was successful in attaining its main objective
2.   The main trigger for the launch of
this movement was the massacre at
Amritsar in April 1919
3.   The movement marked the transition of Indian nationalism from a middle-class to a mass basis

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 and 2 Only b)  1 and 3 Only c)   2 and 3 Only d)  All




45. The Comptroller and Auditor General of India is appointed by the President of India based on the advice by
1.   Council of Ministers
2.   Committee consisting of the PM, Lok Sabha speaker and Leader of Opposition
3.   Former CAG of India

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 only
c)   1 and 3 only d)  1 only




46. The Central Information Commission of India performs which of the following kind of tasks?
1.   Quasi-judicial
2.   Delegated legislation
3.   Administrative

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only d)  3 only






47. Resignation or dissolution of which of the following may bring a collapse of the Council of Ministers at the state level?
1.   Governor
2.   Chief Minister
3.   State Legislative assembly
4.   State Legislative Council

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                 Page 11
a)  2, 3 and 4 only b)  2 and 3 only
c)   1, 2 and 4 only
d)  3 only




48. With reference to Satyagraha as preached and practised by Gandhiji, consider the following statements:
1.   The satyagrahi asserts that truth by refusing to submit to the wrong or to cooperate with it in any way
2.   Satyagraha forbids any tactic suggesting the use of secrecy to one‟s advantage

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 Only b)  2 Only c)   Both
d)  None




49. Fundamental rights in the constitution are available against the arbitrary action of
1.   The State
2.   Private individuals in some cases
3.   Societies and associations
4.   International agencies

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  2, 3 and 4 only b)  1, 2 and 3 only c)   1 and 2 only
d)  1 only
50. If the Rajya Sabha declares that it is necessary in the national interest that Parliament should make laws on a matter in the State List, then the Parliament becomes competent to make laws on that matter. Such a resolution must be supported by
a)  two-third of members present and voting
b)  two-third of members present and voting, and majority of the membership of the house
c)   simple majority of the house
d)  majority of the membership of the house




51. In 1904 Gandhiji set up a farm at Phoenix near Durban where he and his friends could live in austerity and hard work. Which of the following books had an immediate influence on Gandhiji to set up this farm?
a)  War and Peace by Leo Tolstoy
b)  Walden by Henry David Thoreau c)   Unto The Last by John Ruskin
d)  The Bible




52. Average income a country can be a good measure of economic progress, but not economic development. Why?
1.   It does not capture income
disparities.
2.   It does not capture situation of unemployment in the country.
3.   It cannot capture the efficiency of
resource use of the country.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                 Page 12
a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above


53. One way to find out if adults are undernourished is to calculate what nutrition scientists call Body Mass Index (BMI). It is the
a)  ratio of body weight and body height
b)  ratio of square of body weight; and body height
c)   ratio of body height; and square of
body weight
d)  ratio of body height and body weight


54.  With reference to Round Table Conferences that were held in London during India‟s struggle for its independence from the British, consider the following statements:
1.   The first session had 73
representatives, from all Indian states and all parties except the Indian National Congress
2.   The second session was attended
by Mahatma Gandhi as the
Congress representative
3.   The Government of India Act -1935 was the result of deliberations held at these Round Table Conferences.

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 and 3 Only b)  2 and 3 Only c)   1 and 2 Only
d)  All
55. In India, the growth of the services sector can be attributed to
1.   Rising income of people
2.   Urbanization
3.   Developments in Science and
Technology
4.   Development of agriculture and industry sectors

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 3 only b)  2 and 3 only
c)   1 and 4 only
d)  All of the above


56. Disguised unemployment is caused essentially by
a)  Under-employment
b)  Unemployment
c)   Casual employment d)  Over-Employment




57. A constitutional amendment bill may need the consent of
1.   Lok Sabha
2.   Rajya Sabha
3.   President of India
4.   State Legislative assemblies
5.   State legislative councils

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 3 only
b)  1, 2, 3 and 4 only c)   4 and 5 only
d)  All of the above




http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                 Page 13
58. In 2014, the Nobel Prize in Physics was awarded to scientists who invented Efficient Blue Light-Emitting Diodes. With reference to these Blue LEDs, consider the following statements:
1.   High-quality gallium phosphide is
used to create Blue LED
2.   Invention of Blue LED was essential to create a White LED
3.   A modern white LED lightblub converts more than 50 percent of the electricity it uses into light

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 and 2 Only b)  2 and 3 Only c)   1 and 3 Only d)  All




59. The rivers – Indravati River, Manjira River, Bindusara River and  Sabari River are the tributaries of which of the following river?
a)  Krishna River
b)  Godavari River c)   Narmada River d)  Damodar River




60. For rural households, arrange the following sources of credit in descending order with respect to their credit volume?
1.   Moneylenders
2.   Cooperative banks
3.   Government

Choose the correct order from the codes below.
a) 123 b) 231 c) 213 d)  132




61. As per the 73rd Constitutional amendment, the power to expand the responsibilities of the panchayati raj bodies rests with
a)  State legislatures
b)  Governor
c)   President of India d)  Parliament




62. With reference to the Lucknow Pact, consider the following statements:
1.   The pact dealt both with the
structure of the government of India and with the relation of the Hindu and Muslim communities.
2.   This pact paved the way for Hindu-Muslim cooperation in the Khilafat movement and Gandhiji‟s non-cooperation movement from
1920

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 Only b)  2 Only c)   Both
d)  None


63. Consider the following about the areas under the Sixth schedule of the Constitution.
1.   The governor is empowered to
organise and re-organise the


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                 Page 14
autonomous districts under these areas.
2.   The district and regional councils
can make laws on certain specified matters.
3.   The acts of Parliament or the state
legislature necessarily do not apply to autonomous districts.
4.   The village councils can do trial of
suits and cases between the tribes.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2, 3 and 4 only c)   1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




64. Consumers in India have the legal right to information about the goods being sold to them. For a medical commodity, displaying which of the following information is mandatory for the producers?
1.   Ingredients used
2.   Information relating to side effects and risks
3.   Address of the manufacturer
4.   Directions for proper use

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 4 only b)  3 and 4 only
c)   1 and 2 only
d)  All of the above
65. With reference to the World Food Prize, consider the following statements:
1.   It was created by Norman E Borlaug
2.   It was created to honour
individuals who have contributed to improving the availability and quality of food worldwide
3.   It is given by the United Nations
World Food Programme

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 and 3 Only b)  1 and 2 Only c)   2 and 3 Only d)  All




66. Which of the following are included in the non-tax revenue receipts of the government of India?
1.   Profits and dividends which the government gets from its public sector undertakings
2.   External grants received by the government
3.   Interests received by the government out of all loans forwarded by it

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)   2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above







http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                 Page 15
67. “To secure for all citizens a uniform civil code  throughout the country” is one of the Directive Principles of state policy in our constitution. If this is implemented, it will lead to
1.   common laws for all religious
communities in India
2.   common laws for both men and women
3.   centralization of justice delivery system in courts rather than local bodies

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 only
d)  All of the above




68. With reference to a National Park located in Jammu and Kashmir, consider the following statements:
1.   It is located 22 kilometers from
Srinagar, Jammu and Kashmir
2.   This National park is located in the Zabarwan Range of the western Himalayas
3.   The main animal species that this
National Park is most famous for is the hangul, or the Kashmir stag

To which National Parks given below does above descriptions refer ?

a)  Hemis National Park
b)  Kazinag National Park c)   Kishtwar National Park
d)  Dachigam National Park



69. Which of the following processes lead to loss of vitamins/nutrients  from vegetables?
1.   mixing with other vegetables
2.   if excess water used in the cooking is thrown away
3.   continuous heating

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above



70. Consider the following statements. Assertion (A): Farmers do not need to add
nitrogen fertiliser to the soil in      which leguminous plants are grown.

Reason (R): Rhizobium bacteria that can take atmospheric nitrogen and  convert it into a soluble form lives in the roots of leguminous plants.

In the context of the statements above, which of these is true?

a)  A and R both are true, and R is the correct explanation for A.
b)  A and R both are true, and R is the
NOT the correct explanation for A. c)   A is correct, R is incorrect.
d)  A and R both are incorrect.



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                 Page 16
71. Which of the following is/are the same for both the Supreme Court and High Courts?
1.   Appointment procedure of Judges
2.   Extent of writ issuing authority
3.   Power to interpret the constitution
4.   Power of Judicial review of Central laws

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  2 and 3 only
b)  1, 3 and 4 only c)   1, 2 and 4 only d)  3 and 4 only




72. With reference to the Khilafat Movement, consider the following statements:
1.   One of the causes of this movement was the Treaty of Sèvres (August
1920), which gave parts of the Turkish homeland to Greece and other non-Muslim powers
2.   The movement collapsed when Mustafa Kemal Atatürk abolished the caliphate altogether in 1924

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 Only b)  2 Only c)   Both
d)  None




73. Due to temperature differences, warm air at equator rises up and cold wind from the Northern and Southern Polar
Regions rush in, to take its place. But,
the wind movement is not exactly in the North-South Direction because of a)  Rotation of earth
b)  Revolution of earth around the Sun c)   Direction change by ocean currents
and obstruction by clouds
d)  Obstruction by landscapes




74. Design of the Vermi-processing  toilets has been tested in India. Consider the following about it.
1.   Excreta are treated by earthworms.
2.   It is a totally dry technology.
3.   Processed material is suitable for use as herbicide in farms.
4.   Pilot projects in trains have been
implemented with this toilet.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  2 and 4 only c)   1 only
d)  2, 3 and 4 only







75. Turning and loosening of soil is very important for cultivation of crops. Why?
1.   Brings the nutrient-rich soil to the
top
2.   Helps in the growth of earthworms and microbes present in the soil
3.   Reduces the harm caused by pesticides

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                 Page 17
a)  1 and 3 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 2 only
d)  All of the above


76. Which of the following affects the propagation of electromagnetic waves?
1.   Composition of the earth‟s
atmosphere
2.   Shape of earth
3.   Amount of humidity present in the surrounding environment

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 2 only
d)  All of the above




77. Hair washed with hard water looks dull because of a sticky precipitate which also makes
1.   Clothe fibres hard
2.   Human intestines more prone to blockages
3.   Foams in polluted urban lakes

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 2 only
d)  None of the above




78. Gross primary productivity of an ecosystem is
a)  Rate of production of organic matter during photosynthesis
b)  Rate of diversification of the
species base every year
c)   Rate of gathering of organic matter by all possible natural processes
d)  Rate of nutrient cycling to and fro from soil


79. With reference to the Parliamentary seats, the Constitution ensures that there is uniformity of representation
1.   between the states
2.   between the different constituencies of the state

Which of the above correctly complete the above statement?

a)  1 only b)  2 only
c)   Both 1 and 2 d)  None




80. Which of the following species found in India has been  kept  in the “critically endangered” in the IUCN  red list?
1.   Himalayan Quail
2.   Indian Vulture
3.   Siberian Crane
4.   Namdapha Flying Squirrel

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 4 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 2 only
d)  All of the above

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                 Page 18
81. Consider the following statements.
1.   A given species may occupy more than one trophic level in the same ecosystem at the same time.
2.   In most ecosystems, pyramids of energy and biomass are upright.

Which of these is/are true?

a)  1 only b)  2 only
c)   Both 1 and 2
d)  None




82. Panch Mahal, located in Agra, Uttar
Pradesh is an example of
a)  Indo-Islamic Architecture b)   Indo – Roman Architecture
c)   Indo – Saracenic Architecture
d)  None of the above




83. In ecological terminology, what are
„seres‟?
a)  Edge species that show greater diversity in the centre of an ecosystem
b)  Entire sequence of communities that successively change in a given area
c)   A sequence of communities that remains constant despite the change in the type of ecosystem in surrounding areas
d)  None of the above




84. Which are the major differences between carbon and phosphorus cycles in the atmosphere?
1.   Atmospheric inputs of phosphorus through rainfall are much smaller than carbon inputs.
2.   Gaseous exchanges of phosphorus between organism and environment are negligible.

Which of these is/are true?

a)  1 only b)  2 only
c)   Both 1 and 2
d)  None




85. Which of the following are ecosystem services that are hard and exorbitantly costly to replicate technologically?
1.   Mitigating droughts
2.   Pollinating crops
3.   Providing carbon sinks
4.   Nutrient cycling

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 4 only
b)  2, 3 and 4 only c)   1 and 2 only
d)  All of the above




86. Bio-magnification occurs when
1.   The substance can't be broken down by environmental processes
2.   The substance concentration increases progressively as it moves up a food chain
3.   Low or non-existent rate of internal degradation or excretion of the substance by living organisms

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                 Page 19
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 2 only
d)  All of the above




87. Purchasing power parity between two currencies means that
a)  both currencies have equal exchange rate
b)  same goods in both currencies will
effectively cost the same
c)   both currencies can be replaced without buying and selling in the Forex market
d)  All of the above


88. Which of the following can be the uses of DNA fingerprinting?
1.   To determine paternity of an individual.
2.   To identify the dead bodies in any
accident by comparing the DNA‟s
of parents or children
3.   To identify racial groups to rewrite biological evolution

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 2 only
d)  All of the above




89. Atmospheric pollution is generally studied at
1.   Stratospheric levels
2.   Tropospheric levels
3.   Ionospheric levels

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 2 only d)  1 only


90. In a greenhouse, visible light passes through the transparent glass and heats up the soil and the plants. Apart from the sun rays, greenhouse is also heated by
a)  Infrared emissions from warm Soil
b)  Infrared emissions from warm plants
c)   Infrared emissions from both warm
Soil and plants
d)  Infrared emissions from humidity present in the greenhouse


91. Acid rain can be controlled by
1.   Using low sulphur content diesel in vehicles
2.   Switching over to natural gas as
fuels instead of coal or oil
3.   Encouraging use of firewood rather than Kerosene

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 2 only
d)  All of the above


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                 Page 20
92. Photochemical smog, a growing problem in urban areas is most likely to happen in
a)  Warm, sunny and dry climates b)  Hot and humid climates
c)   Cold and dry climates
d)  Cold and humid climates




93. Certain plants can metabolize nitrogen oxide and help control urban
pollution. These plants are
1.   Pinus
2.   Quercus
3.   Vitis
4.   Juniparus

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 3 and 4 only b)  2 and 3 only
c)   1 and 2 only
d)  All of the above




94. A patent is a set of exclusive rights granted by a sovereign state to an inventor or assignee for a limited period of time in exchange for
a)  detailed public disclosure of an
invention
b)  royalty from the state
c)   monetary incentives from the users d)  commercial availability of the
invention




95. The Indian constitution is said to have a „Federal System with Unitary Bias‟. It means that
1.   State governments are subservient to the Union government
2.   State governments derive their
power from the Union government
3.   Union government is primarily responsible for the administration in the states
4.   All major decision concerning states are taken by the Union government

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 3 only b)  2 and 4 only
c)   1 and 3 only
d)  None of the above




96. In the process of transpiration, the evaporation of water from leaves also helps in
1.   Transportation of water to great heights in the plant
2.   Regulating the temperature of the
plant
3.   Absorbing more nutrients from the roots

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 2 only
d)  All of the above

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                 Page 21
97. Consider the following about the recently launched National Supercomputing Mission of India.
1.   Under this, national academic and R&D institutions will get super computing grids.
2.   It provides for development of professional High Performance Computing (HPC) aware human resource.
3.   Supercomputing centres will be
opened in every state in India.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  3 only
c)   1 only
d)  All of the above




98. What was common between Ghosha, Lopamudra, Apala and Romasha Brahmavadini
a)  They were ancient Indian women
authors
b)  They were ancient Indian women painters
c)   They were ancient Indian women
dancers
d)  None of the above




99. The apex court of India, Supreme Court, was established under the a)  Regulating Act of 1773
b)  Pitt‟s India Act 1784
c)   Charter Act 1833
d)  Queen‟s Durbar Proclamation 1911



100.           The Dhamekh stupa is an imposing cylindrical structure of the Gupta age, partly built of stone and partly of brick. This site is looked upon with, greatest sanctity and became a flourishing Buddhist establishment with numerous temples, stupas and monasteries. Where is this stupa located?
a)  Bodh Gaya
b)  Sarnath
c)   Kushinagar d)  Rajgir



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                 Page 22
