




    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    


1.  Solution: a)

http://www.thehindu.com/business/bad-loans-may-persist-for-a-while/article7354634.ece

An algorithm is a specific set of clearly defined instructions aimed to carry out a task or process.

Algorithmic trading (automated trading, black-box trading, or simply algo-trading) is the process of using computers programmed to follow a defined set of instructions for placing a trade in order to generate profits at a speed and frequency that is impossible for a human trader.

The defined sets of rules are based on timing, price, quantity or any mathematical model. Apart from profit opportunities for the trader, algo-trading makes markets more liquid and makes trading more systematic by ruling out emotional human impacts on trading activities.




2.  Solution: a)

http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-national/sc-has-ruled-out-mediation-in-rape- cases/article7351655.ece

The term "mediation" broadly refers to any instance in which a third party helps others reach agreement. More specifically, mediation has a structure, timetable and dynamics that "ordinary" negotiation lacks. The process is private and confidential, possibly enforced by law. Participation is typically voluntary. The mediator acts as a neutral third party and facilitates rather than directs the process.

These are some of the rules laid down by Delhi HC;

Appointment of mediator/conciliator

(a)  Parties to a suit or other proceeding may agree on the name of the sole mediator/conciliator for mediating between them.

(b)  Where, there are two or more sets of parties and are unable to agree on a sole mediator/conciliator, the Court may ask each party to nominate the mediator/conciliator or may nominate/appoint the mediator/conciliator, as it deems fit.




3.  Solution: a)

Xinjiang province is near the Northern border of India with China. BCIM corridor passes from the eastern side.



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Page  1    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    
One of the strategic factors driving the corridor is reduction of reliance on the Straits of Malacca, militarily dominated by the U.S.

Mizoram would be connected with Myanmar’s port of Sittwe, through the Kaladan River, and the passage will provide all the landlocked north-eastern States access to the sea. Compared with the land route, Sittwe provides these States access to Kolkata


























http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/china-india-fasttrack-bcim-economic-corridor- project/article7355496.ece




4.  Solution: c)

As of now, IIMs function as autonomous societies and run as per their Memorandum of Association
(MoA) that is different in case of each institute.

The government does not have absolute say in the appointment of the directors, but normally the approval of the MHRD is required before appointing director in some of the IIMs.

IIMs are free to change the educational curriculum as per the MOUs. However, if the change is strategic and very significant, the government may intervene. There is no clear cut role of the government in the MOUs.

http://www.dnaindia.com/academy/report-bid-to-undermine-faculty-s-role-in-governance-of-iims- draws-flak-1536273


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Page  2    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    
http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/op-ed/let-iims-be-free-of-government-
stranglehold/article7354672.ece?css=print




5.  Solution: d)

According to the terms of the Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana, the government of India will undertake to construct about two crore houses by the year 2022. Each house provided under the scheme will
involve a central grant of about INR 1 lakh which may go up to INR 2.3 lakhs. This will come as part of a 6.5 percent interest rate subsidy scheme (previous schemes had an interest rate subsidy of about 1 percent).

This means that the applicants from lower income groups who avail of the housing scheme may apply for a housing loan with interest subsidy of 6.5 percent. The tenure or term for these housing loans may go up to 15 years and the total benefit received by such loan subsidy will add up to INR 1 to 2.3 lakh each.

Currently housing loan interest rates are estimated at about 10.5 percent. The subsidy should, therefore be a major relief to applicants. The ‘Housing for All’ scheme will replace all previous government housing schemes such as the Rajiv Awas Yojana.




6.  Solution: a)

http://www.thehindubusinessline.com/economy/rajan-world-economy-may-be-slipping-into-1930s- depression-problems/article7357324.ece

http://www.thehindu.com/business/we-are-pushed-to-competitive-monetary-easing- rajan/article7224462.ece

In a recent speech Rajan said, “I want to focus on unconventional monetary policies (UMP), by which
I mean both policies that hold interest rates at near zero for long, as well as balance sheet policies
such as quantitative easing or exchange intervention, that involve altering central bank balance sheets in order to affect certain market prices.”

Quantitative easing increases the money supply by flooding financial institutions with capital in an effort to promote increased lending and liquidity.

Such policies only deprive nations of potential growth without any structural improvements in the economy that attract investment. It is not good for the economy in the long run.





http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Page  3    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    


7.  Solution: c)

We all know about Obama’s visit to India where he signed the Nuclear 123 deal with India.

Chinese premier came to India in September 2014. Both countries signed 12 agreements in Delhi, one of which will see China investing $20bn (£12.2bn) in India's infrastructure over five years.

On the other hand, Modi visited Japan, Russia and France, not the other way round. The Japanese premier did not come to India.

About Russian visit - http://www.firstpost.com/world/expanding-presence-chinas-periphery-modi- visit-5-central-asian-nations-russia-trip-july-2270024.html

http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/modis-central-asia-visit-will-focus-on-fighting-islamic- state-menace/article7372350.ece

http://www.narendramodi.in/list-of-agreementsinitiativesannouncements-signedagreed-during- visit-of-prime-minister-to-france-09-12-april-2015




8. Solution: d)

http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/mobile-number-portability-from-july-3/article7372758.ece

MNP allows mobile subscribers to retain their existing mobile phone number even when they change service provider.

At present, mobile subscribers can switch their service provider within the same telecom circle. The pan-India MNP will allow customers to keep their existing mobile phone numbers while shifting between States and circles.




9.  Solution: d)

http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/dna-test-can-be-ordered-even-in-maintenance-cases-says- hc/article7372835.ece

The question has been made in context of a recent SC order allowing DNA tests in maintenance cases.

DNA is a powerful tool for identification purposes and is admissible evidence. DNA or
Deoxyribonucleic Acid is like a blue print of biological guidelines. DNA analysis is commonly known



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Page  4    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    
as DNA Finger printing, it gives a unique and specific profile similar to a thumb impression and hence it is named as DNA Finger Printing.

DNA analysis plays an important role in the case of murder, rape, paternity and maternity disputes and also in cases of baby exchange.

This is a technique of “Justice through advance science”.




10.           Solution: d)

The fund would be operationalized soon and would be made available to organisations such as
NABARD that made development investment decisions. NGOs might not qualify. The GCF is not to be confused with development aid money.
The Green Climate Fund will support projects, programmes, policies and other activities in developing country Parties using thematic funding windows. It is intended to be the centrepiece of efforts to raise Climate Finance of $100 billion a year by 2020.

http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-national/green-climate-fund-to-become-operational- soon/article7372378.ece




11. Solution: d)

The question was made in the context of mercury pollution victims (factories) coming out to seek justice.

http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-national/mercury-pollution-victims-seek- justice/article7372374.ece

•   The consumption of fish is by far the most significant source of ingestion-related mercury exposure in humans and animals, although plants and livestock also contain mercury due to bioconcentration of mercury from seawater, freshwater, marine and lacustrine sediments, soils, and atmosphere, and due to biomagnification by ingesting other mercury-containing organisms.
•   Exposure to mercury can occur from breathing contaminated air, from eating foods that have acquired mercury residues during processing, from exposure to mercury vapor in mercury amalgam dental restorations, and from improper use or disposal of mercury and mercury- containing objects, for example, after spills of elemental mercury or improper disposal of
fluorescent lamps.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Page  5    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    


•   Consumption of whale and dolphin meat, as is the practice in Japan, is a source of high levels of mercury poisoning. Tetsuya Endo, a professor at the Health Sciences University of Hokkaido, has tested whale meat purchased in the whaling town of Taiji and found mercury levels more than 20 times the acceptable Japanese standard.
•   Human-generated sources, such as coal-burning power plants emit about half of atmospheric mercury, with natural sources such as volcanoes responsible for the remainder. An estimated two-thirds of human-generated mercury comes from stationary combustion, mostly of coal.
•   Other important human-generated sources include gold production, nonferrous metal production, cement production, waste disposal, human crematoria, caustic soda production, pig iron and steel production, mercury production (mostly for batteries), and biomass burning.




12.Solution: d)

http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-national/digital-india-week-could-provide-investment- boost/article7372373.ece

http://vikaspedia.in/e-governance/digital-india/digital-india-week

Digital India Week was organized throughout India with the objectives:

•    Inform, educate and engage with citizens through organization of events at large number of
Digital Points of Presence such as CSCs/ Post Offices, Schools, Gram Panchayats etc

•    Connect all netizens through Digital Media campaigns and events

•    Inform all about the vision, services and benefits of the Programme

•    Popularise and expand the reach of existing e-services, plan and launch new services

•    Educate citizens on functional digital literacy, cyber security, cyber hygiene, ensure better utilization of Digital infrastructure during the DI Week and beyond

•    Incentivize, motivate and connect citizens with the Digital India Programme.




13.Solution: d)

http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-national/modisharif-meet-unlikely-at- ufa/article7372368.ece






http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Page  6    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    
Ufa, the capital of Bashkortostan, will be the venue for the international SCO and BRICS summits for the first time, which have a huge impact on the economic, social and political development of the participating countries and the world.

Although Ufa is hosting the recent SCO meet, India is still not a SCO member.

Recently, the Central Bank of Russia issued 3-rouble commemorative silver coins for the July SCO
and BRICS summits in Ufa.




14.Solution: d)

http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-opinion/the-woes-of-greece/article7372331.ece

The term troika has been widely used in Greece and Cyprus Ireland, Portugal and Spain to refer to the presence of the European Commission, European Central Bank, and International Monetary Fund in these countries since 2010 and the financial measures that these institutions have taken.

These states were unable to repay or refinance their government debt or to bail out over-indebted banks under their national supervision without the assistance of third parties like the EFSF, the ECB, or the IMF.

Four eurozone states had to be rescued by sovereign bailout programs, which were provided jointly by the International Monetary Fund and the European Commission, with additional support at the technical level from the European Central Bank.




15. Solution: d)

http://www.newindianexpress.com/world/50-Nations-Including-India-Sign-Agreement-on-China- Led-AIIB/2015/06/29/article2892704.ece

The AIIB will have authorised capital of USD 100 billion, and Asian countries will contribute to up to
75 per cent of the total capital. Each member will be allocated a share of the quota based on their economic size (not contribution to authorized capital), according to the agreement.

China, India and Russia are the three largest shareholders, taking a 30.34 per cent, 8.52 per cent, 6.66 per cent stake, respectively. Their voting shares are calculated at 26.06 per cent, 7.5 per cent and 5.92 per cent.

The AIIB is designed to finance infrastructure construction in the continent.




http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Page  7    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    


In the IMF - Unlike the General Assembly of the United Nations, where each country has one vote,
decision making at the IMF was designed to reflect the relative positions of its member countries in the global economy.

The United States was a leading force in the establishment of the World Bank in 1944 and remains the largest shareholder of the World Bank today. As the only World Bank shareholder that retains veto power over changes in the Bank’s structure, the United States plays a unique role in influencing and shaping development priorities.




16.Solution: c)

http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-opinion/teaching-the-poor-to- behave/article7368386.ece

Behavioural economics uses insights from psychology, anthropology, sociology and the cognitive sciences to come up with more realistic models of how people think and make decisions. Where these decisions tend to be flawed from an economic point of view, governments can intervene with policies aimed at ‘nudging’ the targeted citizens towards the right decision.

The report states in all earnestness that poverty “shapes mindsets”. “The context of poverty” depletes a person’s “bandwidth” — the mental resources necessary to think properly — as a result of which he or she is, well, a poor decision-maker, especially compared to those who are not in “the context of poverty”, such as the rich and the middle classes.




17. Solution: d)

The BCCI was in news recently due to several reasons:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Board_of_Control_for_Cricket_in_India

http://indianexpress.com/article/opinion/columns/view-from-the-right-clean-up-cricket/\

http://www.thehindu.com/opinion/op-ed/bcci-monopoly-and-judicial-review/article6824141.ece

http://www.cricbuzz.com/cricket-news/73174/icc-and-bcci-need-to-be-more-transparent

http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/rebel-cricket-league-will-find-going-tough-says-n- srinivasan/article7368403.ece

The Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI) is the national governing body for cricket in India. The board was formed in December 1928 as a society, registered under the Tamil Nadu Societies


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Page  8    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    
Registration Act. It is a consortium of state cricket associations and the state associations select their representatives who in turn elect the BCCI officials.

The BCCI's constitution provides for annual elections at its Annual General Meeting (AGM) for all posts, with a bar on re-election of an incumbent president beyond two consecutive years, "provided that the General Body may in its discretion re-elect the same person as president for the third consecutive year"

The BCCI has been known to use its power to influence certain ICC decisions. These included scheduling, player suspension and ICC appointments. As India is a large market in terms of international cricket revenue, the BCCI's opinions carry weight within the ICC's decision making process.




18.Solution: c)

http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/corruption-charges-dent-karnataka-lokayuktas- image/article7371954.ece

A mandate for setting up of the institution of Lokayukta through enactment of a law by the State
Legislature within a period of 365 days from the date of commencement of the Act.

The Lokayukta is an anti-corruption authority orombudsman (An ombudsman is an official, appointed by the government or by parliament to represent the interests of the public). He works along with the Income Tax Department and the Anti Corruption Bureau. The Lokayukta (sometimes referred to the institution itself) investigates allegations of corruption and mal-administration against public servants and is tasked with speedy redressal of public grievances.

The Lokayukta is usually a former High Court Chief Justice or former Supreme Court judge and has a fixed tenure.

Lokayukta’s power varies from State to State. In some States, the Lokayukta inquires into allegations against public functionaries including Chief Minister, Ministers and MLAs. While some has the power to investigate into civil servants/bureaucrats, judiciary and police




19.Solution: d)

http://indianexpress.com/article/opinion/columns/an-act-of-moral-will/

The question has been made in the context of the gay marriage judgment given recently by the US Supreme Court.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Page  9    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    
Here is a table from Laxmikanth comparing the powers of both the courts.






































20.           Solution: c)

http://indianexpress.com/article/opinion/editorials/seeking-saraswati-3/

Saraswati River was in news due to NDA government founding a research institute and museum that will work on India’s mythical river - Saraswati.

The initiative comes from the ministry of tourism, under a scheme for pilgrimage rejuvenation and spirituality augmentation.

It is also called as “antarvahini” (roughly, flowing underground), and it surfaces into reality only at
Prayag, where it can safely mingle with the Ganga and Yamuna.

http://www.dailyo.in/politics/saraswati-river-haryana-yamuna-atal-behari-vajpayee-nasa-indus- valley/story/1/3630.html




http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  10    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    


21.Solution: c)

In a bid to recast the country’s urban landscape, the Centre had given nod to the Atal Mission for
Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT), with an outlay of Rs 50,000 crore.

It is the new avatar of the Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM). But, in a significant departure from the earlier mission, the Centre will not appraise individual projects.

Details of the Mission:

§           AMRUT adopts a project approach to ensure basic infrastructure services relating to water supply, sewerage, storm-water drains, transportation and development of green spaces and parks with special provision for meeting the needs of children.

§           Under this mission, 10% of the budget allocation will be given to states and union territories as incentive based on the achievement of reforms during the previous year.

§           AMRUT, which seeks to lay a foundation to enable cities and towns to eventually grow into smart cities, will be implemented in 500 locations with a population of one lakh and above.

§           Under this mission, states get the flexibility of designing schemes based on the needs of identified cities and in their execution and monitoring.

§           States will only submit state annual action Plans to the centre for broad concurrence based on which funds will be released. But, in a significant departure from JNNURM, the central government will not appraise individual projects.

§           Under the mission, states shall transfer funds to urban local bodies within 7 days of transfer by central government and no diversion of funds to be made failing which penal interest would be charged besides taking other adverse action by the centre.




22.           Solution: a)

40 years of National emergency of 1975 has made it popular in news items like this one. Hence the question.

http://indianexpress.com/article/opinion/columns/emergencys-useful-scars/

This kind of transformation of the political system from federal during normal times to unitary during
Emergency is a unique feature of the Indian Constitution.



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  11    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    
A proclamation of national emergency may be applicable to the entire country or only a part of it. The
42nd Amendment Act of 1976 enabled the president to limit the operation of a National Emergency to a specified part of India.




23.           Solution: d)

http://indianexpress.com/article/opinion/columns/on-your-marks/

•   The new system opens up the opportunity for student mobility, allowing students to transfer credits earned in one institution to another; and for programme portability, allowing movement from one degree programme to another.
•   These will be achieved through the introduction of a uniform system of counting credits (which replaces the “papers” system), a uniform evaluation system based on grade points (replacing the “marks” system), and a uniform semester-based academic year (which replaces the “year- long” pattern).
•   This establishes parity within and across institutions; between Indian higher educational institutions and many international ones. In principle, this new system should also provide employers and post-graduate institutions better standards to compare undergraduate students and their institutions.
•   The credit based semester system provides flexibility in designing curriculum and assigning credits based on the course content and hours of teaching.
•   The choice based credit system provides a ‘cafeteria’ type approach in which the students can take courses of their choice, learn at their own pace, undergo additional courses and acquire more than the required credits, and adopt an interdisciplinary approach to learning, It is desirable that the HEIs move to CBCS and implement the grading system.






24.           Solution: a)

http://www.livemint.com/Opinion/3yGB9NCwIvxFoiCKMjo42L/Unshackling-centrally-sponsored- schemes.html

In India’s developmental plan exercise we have two types of schemes viz; central sector and centrally sponsored scheme. The nomenclature is derived from the pattern of funding and the modality for
implementation.






http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  12    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    


•   Under Central sector schemes, it is 100% funded by the Union government and implemented by the Central Government machinery. Central sector schemes are mainly formulated on subjects from the Union List.
•   In addition, the Central Ministries also implement some schemes directly in States/UTs which are called Central Sector Schemes but resources under these Schemes are not generally transferred to States.
•   Under Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) a certain percentage of the funding is borne by the States in the ratio of 50:50, 70:30, 75:25 or 90:10 and the implementation is by the State Governments. Centrally Sponsored Schemes are formulated in subjects from the State List to encourage States to prioritise in areas that require more attention.
•   Funds are routed either through consolidated fund of States and or are transferred directly to
State/ District Level Autonomous Bodies/Implementing Agencies.




25.           Solution: d)

http://www.livemint.com/Money/rk6X8CGMHcbEU9PCFv5FhI/Whats-missing-in-the-Cicra- Act.html

Use of credit information is becoming prevelant. Therefore, it is important that credit agencies function in a standard way. To an extent, this was achieved when the Credit Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005 (Cicra), came. The legislation was enacted by the government of India to regulate the credit information companies (CICs).

The Act covers various aspects such as details on eligibility criterion to become a CIC, and the role and responsibilities of such companies. Data security and penalties for any such lapses have also been chalked out.




26.           Solution: d)

http://indianexpress.com/article/opinion/columns/the-everywhere-poison/

Though lead is found frequently in our environment, it has no known purpose in our bodies. When lead gets inside the body, the body confuses it with calcium and other essential nutrients. This confusion can cause permanent damage to the health of both children and adults.

Lead poisoning can cause a number of adverse human health effects, but is particularly detrimental to the neurological development of children.

In adults, lead poisoning can cause poor muscle coordination; nerve damage to the sense organs and nerves controlling the body; increased blood pressure; hearing and vision impairment; reproductive

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  13    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    
problems (e.g., decreased sperm count); retarded fetal development even at relatively low exposure levels.




27.           Solution: a)

The human resource development ministry has launched the Study Webs of Active-Learning for Young Aspiring Minds (SWAYAM), a Web portal where Massive Open On-line Courses (MOOCs) will be available on all kinds of subjects.

MOOCS or massive open online courses have made access to top university-level content for every learner possible. By providing free online courses on demand, MOOCS enable learners to learn from anywhere irrespective of their situation as long as they have internet access.

It will be hosted on a virtual cloud and have provision for the beneficiaries to get certificates following tests at the end of the courses.

http://edtechreview.in/trends-insights/trends/1598-indian-hrd-ministry-launches-a-mooc-platform- swayam




28.           Solution: b)

http://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-33314442

The government says the EU-IMF bailout terms are unacceptable, but cannot simply be rejected without the Greek people having their say. Hence the referendum.
























http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  14    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    










































29.           Solution: d)

This is from PIB features – contribution of the new government towards enhancing education in
India.

With the aim to promote educational opportunities among girl students and address the challenge of lower girl enrolment rates in engineering colleges, the program has been launched.

It is a mentoring and scholarship scheme to enable meritorious girl students to transit from schools to technical education without much difficulty and also aims to enrich and enhance teaching and
learning of mathematics and science at senior secondary school level by providing free online
resources for all.





http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  15    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    
Therefore it is envisaged as the first step towards achieving this larger goal of addressing the quality gap between school education and engineering entrance, by addressing the three dimensions of education - curriculum design, transaction and assessment.

http://www.business-standard.com/article/news-ians/udaan-scheme-for-girl-students-launched-
114111402061_1.html




30.           Solution: a)

Only 1.5 per cent of the land and less than 10 per cent of the oceans around Antarctica fall under special protection.

A long-running proposal to designate the Ross Sea (one of the bays surrounding Antarctica), sometimes called “the last ocean” of the world because of its pristine condition, as a marine reserve has so far failed to be negotiated by the convention on the conservation of Antarctic marine living resources.

The Ross Sea is home to at least 10 mammal species, half a dozen species of birds, 95 species of fish, and over 1,000 invertebrate species.

http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/human-activities-taking-toll-antarctic-ecosystems




31.Solution: a)

Nadia district in West Bengal has won the United Nations Public Service Award 2015 in the category of improving delivery of public services for or eliminating open defecation in the district.

It should be noted that Nadia district is the first open defecation free district in India. The district had achieved this feat by making toilets available for all under state governments flagship programme Sabar Shouchagar (Toilets for All).

The model has helped develop generate awareness, improve access to sanitary toilets, and bring substantial health improvement through improved sanitation. The scheme has mobilised all stakeholders, especially women and schoolchildren and has seen involvement of faith-based organisations. The UN has said that this model has the potential to eliminate open defecation from
across the world.








http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  16    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    


32.           Solution: d)

These were the reasons:

•   Security – pre-2005 notes have fewer security features as compared to 2005 and post-2005 currency notes. Thus, lesser will be the chances of its counterfeiting newer currency notes. It will also remove fake currency notes in circulation which were being pumped in Indian economy were copies of pre-2005 notes.
•   Flushing out black money – The spillover effect of the RBI’s decision will be to flush out black money. Money has value only as long as it is a medium of exchange and store of value. It loses its value when it ceases to be a medium of exchange.
•   A disincentive for cash hoarders – With the RBI’s announcement, currency hoarders will be left with no option but to liquidate their unaccounted holdings by spending or exchanging them.

Thus, this was a well thought out exercise by the RBI to capture the “money flows’’ into the system and also help flush out counterfeit notes. International standard practice – It is an international standard practice to remove old series notes.





33.           Solution: d)

India has topped in the regional inflow of Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in South Asia region during year 2014, accounting for 34 billion US dollars investments.

It was revealed in United Nations Conference on Trade and Development’s (UNCTAD’s) World Investment Report 2015. As per the report FDI inflow to India has surged by 22 per cent to about 34 billion US dollars.

India has improved its position to 9th top host country in the world for FDI in 2014. Owing to good performance of India, the FDI inflows to South Asia region has rose to 41 billion US dollars in 2014.

Top five FDI recipients in South Asia: India, Iran, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka. The report had divided Asia into three sub-regions viz East and South East Asia, West Asia and South Asia. China is the world’s largest recipient of FDI with 129 billion dollars investments and has toppled US (92 billion
dollars)








http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  17    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    


34.           Solution: d)

The Delhi Government recently invoked the Essential Services Maintenance Act (ESMA) to end the two-day-old strike by resident doctors.

The Essential Services Maintenance Act (ESMA) is an act of Parliament of India. It is a central law.

§           It was established to ensure the delivery of certain services, which if obstructed would affect the normal life of the people. These include services like public transport (bus services), health services (doctors and hospitals).

§           Although it is a very powerful law, its execution rests entirely on the discretion of the State government. Each state in the union of India, hence has a separate state Essential Services Maintenance Act with slight variations from the central law in its provisions. This freedom is accorded by the central law itself.




35.           Solution: c)

http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/GIAN-will-bring-top-scientists-to-India- Manjul/articleshow/45973668.cms

A new scheme called `Gian` (Global Initiative for Academic Network) has been launched which will bring world class educators from across the globe to teach in India.

Indian American mathematician, Manjul Bhargava, has agreed to spearhead it. Prof. Bhargava is a winner of Fields Medal, which is considered as the highest honour for a mathematician in the world.

`Gian` is aimed at tapping the talent pool of scientists and entrepreneurs internationally to encourage their engagement with the institutes of Higher Education in India so as to augment the country's existing academic resources, accelerate the pace of quality reform, and elevate India's scientific and technological capacity to global excellence.






36.           Solution: a)

The European space agency recently announced that its comet-chasing mission Rosetta would be extended until September 2016 and may end with the dying mother-ship touching down on the
comet.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  18    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    
Rosetta was launched in 2004 on an Ariane 5 rocket and reached the comet in 2014, becoming the first spacecraft to orbit a comet. Rosetta took off from Earth 10 years ago carrying Philae and traveled 6.4 billion miles before arriving at the comet.

On 12 November 2014, the mission performed the first successful landing on a comet and returned data from the surface.

Philae ’s mission was to land successfully on the surface of a comet, attach itself, and transmit data from the surface about the comet’s composition. It is a robotic European Space Agency lander.




37.           Solution: c)

The Union Cabinet chaired by the Prime Minister has given its approval to the proposal of the Ministry of Culture for setting up of a National Memorial at Lala Ka Tola, Sitab, Diara, District Chhapra (Saran) in Bihar. It is the birth place of Lok Nayak Jai Prakash Narayan.

About Jai Prakash Narayan:

§           He was an Indian independence activist, social reformer and political leader. He is popularly called “LokNayak”.

§           He participated in Non Cooperation movement (NCM), Civil disobedience movement (CDM)
and Vinoba bhave’s Sarvodaya and Bhoodan movement.

§           In 1999, he was posthumously awarded the Bharat Ratna, India’s highest civilian award, in recognition of his social work. Other awards include the Magsaysay award for Public Service in
1965.

§           The Patna airport is also named after him.

§           Nav Nirman Andolan movement of Gujarat asked Jayaprakash to lead a peaceful agitation. On
8 April 1974, aged 72, he led a silent procession at Patna.




38.           Solution: d)

Since Lord Jagannath’s Nabakalebar festival is being observed after a gap of 19 years, the Centre has decided to promote the Hindu religious festival under ‘the Incredible India Campaign for its international branding’.

§           The preparations are on in Puri for Nabakalebar festival to be celebrated on 10th July this year.



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  19    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    


§           The Nabakalebara is an ancient ritual associated with most of the Jagannath Temples when the Idols of Lord Jagannath, Balabhadra, Subhadra and Sudarshan are replaced by a new set of Idols.

§           A year with an extra Ashadha masa/month as per Hindu Calendar is considered auspicious for conducting the ceremony. This usually occurs every twelve to nineteen years.

§           This festival is celebrated at the Jagannath Temple in Puri, Orissa.




39.           Solution: d)

PMKSY is central scheme that aims at providing irrigation facilities to every village in the country by converging ongoing irrigation schemes implemented by various ministries.

It will focus on ‘end-to-end solution’ in irrigation supply chain by implementing new programme in a
“project mode” with decentralised state-level planning and execution.

Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana Ensure access to some means of protective irrigation to all agricultural farms in the country in order to produce ‘per drop more crop’ to bring desired rural prosperity.

Flexibility and autonomy: to states in the process of planning and executing irrigation projects in order to ensure water to every farm.

Irrigation plans: ensure that state and district irrigation plans are prepared on the basis of sources of availability of water and agro-climatic conditions in that region.

Promoting extension activities: related to ‘on farm water management and crop alignment’ for farmers as well as grass root level field functionaries.

Agencies involved: nodal agency for implementation of PMKSY projects will be state agriculture department. Inter-ministerial National Steering Committee (NSC) will periodically review these projects.

Budgetary allocation: 1,000 crore rupees for fiscal year 2015-16.

Funding Pattern: Centre- States will share 75: 25 per cent. In case of north-eastern region and hilly states it will be 90:10.








http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  20    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    


40.            Solution:

The question has been made again with reference to the Greece crisis and its possible exist from
European Union. It is an important topic for this year.

The European Union (EU) is a politico-economic union of 28 member states that are located primarily in Europe. The EU operates through a system of supranational institutions and intergovernmental-negotiated decisions by the member states. The institutions are: the European Commission, the Council of the European Union, the European Council, the Court of Justice of the European Union, the European Central Bank, the European Court of Auditors, and the European Parliament. The European Parliament is elected every five years by EU citizens.

The EU has developed a single market through a standardised system of laws that apply in all member states.

The eurozone, officially called the euro area, is a monetary union of 19 European Union (EU) member states that have adopted the euro (€) as their common currency and sole legal tender.

Monetary policy of the zone is the responsibility of the European Central Bank (ECB) which is governed by a president and a board of the heads of national central banks. The principal task of the ECB is to keep inflation under control. Though there is no common representation, governance or fiscal policy for the currency union, some co-operation does take place through the Eurogroup, which makes political decisions regarding the eurozone and the euro. The Eurogroup is composed of the finance ministers of eurozone states, but in emergencies, national leaders also form the Eurogroup.




41.Solution: a)

http://indianexpress.com/article/opinion/columns/because-of-the-44th-amendment/

In 1975, the then Prime Minister, Indira Gandhi advised the president to proclaim emergency without consulting her cabinet. The cabinet was informed of the proclamation after it was made, as a fait accompli.

The 44th Amendment Act of 1978 introduced a safeguard to eliminate any possibility of the prime minister alone taking a decision in this regard.

Then, the President could proclaim a national emergency only after receiving a written recommendation from the cabinet. This means that the emergency can be declared only on the
concurrence of the cabinet and not merely on the advice of the prime minister.



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  21    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    


42.           Solution: d)

Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor of Eastern DFC is a proposed freight corridor in India by Indian
Railways. It is going to be a broad gauge corridor. This will have double line and will be electrified.
Due to lack of space the section from Ludhiana in Punjab to Khurja in Uttar Pradesh will be single line electrified. This corridor will cover total distance of 1839 km. This corridor will also pass through
Dhari (The origin point of Western Dedicated Freight
Corridor) which will serve as a junction.



































Apart from faster delivery of goods, this project is also going to help to reduce greenhouse gases
(GHGs) emissions caused by road transportation in this region.





43.           Solution: a)

The scheme will provide more options to farmers for selling their produce. Decision in this regard was taken at a Union Cabinet meeting presided by Prime Minister.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  22    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    
For online national agriculture market, an online platform will be set up. On this platform farmers will be able to sell and buy vegetables, fruits and other produce from across the country. In this regard, Union government will also establish an agency to oversee online trading and ensure that transactions take place smoothly.

This online agriculture market will also focus on creating godowns and facilitate transportation of the farm produce after the online trade. Presently, farmers are restricted to sell their produce at traditional mandis or market committees which are charging various taxes on producers.

This platform will also give choice to farmers to sell the farm produce both in traditional mandis or online platform and boost their incomes and improve availability, moderating price rise.





44.           Solution: a)

The initiative is aimed at class I and II students in reading, writing language comprehension and numeracy is at par with the world.

The campaign will also seek to ensure that every school provides teaching-learning for 200 days in a year, with 800 instructional hours.
This would enable students to progress to higher classes with the confidence of good education. http://www.thehindubusinessline.com/industry-and-economy/education/smriti-irani-launches-
padhe-bharat-badhe-bharat-programme/article6353330.ece




45.           Solution: d)

The disqualification of the MPs and MLAs are dealt by either the RPI Act or the anti-defection act. In case of the anti-defection act, it is the speaker.
In case of the RPI Act, is the President who is advised by the Election Commission.

A MP or MLA can stand from maximum two electoral constituencies. Narendra Modi contested from both Varansi and Vadodra.









http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  23    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    


46.           Solution: c)

"Crossing the floor"--Passing between the member addressing the House and the Chair which is considered breach of Parliamentary etiquette.

"Adjournment of Debate"--Adjournment on a motion adopted by the House, of the debate on a Motion/Resolution/Bill on which the House is then engaged until a future day or sine die as specified in the motion.

For knowing all important Parliamentary keywords, refer to http://rajyasabha.nic.in/rsnew/parliamentary_term/important_partliament_term.asp




47.           Solution: d)

The qualifications needed to fight local elections is that

•   You should be at least 21 years of age
•   You should be a citizen of India.
•   You should not have been disqualified under the RPI act.
•   All other qualifications remaining the same as that of a MP or MLA. No college verification, approval etc. is needed.



48.           Solution: d)

The Constitution (Article 143) authorises the president to seek the opinion of the Supreme Court in the two categories of matters:
(a) On any question of law or fact of public importance which has arisen or which is likely to arise. (b) On any dispute arising out of any pre-constitution treaty, agreement, covenant, engagement,
sanad or other similar instruments.
In the first case, the Supreme Court may tender or may refuse to tender its opinion to the president. But, in the second case, the Supreme Court ‘must’ tender its opinion to the president. In both the
cases, the opinion expressed by the Supreme Court is only advisory and not a judicial pronouncement.

Hence, it is not binding on the president; he may follow or may not follow the opinion. However, it facilitates the government to have an authoritative legal opinion on a matter to be decided by it.



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  24    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    


49.           Solution: d)

Article 226 of the Constitution empowers a high court to issue writs including habeas corpus, mandamus, certiorari, prohibition and quo-warrento for the enforcement of the fundamental rights of the citizens and for any other purpose.

Judicial review is the power of a high court to examine the constitutionality of legislative enactments and executive orders of both the Central and state governments.

On examination, if they are found to be violative of the Constitution (ultra-vires), they can be declared as illegal, unconstitutional and invalid (null and void) by the high court. Consequently, they cannot be enforced by the government.




50.           Solution: d)

Freedom of Speech and Expression under Article 19 implies that every citizen has the right to express his views, opinions, belief and convictions freely by word of mouth, writing, printing, picturing or in any other manner. The Supreme Court held that the freedom of speech and expression includes the following:

o Right to propagate one’s views as well as views of others.
o Freedom of the press.
o Freedom of commercial advertisements.
o Right against tapping of telephonic conversation.
o Right to telecast, that is, government has no monopoly on electronic media.
o Right against bundh called by a political party or organisation.
o Right to know about government activities.
o Freedom of silence.
o Right against imposition of pre-censorship on a newspaper.
o Right to demonstration or picketing but not right to strike.




51. Solution: d)

As per the constitution of India, the Vice-President of India does not make any appointments when he is acting as the Vice-President of India.
Only when he is in the capacity of the President, can he make the appointments given in the options. Vice-President of India does not carry any formal authority other than being the Chairman of the
Rajya Sabha.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  25    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    


52.           Solution: a)

The reasoning behind the court’s judgment was:

“Since the Constitution had conferred a limited amending power on the Parliament, the Parliament cannot under the exercise of that limited power enlarge that very power into an absolute power. Indeed, a limited amending power is one of the basic features of the Constitution and, therefore, the limitations on that power cannot be destroyed. In other words, Parliament cannot, under article 368, expand its amending power so as to acquire for itself the right to repeal or abrogate the Constitution or to destroy its basic features. The donee of a limited power cannot by the exercise of that power convert the limited power into an unlimited one.”




53.           Solution: d)

A simple case of majority seats not meaning majority votes is Modi government’s win by a majority of seats but only around 38% votes.

On the other hand, in Delhi, AAP secured 54.4% of votes, and won nearly 95% seats. So majority of seats does not mean necessarily majority of votes.
The opposite is also true. A party can get majority of votes, yet it may not get majority of seats, because it may not win by a huge margin in all electoral constituencies.




54.           Solution: b)

Voters can not choose members of Rajya Sabha and State Legislative Council. They are indirectly elected by members of the state LA (almost all in case of RS, and 1/3rd in case of SLC).

Chief Minister of a state cannot vote for Rajya Sabha and State Legislative Council, if he is a member of State Legislative Council, and not State Legislative Assembly.

Only the Elected members choose 1/3rd of the SLC members, as well as choose RAjya Sabha members, as well as vote as registered voters for Lok Sabha elections.












http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  26    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    


55.           Solution: c)

India has had the first President running for successive terms. It can be as many number of times. In the USA, however, there is a ban on more than two terms for a President.

CAG is an important constitutional office maintaining the financial accountability of the executive to the legislature. A promise of successive terms to a pliant bureaucrat can erode the autonomy of the institution.

Same is the case with ECI. More than one term may erode the independence of the CEC.

Governor and Chairman, RS do not carry such responsibilities. Hence, they can run for successive terms.




56.           Solution: a)

The Constituent Assembly was constituted in November 1946 under the scheme formulated by the
Cabinet Mission Plan.

The total strength of the Constituent Assembly was to be 389. Of these, 296 seats were to be allotted to British India and 93 seats to the Princely States. Out of 296 seats allotted to the British India, 292 members were to be drawn from the eleven governors’ provinces and four from the four chief
commissioners’ provinces, one from each.





























http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  27    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    


57.Solution: d)

The recommendation for election is made by the government and the notification for election is issued by the Election Commission.

After the notification, the ECI announces the schedule, and starts accepting nomination papers of candidates.

After announcing the schedule, the model code of conduct comes automatically in force that prohibits certain kind of political activities to ensure a level playing field.




58.           Solution: c)

CRR is the amount that the banks have to keep with the RBI. The banks do nto earn any interest rate on this CRR, which the banks also called dead asset.

Higher is the CRR, lesser money do the banks have to lend to the public.

If CRR is reduced, money supply in the economy is increased. It may lead to inflation and lower interest rates, not the reverse in the short-run.




59.           Solution: b)

Banks actually create money by lending money.

The money multiplier is the amount of money that banks generate with each dollar of reserves. Reserves is the amount of deposits that the Federal Reserve requires banks to hold and not lend. Banking reserves is the ratio of reserves to the total amount of deposits.

The money multiplier is the ratio of deposits to reserves in the banking system.

Imagine that you are the president of a large bank. The Fed requires that you hold 10% of your deposits in reserves (a reserve ratio of 1/10). This means that for every $1.00 of deposits, you can only lend out $0.90. The total value of your bank's deposits is $100,000,000. You want to maximize your bank's profits, so you loan out all of the $90,000,000. All of sudden, you've just increased the supply of money from $100,000,000 to $190,000,000!

Here's how you did it. Your depositors still have $100,000,000 with you, but only on paper. They can come in any time and get their money. However, since not everyone wants or needs their money at the same time, your reserves of $10,000,000 will cover the normal demand for withdrawals.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  28    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    
At the same time, you have distributed $90,000,000 in loan funds to your borrowers - that's real money going out the bank's door.




60.           Solution: d)

Throughout his life, Gandhi sought to develop ways to fight India's extreme poverty, backwardness and socio-economic challenges as a part of his wider involvement in the Indian independence movement.

Gandhi's championing of Swadeshi and non-cooperation were centred on the principles of economic self-sufficiency. Gandhi sought to target European-made clothing and other products as not only a symbol of British colonialism but also the source of mass unemployment and poverty, as European industrial goods had left many millions of India's workers, craftsmen and women without a livelihood.

By championing homespun khadi clothing and Indian-made goods, Gandhi sought to incorporate peaceful civil resistance as a means of promoting national self-sufficiency.

Gandhi was a self-described philosophical anarchist, and his vision of India meant an India without an underlying government. He once said that "the ideally nonviolent state would be an ordered anarchy.




61.Solution: c)

The law of diminishing returns, also referred to as the law of diminishing marginal returns, states that in a production process, as one input variable is increased, there will be a point at which the marginal per unit output will start to decrease, holding all other factors constant.

In other words, keeping all other factors constant, the additional output gained by another one unit increase of the input variable will eventually be smaller than the additional output gained by the previous increase in input variable. At that point, the diminishing marginal returns take effect.

You can see a live example here in this article http://study.com/academy/lesson/law-of-diminishing- returns-definition-examples-quiz.html




62.           Solution: c)

http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/04/27/us-eu-google-antitrust-idUSKBN0NF1YX20150427



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  29    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    
Recently Google and some other firms came under the European anti-trust laws that punish anti- competitive practices in markets. Anti-trust laws regulate anti-competitive practices.

The same is done by the Competition Act, 2002 in India which was enacted by the Parliament of India and governs Indian competition law. It replaced the archaic Monopoly and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969. Under this legislation, the Competition Commission of India was established to prevent activities that have an adverse effect on competition in India.

In accordance with the provisions of the Amendment Act, the Competition Commission of India and the Competition Appellate Tribunal have been established.




63.           Solution: d)

Wholesale Price Index (WPI)

This index is published by office of Economic Adviser (Ministry of Commerce & Industry).The calculation is done by tracking the average prices of commodities that are traded in bulk i.e. wholesale.

The commodities under study are divided into three categories: primary articles (food, non-food, tobacco, fodder and minerals), fuel & power and manufactured products. Currently, the total basket of products under consideration for WPI is 676 items and the calculation of this index is done by using Laspeyres formula (it works on averaging principle) and year (2004-2005) commodity prices are
taken as base for reference by equating them to 100 and values of the index are calculated as a
percentage relative to this base.

Consumer Price Index (CPI)

This index is published by Central Statistics Office (CSO) (Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation).In nations like United Kingdom, Poland, Malaysia etc. it is also known as Retail Price Index. CPI is a method that involves calculation of inflation through time tracking of weighted averages of 200 consumer goods and services with prices of year 2010 as the base.

So which is the better index for measuring inflation?

The primary disapproval for WPI being used as the key index for estimating inflation is that the general public doesn’t transact on wholesale level on a daily basis. Also, the wholesale doesn’t reflect the pricing trends at retail level and thus, not the definitive ideal indicator of inflation.

On the other hand, many analysts feel that CPI is the accurate method of measuring inflation since it reflects the ground realities by tracking the costs of the goods that are purchased on daily basis by general public.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  30    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    
The difference between Wholesale Price Index (WPI) and Consumer Price Index (CPI) is that along with tracking prices of goods, the latter also includes services in the indexing.




64.           Solution: d)

High fiscal deficit does not impeded growth necessarily in the short-run. Only if the fiscal deficit is not augmented by increased supply will it roadblock growth.

Loose monetary policy gives stimulus to growth.
Liberalising the external sector gives impetus to FDI and FIIs pushing growth in the short-run. Inflation in the economy is good because it indicates that there is demand for goods greater than its
supply. More demand will lead to more production and more GDP.




65.           Solution: a)

Vedas are a series of sacred texts used in religious rituals and sacrifices. The Vedas are essentially archetypal poetry of high literary value. They are mythical in nature and their language is symbolic.

Being mythical, they have multiple meanings, and, therefore, the theologian moulds his rites, the preacher seeks his belief, the philosopher finds the clues for his intellectual speculation and the law- makers work out the social and political life-style in accordance with the archetypal truths of the Vedas.

Vedic poets are called the rishis, the seers who visualized the archetypal truths of cosmic functioning at all levels of existence. Devatas of the vedic poetry symbolise the manifestations of the divine force of the One Supreme.




66.           Solution: d)

The dominating note in bhakti is ecstasy and total identity with God. It is a poetic approach to religion and an ascetic approach to poetry. It is poetry of connections – connecting the worldly with the
divine, and as a result, the old form of secular love poetry began to have a new meaning in all
languages. The rise of bhakti poetry gave rise to regional languages (Bhasa).

The conception of bhakti did away with the elite tradition of Sanskrit and accepted the more acceptable language of the common man. Kabir (Hindi) says that Sanskrit is like water of a well
stagnant, Bhasa like flowing water.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  31    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    
A seventh century Shaiva Tamil writer Manikkarvachakar has something similar to say about in his book of poetry Thiruvachakam.

Bhakti also attacked the age-old caste system and devoted itself to the worship of humanity, because the catch-word of bhakti is that God is there in every human being. The movement was in essence subaltern, as most of its poets belonged to the so-called ‘lower’ castes. Bhakti is antitheology and against any kind of conceptual erudition.




67.           Solution: a)

A barometer measures atmospheric pressure, which can help give you a rough idea of how the weather will be changing in the next 24 hours.

Sea-level barometer readings usually range from about 29.70 inches of mercury to 30.20 or so, with
29.92 being the average reading.

Pressure also drops with altitude too, so reported pressures are converted to sea-level to factor out the difference in altitude from individual reports. You can convert your observed pressure to sea-level by subtracting .06 inches for every 50 feet in altitude.

But it's not so much the actual number reading as the trend the readings are taking. A steadily falling barometer usually signals a storm is approaching, while a rising barometer normally means sunnier skies ahead. Although very low readings (under 29.50 inches) can suggest a strong storm approaching.




68.           Solution: a)

A thunderstorm, also known as an electrical storm, a lightning storm, or a thundershower, is a type of storm characterized by the presence of lightning and its acoustic effect on the Earth's atmosphere known as thunder.

While most thunderstorms move with the mean wind flow through the layer of the troposphere that they occupy, vertical wind shear causes a deviation in their course at a right angle to the wind shear direction.

Thunderstorms result from the rapid upward movement of warm, moist air.

They can occur inside warm, moist air masses and at fronts. As the warm, moist air moves upward, it cools, condenses, and forms cumulonimbus clouds that can reach heights of over 20 km. As the rising air reaches its dew point, water droplets and ice form and begin falling the long distance through the clouds towards the Earth's surface.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  32    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    
As the droplets fall, they collide with other droplets and become larger. The falling droplets create a downdraft of cold air and moisture that spreads out at the Earth's surface, causing the strong winds commonly associated with thunderstorms, and occasionally fog.

Thunderstorms can generally form and develop in any particular geographic location, perhaps most frequently within areas located at mid-latitude when warm moist air collides with cooler air. Thunderstorms are responsible for the development and formation of many severe weather phenomena.




69.           Solution: a)

Normally, light waves from the sun travel straight through the atmosphere to your eye. But, light travels at different speeds through hot air and cold air.

Mirages happen when the ground is very hot and the air is cool. The hot ground warms a layer of air just above the ground.

When the light moves through the cold air and into the layer of hot air it is refracted (bent).

A layer of very warm air near the ground refracts the light from the sky nearly into a U-shaped bend. Our brain thinks the light has travelled in a straight line.

Our brain doesn't see the image as bent light from the sky. Instead, our brain thinks the light must have come from something on the ground.




























http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  33    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    


70.           Solution: d)

Sunspots are temporary phenomena on the photosphere of the Sun that appear visibly as dark spots compared to surrounding regions. They correspond to concentrations of magnetic field that inhibit convection and result in reduced surface temperature compared to the surrounding photosphere. Sunspots usually appear as pairs, with each spot having the opposite magnetic polarity of the other.

Although they are at temperatures of roughly 3,000–4,500 K (2,700–4,200 °C), the contrast with the surrounding material at about 5,780 K (5,500 °C) leaves them clearly visible as dark spots.

Manifesting intense magnetic activity, sunspots host secondary phenomena such as coronal loops (prominences) and reconnection events. Most solar flares and coronal mass ejections originate in magnetically active regions around visible sunspot groupings. Similar phenomena indirectly observed on stars other than the sun are commonly called starspots and both light and dark spots have been measured.

Such activities directly affect the level of solar output and ion concentration on earth and earth’s atmosphere, and affect its climate and weather.




71. Solution: d)

An antigen is any substance that causes your immune system to produce antibodies against it. An antigen may be a foreign substance from the environment, such as chemicals, bacteria, viruses, or pollen. An antigen may also be formed inside the body, as with bacterial toxins or tissue cells.

Foreign antigens originate from outside the body. Examples include parts of or substances produced by viruses or microorganisms (such as bacteria and protozoa), as well as substances in snake venom, certain proteins in foods, and components of serum and red blood cells from other individuals.




72.           Solution: a)

Mīmāṃsā is a Sanskrit word that means "reflection" or "critical investigation".It is also the name of one of six orthodox (astika) schools of Hinduism. The school is known for its philosophical theories into the nature of dharma based on hermeneutics of the Vedas.

The school was influential and foundational to Vedanta school of Hinduism, with the difference that Mimamsa school developed and emphasized karma-kanda (study of ritual actions, early parts of Vedas), while Vedanta school developed and emphasized jnana-kanda (study of knowledge and spirituality, later parts of Vedas).

The classical Mimamsa school is sometimes referred to as Purva-Mimamsa or Karma-Mimamsa.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  34    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    


73.           Solution: d)

Acharya Tulsi was a prominent Jain religious leader.

In 1949 he launched the Anuvrat Movement (anu = small, vrat=vow, Anuvratas are the limited version of the Mahavratas for the monks), based on the five Jain principles Truth, Nonviolence, Non- possession, Non-stealing and Celibacy as applied in their limited version for the lay people.

The movement encouraged people to apply the Anuvratas in their personal lives, even when dealing with non-religious aspects of the society. The movement also held that Dharma is not for ensuring happiness in the future lives but also for achieving happiness in the present life.

The movement has continued under the leadership of his disciple Yuvacharya Mahapragya. He was raised to the rank of the Acharya by Acharya Tulsi himself.




74.           Solution: c)

Characteristics of Gamma Radiation and X-Rays

•   Gamma radiation and X-rays are electromagnetic radiation like visible light, radio waves, and ultraviolet light. These electromagnetic radiations differ only in the amount of energy they have. Gamma rays and X-rays are the most energetic of these.
•   Gamma radiation is able to travel many meters in air and many centimeters in human tissue. It readily penetrates most materials and is sometimes called "penetrating radiation."
•   X-rays are like gamma rays. They, too, are penetrating radiation.
•   Radioactive materials that emit gamma radiation and X-rays constitute both an external and internal hazard to humans.
•   Dense materials are needed for shielding from gamma radiation. Clothing and turnout gear provide little shielding from penetrating radiation but will prevent contamination of the skin by radioactive materials.
•   Gamma radiation is detected with survey instruments, including civil defense instruments.
Low levels can be measured with a standard Geiger counter, such as the CD V-700. High levels can be measured with an ionization chamber, such as a CD V-715.
•   Gamma radiation or X-rays frequently accompany the emission of alpha and beta radiation.
•   Instruments designed solely for alpha detection (such as an alpha scintillation counter) will not detect gamma radiation.
•   Pocket chamber (pencil) dosimeters, film badges, thermoluminescent, and other types of
dosimeters can be used to measure accumulated exposure to gamma radiation.





http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  35    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    


75.Solution: c)

The sitar is the main instrument of Hindusthani (North Indian) music and is gourd-shaped with a long neck. The instrument itself in fact is made out of aged pumpkin shell. It has many strings, the number varies but 17 is usual. It is usually performed alongside the tabla.

The veena is the sitar's Carnatic counterpart and is also gourd-shaped with a long neck. It is made of wood. The veena has 4 main strings and 3 drone or sympathetic strings, and is usually paired with the mridangam which is the South Indian drum.

The Carnatic flute is known as Venu, and the Hindustani flute as Bansuri. This is the distinction between them in vocabulary. The Venu consists of 8 finger holes, while Bansuri consists of six or seven finger holes. Also bansuri is used mostly in north indian music while venu in south indian music.




76.           Solution: d)

The movement aroused tremendous national awakening. While developing complete distrust in British Government, people revived a sense of self-confidence and self- esteem. For the first time the Congress movement could become a mass movement. Moreover, the pre-eminent position of Gandhiji in the National Congress was established.

Mantra of Purna-swaraj was born at the Lahore session of the Congress in 1929. The British had already made half-hearted concessions by way of the 1919 Act.



77.Solution: d)

http://www.thehindu.com/news/international/bp-settles-2010-us-oil-spill-claims-for-187- bln/article7379427.ece

In the British Petroleum (BP) oil spill of 2010, 4.9 million barrels of crude oil were spilt in the Gulf of
Mexico.

According to Time, thousands of dead invertebrates like starfish and coral were found. Unfortunately, these species play an essential role in the ecosystems to which they belong, thereby impacting many other marine populations. Similarly, many dolphin offspring were found dead along the Gulf Coast. Oyster beds were also devastated by the oil spill; in fact, it could take ten years for the population to
reach its former size.




http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  36    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    
You can understand the impact of oil spill in greater detail here https://www.nwf.org/What-We-
Do/Protect-Habitat/Gulf-Restoration/Oil-Spill/Effects-on-Wildlife.aspx




78.           Solution: a)

To understand in short, after Cuba’s independence in 1902, in the following 20 years the United
States repeatedly intervened militarily in Cuban affairs: 1906 – 1909, 1912 and 1917 – 1922. The Cuban economy was highly dominated by US companies.
However, the rise of General Fulgencio Batista in the 1930s to de facto leader and President of Cuba for two terms (1940–44 and 1952–59) led to an era of close co-operation between the governments of Cuba and the United States.

But, as armed conflict broke out in Cuba between rebels led by Fidel Castro and the Batista government, the U.S. was urged to end arms sales to Cuban government.

Following the Cuban Revolution of 1959, bilateral relations deteriorated substantially. In 1961, the U.S. severed diplomatic ties with Cuba and began pursuing covert operations to topple the Communist regime.

Besides, the U.S. imposed and subsequently tightened a comprehensive set of restrictions and bans vis-a-visa the Cuban regime as retaliation for the nationalization of U.S. corporations' property by Cuba, and has stated it will continue it so long as the Cuban government continues to refuse to move toward democratization and greater respect for human rights.
Read this page to understand the US-Cuba relations in detail. The topic is important for Mains too. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cuba%E2%80%93United_States_relations#Relations_1900.E2.80.93
1959




79.           Solution: b)

Economies are currently divided into four income groupings: low, lower-middle, upper-middle, and high, based on GNI per capita (in U.S. dollars, converted from local currency using the Atlas method.

India’s GDP crossed the $2-trillion mark in 2014, according to data released by the World Bank. After taking 60 years to reach the $1-trillion mark, India added the next trillion in just seven years.

The World Bank data also show that India’s gross national income per person rose to $1,610 (around
Rs. 1 lakh) a year during 2014 from $1,560 the previous year.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  37    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    
It would take India a little more than a decade to rise from its current ‘lower middle income’ category to the ‘upper middle income’ level.

http://www.thehindu.com/business/Economy/india-is-now-a-2trillion-economy-says-world-bank- data/article7380442.ece




80.           Solution: a)




Apart from the social and economic causes of the 1857 revolt, this was one of the chief military causes. Then the bullet biting episode lead to the popular revolt.



81.Solution: d)




82.           Solution: d)

This is a very good article listing all the factors that were responsible for the growth of nationalism in
India.

http://www.yourarticlelibrary.com/sociology/top-14-factors-for-the-growth-of-nationalism-in- india/32942/

This is equally helpful for your Mains preparation. Do go through it.






83.           Solution: a)















http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  38    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    



























84.           Solution: d)

The Jallianwala Bagh massacre, also known as the Amritsar massacre, took place on 13 April 1919 when a crowd of nonviolent protesters, along with Baishakhi pilgrims, who had gathered in the Jallianwala Bagh garden in Amritsar, Punjab were fired upon by troops of the British Indian Army under the command of Reginald Dyer.

The crowd had gathered to protest against the arrest of two nationalist leaders, Dr. Satyapal, Dr. Saifuddin Kitchlew, although a curfew had been recently declared. On Dyer's orders, his troops fired on the crowd for ten minutes, directing their bullets largely towards the few open gates through which people were trying to run out.




85.           Solution: d)

Gandi-irwin pact was signed in 1931 after the failure of the first round table conference.

This led to the second round table conference, the failure of which made Gandhi return to India. He and other important leaders were arrested on return.

When Gandhi was in jail, the British PM Ramsay announced the Communal award to settle which
Gandhi and Ambedkar signed the Poona Pact.

Muslim league made the demand for Pakistan in 1940.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  39    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    


86.           Solution: a)

The Cripps mission was an attempt in late March 1942 by the British government to secure full Indian cooperation and support for their efforts in World War II. The mission was headed by Sir Stafford Cripps, a senior left-wing politician and government minister in the War Cabinet of Prime Minister Winston Churchill.

ps worked to keep India loyal to the British war effort in exchange for a promise of full self- government after the war. Cripps promised to give dominion status after the war as well as elections to be held after the war. Cripps discussed the proposals with the Indian leaders and published them. Both the major parties, the Congress and the League rejected his proposals and the mission proved a failure.

Congress moved toward the Quit India movement whereby it refused to cooperate in the war effort, while the British imprisoned practically the entire Congress leadership for the duration of the war.




87.           Solution: d)

Mansabdari system was the system of providing ranks to the officials of the Mughal Empire. The mansabdars governed the empire and commanded its armies in the emperor's name. Though they were usually aristocrats, they did feudal aristocracy, for neither the offices nor the estates that supported them were hereditary. There were 33 categories of mansabdars
The term is derived from Mansab, meaning 'rank'. Hence, Mansabdar literally means rank-holder. nstituted by the Mughal emperor Akbar, mansabdari was a system common to both the military and
the Civil department. Basically the Mansabdari system was borrowed from Persia. It was prevalent
during the reign of Babur and Humayun. Akbar made some important changes to the system and made it more efficient.




88.            Solution: d)

Buddhism prospered under the Indo-Greek kings, and it has been suggested that their invasion of
India was intended to protect the Buddhist faith from the religious persecutions of the Śuṅgas (185–
73 BCE), who had overthrown the Mauryans.

Kanishka’s conquests and patronage of Buddhism played an important role in the development of the Silk Road, and the transmission of Mahayana Buddhism from Gandhara across the Karakoram range to China.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  40    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    
However, in Buddhist tradition, Kanishka is often described as a violent, faithless ruler before his conversion to Buddhism.




89.           Solution: d)

The term Industrial Microbiology refers to the use of microorganisms for industrial purposes.

Such things as anticoagulants, antidepressants, vasodilators, herbicides, insecticides, plant hormones, enzymes, and vitamins have been isolated from microorganisms or produced in large quantities by genetically engineering the organisms with foreign genes.

In commercial industrial plants, microorganisms are widely used to produce numerous organic materials that have far-reaching value and application.

Examples can be anti-biotic, wine production, Single-cell protein etc.




90.           Solution: a)

India has the largest population of the Asian elephants. Today, there are just about 20,000 to 25,000 elephants in their natural habitat spreading across the evergreen forests, dry thorn forests, swamps and grasslands.

Their prime habitats are, however, the moist deciduous forests. Their population in India ranges from North-West India where they are found in the forest divisions of Dehradun, Bijnor and Nainital districts of UP to the Western Ghats in the states of Karnataka and Kerala and in Tamil Nadu.

In Central India, their population is distributed in southern Bihar and Orissa. In the East, they are seen in North-Bengal, Assam and a few other states




91.Solution: a)

Emerging industries are also known as ‘Sunrise Industries’. Morover, sunrise industries are expected to grow fast and become important in the future.

Examples of sunrise industries include hydrogen fuel production, space tourism, and online encyclopaedias.

Some of the others include Information technology, Wellness, Hospitality and Knowledge.




http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  41    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    
Over a period of years or decades, as an industry grows and matures, it may pass from the sunrise phase to maturity and, finally, the sunset stage. The compact-disc industry is a typical example of such a transition. It was a sunrise industry in the 1990s as compact discs replaced vinyl records and cassette tapes, but the rapid adoption of digital media in the 21st century could mean that the compact-disc industry's days are numbered.




92.           Solution: d)

Humidity is very essential for textile weaving.

In modern textiles humidity is created artificially. In older days this technology was not available. So, moist climate was the first need of the mills.

Moreover, cotton requires a warm climate to grow which was present near Mumbai.

For similar reasons, Ahmedabad also became a major hub for textiles in India. The first mill was established there right after 5 years from the one at Mumbai.




93.           Solution: d)

Births are usually measured using the birth rate i.e. the number of live births per 1,000 people. Deaths are usually measured using the death rate i.e. the number of deaths per 1,000 people.

Migrations is the movement of people in and out of an area.

Births and deaths are the natural causes of population change. The difference between the birth rate and the death rate of a country is called the natural growth rate.

The population increase in the world is mainly due to rapid increase in natural growth rate.




94.           Solution: d)

Oceanic Deeps or Trenches are some 3-5 km deeper than the surrounding ocean floor - the deepest parts of the oceans.

The trenches are relatively steep sided, narrow basins.

They occur at the bases of continental slopes and along island arcs and are associated with active volcanoes and strong earthquakes.



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  42    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    
That is why they are very significant in the study of plate movements. As many as 57 deeps have been explored so far; of which 32 are in the Pacific Ocean; 19 in the Atlantic Ocean and 6 in the Indian Ocean.




95.           Solution: d)

Polar climates exist poleward beyond 70° latitude. Polar climates consist of two types: (i) Tundra
(ET); (ii) Ice Cap (EF).

Tundra Climate (ET)

The tundra climate (ET) is so called after the types of vegetation, like low growing mosses, lichens and flowering plants. This is the region of permafrost where the sub soil is permanently frozen. The short growing season and water logging support only low growing plants. During summer, the tundra regions have very long duration of day light.

Ice Cap Climate (EF)

The ice cap climate (EF) occurs over interior Greenland and Antartica. Even in summer, the temperature is below freezing point. This area receives very little precipitation.




96.           Solution: a)

The Lushai Hills is also called Mizo Hills is a part of Patkai range or the purvanchal mountain ranges of India. Lushai hills are very rich in Flora & Fauna and covered with dense bamboo jungle and inhabited by the Mizo and Lushais tribes of North East India.

It is a northern extension of the Arakan ranges of Myanmar. Mizo hills are often confused with Garo Khasi and Jaintia hills.
The Garo,Khasi and Jaintia Hills are the three major hills of Patkai range located in the state of
Meghalaya. The group of mountains are extremely rich in flora & fauna and home to highest waterfalls in India along with the wettest place on earth Cherrapunji and nearby Mawsynram.












http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  43    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    


97.           Solution: b)

The term greenhouse is derived from the analogy to a greenhouse used in cold areas for preserving heat. A greenhouse is made up of glass. The glass which is transparent to incoming short wave solar radiation is opaque to outgoing long wave radiation.

The glass, therefore, allows in more radiation and prevents the long wave radiation going outside the glass house, causing the temperature inside the glasshouse structure warmer than outside. When you enter a car or a bus, during summers, where windows are closed, you feel more heat than outside.

Likewise during winter the vehicles with closed doors and windows remain warmer than the temperature outside. This is another example of the greenhouse effect.




98.           Solution: d)

The temperature of surface water decreases from the equator towards the poles because the amount of insolation decreases poleward.

The oceans in the northern hemisphere receive more heat due to their contact with larger extent of land than the oceans in the southern hemisphere.

The winds blowing from the land towards the oceans drive warm surface water away from the coast resulting in the upwelling of cold water from below. It results into the longitudinal variation in the temperature. Contrary to this, the onshore winds pile up warm water near the coast and this raises the temperature.

Warm ocean currents raise the temperature in cold areas while the cold currents decrease the temperature in warm ocean areas. Gulf stream (warm current) raises the temperature near the eastern coast of North America and the West Coast of Europe while the Labrador current (cold current) lowers the temperature near the north-east coast of North America.




99.           Solution: a)

An astronomical theory is Millankovitch oscillations, which infer cycles in the variations in the earth’s orbital characteristics around the sun, the wobbling of the earth and the changes in the earth’s axial tilt.

All these alter the amount of insolation received from the sun, which in turn, might have a bearing on the climate.




http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  44    
    





    
    
INSIGHTS  MOCK    TEST    SERIES    2015:    TEST    –    29    SOLUTIONS    
Volcanism is considered as another cause for climate change. Volcanic eruption throws up lots of aerosols into the atmosphere. These aerosols remain in the atmosphere for a considerable period of time reducing the sun’s radiation reaching the Earth’s surface




100.         Solution: a)

One striking feature of Kangra paintings is the verdant greenery it depicts. The style is naturalistic,
and great attention is paid to detail. The foliage depicted is vast and varied. This is made noticeable by using multiple shades of green. The Kangra paintings feature flowering plants and creepers, leafless trees, rivulets and brooks. The Kangra artists adopted various shades of the primary colors and used delicate and fresher hues. For instance, they used a light pink on the upper hills to indicate distance. Kangra paintings depict the feminine charm in a very graceful manner. Facial features are soft and refined. The female figures are exceptionally beautiful. A regal figure seated on a throne, Pahari
school Later Kangra paintings also depicted nocturnal scenes, and storms and lightning. The
paintings were often large and had complex compositions of many figures and elaborate landscapes. Towns and house clusters were often depicted in the distance. The Kangra painters used colors made of vegetable and mineral extracts. They employed cool and fresh colors. Kangra paintings are known for the lyrical blending of form and color. The Kangra Arts Promotion Society - an NGO at Dharamshala Himachal Pradesh is working for the promotion of this art which is at the verge of extinction today. This NGO is running a school to train young boys and girls in this art. It also runs a workshop where genuine Kangra Paintings are made on traditional handmade paper using only mineral and vegetable colours.




    























http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                      INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  45    
    
