                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  3 SOLUTIONS                     


1.   Solution: a)





























2.   Solution: a)

Democracy is a form of government that allows people to choose their rulers. In a democracy: only leaders elected by people should rule the country, and people have the freedom to express views, freedom to organise and freedom to protest.

Option 1 and 2 go against these two basic tenets.

3.   Solution: a)

In case of India we have unemployment in rural and urban areas. However, the nature of unemployment differs in rural and urban areas. In case of rural areas, there is seasonal and disguised unemployment. Urban areas have mostly educated unemployment.

Seasonal unemployment happens when people are not able to find jobs during some months of the year. People dependant upon agriculture usually faces such kind of problem. There are certain busy seasons when sowing, harvesting, weeding and
threshing is done. Certain months do not provide much work to the people dependant on agriculture.

In case of disguised unemployment people appear to be employed. They have agricultural plot where they find work. This usually happens among family members engaged in agricultural activity. The work requires the service of five people but
engages eight people. Three people are extra. These
three people also work in the same plot as the others. The contribution made by the three extra people does not add to the contribution made by the five people. If three people are removed the productivity of the field will not decline. The field requires the service of five people and the three extra people are disguised unemployed.

A study showed that I the urban areas (educated unemployment), unemployment of graduate and post-graduate ha increased faster than among matriculates. A paradoxical manpower situation is witnessed as surplus of manpower in certain categories coexist with shortage of manpower in others. There is unemployment among technically qualified person on one hand, while there is a


http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                            Page 1
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  3 SOLUTIONS                     


dearth of technical skills required for economic growth.

4.   Solution: c)

The mahuwa flower is edible and is a food item for tribals. They are used to make syrup for medicinal purposes.

They are also fermented to produce the alcoholic drink mahuwa, a country liquor. Tribals of Bastar in Chhattisgarh and Orissa, Santhals of Santhal Paraganas (Jharkhand), Koya tribals of North-East Andhra Pradesh and tribals of North Maharashtra consider the tree and the mahuwa drink as part of their cultural heritage. Mahuwa is an essential drink for tribal men and women during celebrations. The main ingredients used for making it are chhowa
gud (granular molasses) and dried mahuwa flowers.

Mahua flowers are also used to manufacture jam, which is being made by tribal cooperatives in the Gadchiroli district of Maharashtra.

Sal is one of the most important sources
of hardwood timber in India, with hard, coarse- grained wood that is light in colour when freshly cut, but becomes dark brown with exposure. The wood is resinous and durable, and is sought-after for construction, although not well suited to planing and polishing. The wood is especially suitable for constructing frames for doors and windows. The dry leaves of sal are a major source for the production of leaf plates called
as patravali and leaf bowls in northern and eastern India. The leaves are also used fresh to serve ready made paan (betelnut preparations) and small snacks such as boiled black grams, gol gappa, etc. The used leaves/plates are readily eaten by goats and cattle that roam the streets freely. The tree has therefore protected northern India from a flood of styrofoam and plastic plates that would have caused tremendous pollution. In South India,
fresh plantain and banana leaves are used instead.

Sal tree resin, ṛla in Sanskrit, is used as
an astringent in Ayurvedic medicine.  It is also
burned as incense in Hindu ceremonies, and sal seeds and fruit are a source of lamp oil and vegetable fat. shorea robusta seed oilis extracted from the seeds and used as cooking oil after refining.

5.   Solution: a)

Who makes laws and rules to govern the seas that do not fall within the boundaries of any one country? Or who takes steps to control environmental degradation that threatens all the countries together. The United Nations (UN)has evolved many Conventions on these questions that are now binding on most countries of the world. The UN is a global association of nations of the world to help cooperation in international law, security, economic development and social equity. The UN Secretary General is its chief
administrative officer.

What happens when a country attacks another country in an unjust manner? The UN Security Council, an organ of the UN, is responsible for maintaining peace and security among countries. It can put together an international army and take action against the wrongdoer.

Who lends money to governments when they need it? The International Monetary Fund (IMF) does so. The World Bank also gives loans to the governments. Before lending they ask the concerned government to show all its accounts and direct it to make changes in its economic policy.

IUCN is only an agreement between the nations. It does not perform any such functions except record keeping and sending periodic warnings and advisories.

6.   Solution: b)

The fifteen-member Security Council of the UN takes such crucial decisions. The Council has five permanent members – US, Russia, UK, France and China. Ten other members are elected by the General Assembly for two-year terms. The real power is with five permanent members.

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                            Page 2
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  3 SOLUTIONS                     


7.   Solution: c)

The yardstick for Democratic world governance is whether each of the countries has free and equal say in the decisions that affect them. It depends more on the International institutional architecture in the UN, than in democracy being brought in the nations of the world.

UNSC does not need the approval of UNGA even though the non-permanent members are elected by UNGA. The permanent members wield a lot of power in UNSC.

8.   Solution: b)

To know how the military coup in each has occurred please refer to the 1st chapter of Democratic Politics –I, NCERT.

9.   Solution: c)

Options 2 and 3 should be interchanged.

The ruling of Supreme Court denotes rule of law and non-arbitrariness is the functioning of democracy.

A neutral government during elections would promote free and fair electoral competition.

10. Solution: d)

In a democracy the rulers are not free to do what they like. There are certain basic rules that the citizens and the government have to follow. All such rules together are called constitution. As the supreme law of the country, the constitution
determines the rights of citizens, the powers of the government and how the government should function.

11. Solution: d)

http://www.mainstreamweekly.net/article955.ht ml

The Royal Indian Navy mutiny (also called
the Royal Indian Navy Revolt or Bombay Mutiny) encompasses a total strike and subsequent revolt by Indian sailors of the Royal Indian Navy on board ship and shore establishments at Bombay (Mumbai) harbour on 18 February 1946. From the initial flashpoint in Bombay, the revolt spread and found support throughout British India, from Karachi to Calcutta and ultimately came to involve
78 ships, 20 shore establishments and 20,000 sailors.

It was repressed with force by the British Royal Navy. Total casualties were 7 dead and 33 wounded. Only the Communist Party supported the strikers; the Congress and the Muslim League condemned it.

12. Solution: c)

Rajya Sabha and State Legislative Council are permanent chambers. They can not be dissolved. Members retire every 2 years in Rajya Sabha and SLC.

13. Solution: c)

The following diagram from NCERT will make it clear.
















http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                            Page 3
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  3 SOLUTIONS                     





































16. Solution: d)

14. Solution: d)

The people of UTs vote only for their own legislative assembly, if any. Moreover, they get to vote for general elections.

There is no nomination by the Central Government in the Legislative Assembly of a UT (Delhi and Pudducherry). The Administrator of the UT is appointed by the President on the advice of the central cabinet.

15. Solution: b)

No seats are reserved in Rajya Sabha as it represents the interests of the state.

Not just the village Panchayat, but also the Block and Zila Panchayats has seats reserved for Women. It is the same for urban government too.
Constituencies are of two types – general and reserved. In a general constituency any one can stand and fight elections. In a reserved constituency – in any election, local, general etc. –
candidates belonging to the certain community can only stand for the election.



17. Solution: b)

If you are issued with a voter ID card, you have to compulsorily carry it on the day of voting as an identity proof. If you do not possess a voter ID card, you can carry any one of the approved
identity proof documents on Election Day. It can be ration card, passport etc.

The ECI does not function under the supervision of the GoI.

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                            Page 4
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  3 SOLUTIONS                     


18. Solution: a)

The British also realised that the countryside could not only yield revenue, it could also grow the crops that Europe required. By the late eighteenth
century the Company was trying its best to expand the cultivation of opium and indigo. In the century and a half that followed, the British persuaded or forced cultivators in various parts of India to produce other crops: jute in Bengal, tea in Assam, sugarcane in the United Provinces (now Uttar Pradesh), wheat in Punjab, cotton in Maharashtra and Punjab, rice in Madras.

Indigo

The indigo plant grows primarily in the tropics. By the thirteenth century Indian indigo was being used by cloth manufacturers in Italy, France and Britain to dye cloth. However, only small amounts of Indian indigo reached the European market and its price was very high. European cloth manufacturers therefore had to depend on another plant called woad to make violet and blue dyes. Being a plant of the temperate zones, woad was more easily available in Europe. It was grown in northern Italy, southern France and in parts of Germany and Britain. Worried by the competition
from indigo, woad producers in Europe pressurised their governments to ban the import of indigo. Cloth dyers, however, preferred indigo as a dye. Indigo produced a rich blue colour, whereas the dye from woad was pale and dull. By the seventeenth century, European cloth producers persuaded their governments to relax  the ban on indigo import. The French began cultivating indigo in St Domingue in the Caribbean islands, the

Portuguese in Brazil, the English in Jamaica, and the Spanish in Venezuela. Indigo plantations also came up in many parts of North America. By the end of the eighteenth century, the demand for Indian indigo grew further. Britain began to industrialise, and its cotton production expanded dramatically, creating an enormous new demand for cloth dyes. While the demand for indigo increased, its existing supplies from the West
Indies and America collapsed for a variety of reasons. Between 1783 and 1789 the production of indigo in the world fell by half. Cloth dyers in Britain now desperately looked for new sources of indigo supply.

19. Solution: d)

Minimum age for voting – 18, to fight local body elections – 21.

There is no educational qualification laid down for becoming an MP or MLA. S/he must be able to understand people‘s problems and concerns. No formal education or degree is necessary for this. People themselves decide whether a person is fit to become their MP, MLA etc. or not.

20. Solution: a)

Some state government give unemployment allowances like Uttar Pradesh. It is not given by the Central government.

Providing basic facilities like health, sanitation, drinking water remains the most fundamental strategy of the government to eradicate poverty.

21. Solution: a)

Lord Dalhousie who was the Governor-General from 1848 to 1856, devised a policy that came to be known as the Doctrine of Lapse. The doctrine declared that if an Indian ruler died without a male heir his kingdom would ―lapse‖, that is, become part of Company territory. One kingdom after another was annexed simply by applying this doctrine: Satara (1848), Sambalpur (1850), Udaipur (1852), Nagpur (1853) and Jhansi (1854).

Finally, in 1856, the Company also took over Awadh. This time the British had an added argument – they said they were ―obliged by duty‖ to take over Awadh in order to free the people
from the ―misgovernment‖ of the Nawab! Enraged by the humiliating way in which the Nawab was deposed, the people of Awadh joined the great revolt that broke out in 1857.

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                            Page 5
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  3 SOLUTIONS                     


22. Solution: d)

Self-explanatory as these disturb the level playing field between political parties and candidates. In addition to this malafide activities are regulated by the Model Code of conduct. It is explained later.

23. Solution: b)

MCC is not a law. It is an informal agreement between the political parties.

Read more about it here in detail. It is a important topic as it has been in news several times.

http://pib.nic.in/newsite/efeatures.aspx?relid=10
4399

24. Solution: c)

25. Solution: c)

New Delhi was constructed as a 10-square-mile city on Raisina Hill, south of the existing city. Two architects, Edward Lutyens and Herbert Baker,
were called on to design New Delhi and its buildings. The government complex in New Delhi consisted of a two-mile avenue, Kingsway (now Rajpath),  that led to the Viceroy‘s Palace (now Rashtrapati Bhavan), with the Secretariat buildings on either sides of the avenue. The features of these government buildings were borrowed from different periods of India‘s imperial history, but the overall look was Classical Greece (fifth century BCE). For instance, the central dome of the
Viceroy‘s Palace was copied from the Buddhist stupa at Sanchi, and the red sandstone and carved screens or jalis were borrowed from Mughal architecture.

26. Solution: b)

Option 2 is not wrong as it can be a part of the Election Manifesto. It is a part of the policy and to- do list of the candidate if he is elected. It is a fair practice.
The other three are unfair. Option 1 and 3 are violations of the MCC. Option4 is clearly bribing the voters.

27. Solution: a)

In India, from 1772 a new system of justice was established. Each district was to have two courts – a criminal court ( faujdari adalat ) and a civil court (diwani adalat). Maulvis and Hindu pandits interpreted Indian laws for the European district collectors who presided over civil courts. The criminal courts were still under a qazi and a mufti but under the supervision of the collectors.

A major problem was that the Brahman pandits gave different interpretations of local laws based
on different schools of the dharmashastra. To bring about uniformity, in 1775 eleven pandits were asked to compile a digest of Hindu laws. N.B. Halhed translated this digest into English. By 1778
a code of Muslim laws was also compiled for the benefit of European judges. Under the Regulating Act of 1773, a new Supreme Court was established, while a court of appeal – the Sadar Nizamat Adalat
– was also set up at Calcutta.

28. Solution: b)

It is thought that fruit bats of the Pteropodidae family are natural Ebola virus hosts. Ebola is introduced into the human population through close contact with the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected animals such as chimpanzees, gorillas, fruit bats, monkeys, forest antelope and porcupines found ill or dead or in the rainforest.

Ebola then spreads through human-to-human transmission via direct contact (through broken skin or mucous membranes) with the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected people, and with surfaces and materials (e.g. bedding, clothing) contaminated with these fluids.

Health-care workers have frequently been infected while treating patients with suspected or confirmed EVD. This has occurred through close contact with

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                            Page 6
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  3 SOLUTIONS                     


patients when infection control precautions are not strictly practiced.

Burial ceremonies in which mourners have direct contact with the body of the deceased person can also play a role in the transmission of Ebola.

People remain infectious as long as their blood and body fluids, including semen and breast milk, contain the virus. Men who have recovered from the disease can still transmit the virus through their
semen for up to 7 weeks after recovery from illness.

29. Solution: d)

The Election Commission of India is an autonomous, constitutionally established federal authority responsible for administering all the electoral processes in the Republic of India. Under the supervision of the commission, free and fair elections have been held in India at regular intervals as per the principles enshrined in the Constitution. The Election Commission has the power of superintendence, direction and control of all elections to the Parliament of India and the state legislatures and of elections to the office of the President of India and the Vice-President of India.

The power of superintendence, direction and control of all elections to the Local Government/Municipal Corporation by the State Election Commission.

The Chief Election Commissioner can
be removed from his office by Parliament with two- thirds majority in Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha on
the grounds of proven misbehaviour or incapacity. Other Election Commissioners can be removed by the President on the recommendation of the Chief Election Commissioner. The Chief Election Commissioner and the two Election Commissioners draw salaries and allowances at par with those of the Judges of the Supreme Court of India as per the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners (Conditions of Service) Rules, 1992. The current CEC is V. S. Sampath.
30. Solution: a)

Self-explanatory. For more info please refer to http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Election_Commissi on_of_India#Functions_and_powers

31. Solution: d)

According to the Election Commission of India,
814.5 million people were eligible to vote, with an increase of 100 million voters since the last general election in 2009, making this the largest-ever election in the world. Around 23.1 million or 2.7% of the total eligible voters were aged 18–19 years.

Voter turnout was near to 66%, the highest in the history of India. Female voter turnout was also near to 65%, the highest till date.

32. Solution: a)

Even China has a very large number of voters in its elections. But that does not make China a democracy.

The existence of a democracy is not decided solely by the number of voters or existence of voters.
There are several other criteria such as: free and fair elections; decision-making power with the people; freedom of speech and expression; open political competition etc.

33. Solution: b)

The Commission normally announces the schedule of elections in a major Press Conference a few weeks before the formal process is set in motion. The Model Code of Conduct for guidance of candidates and Political Parties immediately comes into effect after such announcement. The formal process for the elections starts with the Notification or Notifications calling upon the electorate to elect Members of a House. As soon as Notifications are issued, Candidates can start filing their
nominations in the constituencies from where they wish to contest. These are scrutinised by the Returning Officer of the constituency concerned after the last date for the same is over after about a

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                            Page 7
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  3 SOLUTIONS                     


week. The validly nominated candidates can withdraw from the contest within two days from the date of scrutiny.

Contesting candidates get at least two weeks for political campaign before the actual date of poll. On account of the vast magnitude of operations and the massive size of the electorate, polling is held at least on three days for the national elections. A separate date for counting is fixed and the results declared for each constituency by the concerned Returning Officer. The Commission compiles the complete list of Members elected and issues an appropriate Notification for the due
Constitution of the House. With this, the process of elections is complete and the President, in case of the Lok Sabha, and the Governors of the concerned States, in case of Vidhan Sabhas, can then convene their respective Houses to hold their sessions. The entire process takes between 5 to 8 weeks for the national elections, 4 to 5 weeks for separate elections only for Legislative Assemblies.

For more details refer to http://www.indian- elections.com/about-election-commission.html

34. Solution: a)

The Battle of Plassey

When Alivardi Khan died in 1756, Sirajuddaulah became the nawab of Bengal. The Company was worried about his power and keen on a puppet ruler who would willingly give trade concessions and other privileges. So it tried, though without success, to help one of Sirajuddaulah‘s rivals become the nawab. An infuriated Sirajuddaulah asked the Company to stop meddling in the political affairs of his dominion, stop fortification, and pay the revenues. After negotiations failed, the Nawab marched with 30,000 soldiers to the English factory at Kassimbazar, captured the Company officials, locked the warehouse, disarmed all Englishmen, and blockaded English ships. Then he marched to Calcutta to establish control over the Company‘s fort there.  On hearing the news of the fall of Calcutta, Company officials in Madras sent
forces under the command of Robert Clive, reinforced by naval fleets. Prolonged negotiations with the Nawab followed. Finally, in 1757, Robert Clive led the Company‘s army  against Sirajuddaulah at Plassey. One of the main reasons for the defeat of the Nawab was that the forces led by Mir Jafar, one of Sirajuddaulah‘s commanders, never fought the battle. Clive had managed to secure his support by promising to make him nawab after crushing Sirajuddaulah. The Battle of Plassey became famous because it was the first major victory the Company won in India.

35. Solution: d)

In all democracies, an assembly of elected representatives exercises supreme political authority on behalf of the people. In India such a national assembly of elected representatives is called Parliament.

At the state level this is called Legislature or
Legislative Assembly.

The name may vary in different countries, but such an assembly exists in every democracy. It exercises political authority on behalf of the people in many ways:

1 Parliament is the final authority for making laws in any country. This task of law making or legislation is so crucial that these assemblies are called legislatures. Parliaments all over the world can make new laws, change existing laws, or abolish existing laws and make new ones in their place.

2 Parliaments all over the world exercise some control over those who run the government. In some countries like India this control is direct and full. Those who run the government can take decisions only so long as they enjoy support of the Parliament.

3 Parliaments control all the money that governments have. In most countries any the public money can be spent only when the Parliament sanctions it.

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                            Page 8
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  3 SOLUTIONS                     


4 Parliament is the highest forum of discussion and debate on public issues and national policy in any country. Parliament can seek information about
any matter.

36. Solution: a)

Our Constitution does give the Rajya Sabha some special powers over the states. But on most matters, the Lok Sabha exercises supreme power. Here are the ways;

1 Any ordinary law needs to be passed by both the Houses. But if there is a difference between the two Houses, the final decision is taken in a joint session in which members of both the Houses sit together. Because of the larger number of members, the view of the Lok Sabha is likely to prevail in such a meeting.

2 Lok Sabha exercises more powers in money matters. Once the Lok Sabha passes the budget of the government or any other money related law, the Rajya Sabha cannot reject it. The Rajya Sabha can only delay it by 14 days or suggest changes in it. The Lok Sabha may or may not accept these changes.

3 Most importantly, the Lok Sabha controls the Council of Ministers. Only a person who enjoys the support of the majority of the members in the Lok Sabha is appointed the Prime Minister. If the majority of the Lok Sabha members say they have
‗no confidence‘ in the Council  of Ministers, all ministers including the Prime Minister, have to quit. The Rajya Sabha does not have this power.

37. Solution: a)

At different levels of any government we find functionaries who take day-to-day decisions but do not exercise supreme power on behalf of the
people. All those functionaries are collectively known as the executive. They are called executive because they are in charge  of the ‗execution‘ of the policies of the government. Thus, when we talk about ‗the government‘ we usually mean  the
executive. Some of the examples cab the
Superintendent of Police, DM, Sub-inspector etc.

The metropolitan magistrate forms a part of the judiciary.

38. Solution: c)

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slavery_in_South_ Africa

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atlantic_slave_trad e

Slavery in South Africa was first started by the
Dutch. Other two statements are correct.

39. Solution: d)

The President has only a situational discretion in appointing the PM. Only the leader of the majority party/coalition can be appointed as the PM. The ministers are appointed by the President, not the PM, on the advice of the PM. A minister can be any MP and not necessarily from the ruling party/coalition. For e.g. in the First cabinet, Nehru appointed Ambedkar as a cabinet minister. He was from the opposition party.

However, it does not usually happen in contemporary politics.

40. Solution: c)

In 1765 the Mughal emperor appointed the Company as the Diwan of the provinces of Bengal. The Diwani allowed the Company to use the vast revenue resources of Bengal. This solved a major problem that the Company had earlier faced. From the early eighteenth century its trade with India had expanded. But it had to buy most of the goods
in India with gold and silver imported from Britain. This was because at this time Britain had no goods to sell in India. The outflow of gold from Britain slowed after the Battle of Plassey, and entirely stopped after the assumption of Diwani. Now revenues from India could finance Company expenses. These revenues could be used to


http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                            Page 9
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  3 SOLUTIONS                     


purchase cotton and silk textiles in India, maintain Company troops, and meet the cost of building the Company fort and offices at Calcutta.

After the Battle of Plassey the actual nawabs of Bengal were forced to give land and vast sums of money as personal gifts to Company officials. Robert Clive himself amassed a fortune in India. He had come to Madras (now Chennai) from England in 1743 at the age of 18. When in 1767 he left India his Indian fortune was worth £401,102. Interestingly, when he was appointed Governor of Bengal in 1764, he was asked to remove corruption in Company administration but he was himself cross-examined in 1772 by the British Parliament which was suspicious of his vast wealth. Although he was acquitted, he committed suicide in 1774.

41. Solution: b)

Only elected members of the Parliament and State Legislative Assembly of states and UTs participate in the election of the President.

42. Solution: a)

These appointments include the Chief Justice of India, the Judges of the Supreme Court and the High Courts of the states, the Governors of the states, the Election Commissioners, ambassadors to other countries, etc. All international treaties and agreements are made in the name of the President. The President is the supreme commander of the defence forces of India.

But we should remember that the President exercises all these powers only on the advice of the Council of Ministers.

43. Solution: a)

Under Lord Hastings (Governor-General from 1813 to 1823) a new policy of ―paramountcy‖ was initiated. Now the Company claimed that its authority was paramount or supreme, hence its power was greater than that of Indian states. In order to protect its interests it was justified in annexing or threatening to annex any Indian
kingdom. This view continued to guide later British policies as well.

44. Solution: c)

Self-explanatory. The President can either delay the bill or send it for reconsideration a bill passed by the Parliament.

45. Solution: a)

The National Archives of India (NAI) is a repository of the non-current records of
the Government of India and holds them in trust for the use of administrators and scholars. Originally established as the Imperial Record Department in 1891, in Calcutta, then capital
of British India, the NAI is situated at the intersection of Janpath and Rajpath, in Delhi. It functions as an Attached Office of the Department of Culture under the Ministry of Culture, Government of India.

46. Solution: c)

Appointments to the High Courts are made by the President. Governor does the same for district courts.

The previous process of judicial appointments have been changed.

Read more here http://www.prsindia.org/billtrack/the-judicial- appointments-commission-bill-2013-2906/

47. Solution: a)

The SC can declare a law void, not change it. The Parliament can only change an existing law, not the President or PM. The President can utmost delay the changing of the law or resend it to the Parliament for reconsideration.

48. Solution: d)
Right to property is a legal right in option D. Option A shows Right to free movement.

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 10
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  3 SOLUTIONS                     


Option B shows Right to Freedom of religion. Option C shows Right to equality.


49. Solution: a)

Refer to http://www.indiaonestop.com/Greenrevolution.h tm

50. Solution: a)

Scientific reports indicate that the modern farming methods used in the Green revolution have overused the natural resource base.

In many areas, Green Revolution is associated with the loss of soil fertility due to increased use of chemical fertilizers. Also, continuous use of groundwater for tubewell irrigation has reduced the water-table below the ground. Environmental resources like soil fertility and groundwater are built up over many years. Once destroyed it is very difficult to restore them.

51. Solution: d)

Given below are the important changes that were introduced by the British.

1. The British Parliament passed a new Act in 1858 and transferred the powers of the East India Company to the British Crown in order to ensure a more responsible management of Indian affairs. A member of the British Cabinet was appointed Secretary of State for India and made responsible for all matters related to the governance of India. He was given a council to advise him, called the India Council. The Governor-General of India was given the title of Viceroy, that is, a personal representative of the Crown. Through these measures the British government accepted direct responsibility for ruling India.

2. All ruling chiefs of the country were assured that their territory would never be annexed in future. They were allowed to pass on their kingdoms to
their heirs, including adopted sons. However, they were made to acknowledge the British Queen as their Sovereign Paramount. Thus the Indian rulers were to hold their kingdoms as subordinates of the British Crown.

3. It was decided that the proportion of Indian soldiers in the army would be reduced and the number of European soldiers would be increased. It was also decided that instead of recruiting soldiers from Awadh, Bihar, central India and
south India, more soldiers would be recruited from among the Gurkhas, Sikhs and Pathans.

4. The land and property of Muslims was confiscated on a large scale and they were treated with suspicion and hostility. The British believed that they were responsible for the rebellion in a big way.

5. The British decided to respect the customary religious and social practices of the people in India.

6. Policies were made to protect landlords and zamindars and give them security of rights over their lands. Thus a new phase of history began after
1857.

52. Solution: b)















Figures remain nearly the same even to date.



53. Solution: c)

The Impeachment of Warren Hastings was a failed attempt to impeach the former Governor-General

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 11
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  3 SOLUTIONS                     


of India Warren Hastings in the Parliament of
Great Britain between 1788 and 1795. Hastings was accused of misconduct during his time
in Calcutta particularly relating to mismanagement and personal corruption. The prosecution was led by Edmund Burke and became a wider debate about the role of the East India Company and the expanding empire in India.

The trial did not sit continuously and the case dragged on for seven years. When the eventual verdict was given Hastings was overwhelmingly acquitted. It has been described as "probably
the British Isles' most famous, certainly the longest,
political trial"

54. Solution: c)

Investment in physical infrastructure does not form part of the investment in human capital.

Research on health will yield dividends in future.

55. Solution: d)

Every person who wishes to contest an election has
to fill a ‗nomination form‘ and give some money as
‗security deposit‘.

Recently, a new system of declaration has been introduced on direction from the Supreme Court.

Every candidate has to make a legal declaration, giving full details of :

    Serious criminal cases pending against the candidate;
    Details of the assets and liabilities of the candidate and his or her family; and
    Education qualifications of the candidate.

This information has to be made public. This provides an opportunity to the voters to make their decision on the basis of the information provided
by the candidates.

56. Solution: a)
Refer to http://gradestack.com/CBSE-Class-
10th/Organised-and-Unorganised-Sectors/15078-
3004-4121-study-wtw

57. Solution: d)

Mid-day meal is a separate scheme. SSA goals of 2015 were to:
     Open new schools in areas which do not
have them and to expand existing school infrastructures and maintenance.

     Address inadequate teacher numbers, and provide training a development for existing teachers

     Provide quality elementary education including life skills with a special focus on the education of girls and children with special needs as well as computer education.

Besides the scheme focuses on water and sanitation in all primary public schools.

58. Solution: d)

Refer to http://www.arthapedia.in/index.php?title=Povert y,_Poverty_Line,_Below_and_Above_poverty_line
_(APL,_BPL)



59. Solution: a)

Refer to http://www.preservearticles.com/201107189264/ what-are-the-main-causes-of-poverty-in-india.html

60. Solution: d)

The Company introduced the Permanent Settlement in 1793. By the terms of the settlement, the rajas and taluqdars were recognised as zamindars. They were asked to collect rent from
the peasants and pay revenue to the Company. The amount to be paid was fixed permanently, that is, it

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 12
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  3 SOLUTIONS                     


was not to be increased ever in future. It was felt that this would ensure a regular flow of revenue into the Company‘s coffers and  at the same time encourage the zamindars to invest in improving the land. Since the revenue demand of the state would not be increased, the zamindar would benefit from increased production from the land.

61. Solution: d)

Rural 2400 calories (26 Rs.), Urban 2100 calories (32
Rs.)

A person is considered poor if his or her income or consumption  level falls below  a given ―minimum level‖ necessary to fulfill basic needs.

While determining the poverty line in India, a minimum level of food requirement, clothing, footwear, fuel and light, educational and medical requirement etc. are determined for subsistence. These physical quantities are multiplied by their prices in rupees. The present formula for food requirement while estimating the poverty line is based on the desired calorie requirement.

62. Solution: d)

MGNREGA addresses the problems of seasonal employment by promising to provide each household 100 days of work. NRLM or Aajeevika stresses on capacity building of self-help groups of poor people. National Health Mission provides basic public healthcare facilities to both rural and urban India.

63. Solution: d)

Food security means something more than getting two square meals. Food security has following dimensions

(a) availability of food means food production within the country, food imports and the previous years stock stored in government granaries.

(b) accessibility means food is within reach of every person.
(c) affordability implies that an individual has enough money to buy sufficient, safe and nutritious food to meet one's dietary needs.

64. Solution: a)

Refer to details about BPL ration cards here http://controllerofrationing.net/rationcard.html

65. Solution: a)

Minimum support prices are currently announced for 24 commodities including seven cereals (paddy, wheat, barley, jowar, bajra, maize and ragi); five pulses (gram, arhar/tur, moong, urad and lentil); eight oilseeds (groundnut, rapeseed/mustard,
toria, soyabean, sunflower seed, sesamum, safflower seed and nigerseed); copra, raw cotton, raw jute and virginia flu cured (VFC) tobacco.

Such minimum support prices are fixed at
incentive level, so as to induce the farmers to make capital investment for the improvement of their farm and to motivate them to adopt improved crop production technologies to step up their
production and thereby their net income. In the absence of such a guaranteed price, there is a concern that farmers may shift to other crops causing shortage in these commodities.

66. Solution: d)

Refer to http://gradestack.com/CBSE-Class-
9th/Buffer-Stock-and-its-Distribution/14927-2956-
2909-study-wtw

67. Solution: d)

For e.g. increase in MSP of wheat and rice would induce farmers to grow these crops at the cost of land available for the other crops. So the cropping pattern will change favouring the production of rice and wheat. This will also increase the fiscal deficit.

68. Solution: a)

Kharif Crops : The crops which are sown in the rainy season are called kharif crops. The rainy

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 13
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  3 SOLUTIONS                     


season in India is generally from June to September. Paddy, maize, soyabean, groundnut, cotton, etc., are kharif crops.

Rabi Crops : The crops grown in the winter season are called rabi crops. Their time period is generally from October to March. Examples of rabi crops are wheat, gram, pea, mustard and linseed.

69. Solution: d)

This allows the roots to penetrate deep into the soil. The loose soil allows the roots to breathe easily
even when they go deep into the soil. Why does the loosening of soil allow the roots to breathe easily?

The loosened soil helps in the growth of earthworms and microbes present in the soil. These organisms are friends of the farmer since they further turn and loosen the soil and add humus to it.

But why does the soil need to be turned and loosened?

Soil contains minerals, water, air and some living organisms.

In addition, dead plants and animals get decomposed by soil organisms. In this way, various nutrients held in the dead organisms are released back into the soil. These nutrients are again
absorbed by plants. Since only a few centimetres of the top layer of soil supports plant growth, turning and loosening of soil brings the nutrient-rich soil to the top so that plants can use these nutrients. Thus, turning and loosening of soil is very important for cultivation of crops. The process of loosening and turning of the soil is called tilling or ploughing.

70. Solution: a)

Refer to http://www.globalhealth.gov/global- health-topics/communicable-diseases/

71. Solution: d)

Refer to http://www.livestrong.com/article/301425-what- are-some-natural-preservatives/

72. Solution: a)

Products obtained from coal tar are used as starting materials for manufacturing various substances used in everyday life and in industry, like synthetic dyes, drugs, explosives, perfumes, plastics, paints, photographic materials, roofing materials, etc. Interestingly, naphthalene balls used to repel
moths and other insects are also obtained from coal tar.

73. Solution: b)

Petroleum and natural gas deposits



















74. Solution: d)

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 14
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  3 SOLUTIONS                     


Cabinet Secretary only attends the meetings of the
Cabinet. He is not a part of it.

No one except the PM and cabinet Ministers are included in the Central Cabinet. Some ministers
may occasionally be called to a meeting. But, they are not a part of the cabinet, but Council of Ministers.

75. Solution: d)




























76. Solution: a)

One of India‘s competitive advantages is its demographic dividend. Demographic dividend occurs when the proportion of working people in the total population is high because this indicates that more people have the potential to be productive and contribute to growth of the economy. According to the United National population research, during the last four decades the countries of Asia and Latin America have been the main beneficiaries of the demographic dividend. Advanced countries of Europe, Japan
and USA have an ageing population because of low birth rates and low mortality rates. Neither the
least developed countries nor the countries of Africa have as yet experienced favourable demographic conditions according to the research by UN population division. China‘s  one child policy has reversed the demographic dividend it
enjoyed since the mid-1960s according to a World
Bank global development report.

Falling birth rates reduce the overall expenditure required to provide basic necessities for the under
14 age group (which is yet to be productive) and increased longevity ensures that a large proportion of the population are within the 15-59 age group (working population). Dependency ratio refers to the proportion of non -working population on the working population. In India this ratio is around
0.6 according to the World Bank.

However, reaping the demographic dividend requires focused policy action. A recent UNESCAP survey warns there are no guarantees the "dividend" will automatically translate to economic growth. Countries need to put in place the appropriate "social and economic policies and institutions" to absorb the rapidly growing labour force. Reforms in the health and education sector, financial inclusion and adequate employment


http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 15
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  3 SOLUTIONS                     


opportunities are essential pre-requisites to ensure
that India‘s young  population is truly an asset.

77. Solution: d)

Dos and  Don‘ts during a Thunderstorm

Open vehicles, like motorbikes, tractors, construction machinery, and open cars are not safe. Open fields, tall trees, shelters in parks, elevated places do not protect us from lightning strokes. Carrying umbrella is not a good idea at all during thunderstorms. If in a forest, take shelter under shorter trees. If no shelter is available and you are
in an open field, stay far away from all trees. Stay away from poles or other metal objects. Do not lie on the ground. Instead, squat low on the ground. Place your hands on your knees with your head between the hands. This position will make you the smallest target to be struck.

78. Solution: c)

Pole star is located on the axis of the earth vertical up from the North Pole. It remains stationary w.r.t earth.

79. Solution: d)

It has been explained previously. For the sake of convenience here is the link http://pib.nic.in/newsite/efeatures.aspx?relid=10
4399

80. Solution: a)

Refer to http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thermal_pollution



81. Solution: b)

In 1817, James Mill, a Scottish economist and political philosopher, published a massive three- volume work, A History of British India. In this he divided Indian history into three periods – Hindu, Muslim and British. This periodisation came to be widely accepted. Mill thought that all Asian
societies were at a lower level of civilisation than Europe. According to his telling of history, before the British came to India, Hindu and Muslim despots ruled the country. Religious intolerance, caste taboos and superstitious practices dominated social life. British rule, Mill felt, could civilise India. To do this it was necessary to introduce European manners, arts, institutions and laws in India. Mill, in fact, suggested that the British should conquer
all the territories in India to ensure the enlightenment and happiness of the Indian people. For India was not capable of progress without British help.

82. Solution: b)

In 1600, the East India Company acquired a charter from the ruler of England, Queen Elizabeth I, granting it the sole right to trade with the East. This meant that no other trading group in England
could compete with the East India Company. With this charter the Company could venture across the oceans, looking for new lands from which it could buy goods at a cheap price, and carry them back to Europe to sell at higher prices. The Company did not have to fear competition from other English trading companies. Mercantile trading companies in those days made profit primarily by excluding competition, so that they could buy cheap and sell dear.

The royal charter, however, could not prevent other European powers from entering the Eastern markets. By the time the first English ships sailed down the west coast of Africa, round the Cape of Good Hope, and crossed the Indian Ocean, the Portuguese had already established their presence in the western coast of India, and had their base in Goa. In fact, it was Vasco da Gama, a Portuguese explorer, who had discovered this sea route to India in 1498. By the early seventeenth century, the Dutch too were exploring the possibilities of trade in the Indian Ocean. Soon the French traders arrived on the scene.

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 16
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  3 SOLUTIONS                     


83. Solution: a)

The Constitution does not say very much about the powers of the Prime Minister or the ministers or their relationship with each other. But as head of the government, the Prime Minister has wide ranging powers.

He chairs Cabinet meetings. He coordinates the work of different Departments. His decisions are final in case disagreements arise between Departments. He exercises general supervision of different ministries.

All ministers work under his leadership. The Prime Minister distributes and redistributes work to the ministers. He also has the power to dismiss ministers. When the Prime Minister quits, the entire ministry quits.

If the cabinet is the most powerful, inside it the PM
is the most powerful.

84. Solution: d)

Mysore had grown in strength under the
leadership of powerful rulers like Haidar Ali (ruled from 1761 to 1782) and his famous son Tipu Sultan (ruled from 1782 to 1799). Mysore controlled the profitable trade of the Malabar coast where the Company purchased pepper and cardamom. In
1785 Tipu Sultan stopped the export of sandalwood, pepper and cardamom through the ports of his kingdom, and disallowed local merchants from trading with the Company. He also established a close relationship with the French in India, and modernized his army with their help.

The British were furious. They saw Haidar and
Tipu as ambitious, arrogant and dangerous – rulers who had to be controlled and crushed. Four wars were fought with Mysore (1767-69, 1780-84, 1790-92 and 1799). Only in the last – the Battle of Seringapatam – did the Company ultimately win a victory. Tipu Sultan was killed defending his
capital Seringapatam, Mysore was placed under the former ruling dynasty of the Wodeyars and a subsidiary alliance was imposed on the state.
85. Solution: a)

Since it is not practical for all ministers to meet regularly and discuss everything, the decisions are taken in Cabinet meetings. That is why parliamentary democracy in most countries is often known as the Cabinet form of government. The Cabinet works as a team. The ministers may have different views and opinions, but everyone has to own up to every decision of the Cabinet. It is called the principle of Collective Responsibility.

86. Solution: d)

Anyone can form a party or contest elections –
Open political competition

Reservation of seats for the SCs and the STs –
Representation of weaker sections

87. Solution: c)

The Munro system

In the British territories in the south there was a similar move away from the idea of Permanent Settlement. The new system that was devised came to be known as the ryotwar (or ryotwari ). It was tried on a small scale by Captain Alexander Read in some of the areas that were taken over by the Company after the wars with Tipu Sultan. Subsequently developed by Thomas Munro, this system was gradually extended all over south
India. Read and Munro felt that in the south there
were no traditional zamindars. The settlement, they argued, had to be made directly with the
cultivators (ryots) who had tilled the land for generations. Their fields had to be carefully and separately surveyed before the revenue assessment was made. Munro thought that the British should act as paternal father figures protecting the ryots under their charge.

All was not well

Within a few years after the new systems were imposed it was clear that all was not well with them. Driven by the desire to increase the income

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 17
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  3 SOLUTIONS                     


from land, revenue officials fixed too high a revenue demand. Peasants were unable to pay, ryots fled the countryside, and villages became deserted in many regions. Optimistic officials had imagined that the new systems would transform the peasants into rich enterprising farmers. But this did not happen.

88. Solution: a)

Forests are complex ecosystems that are important to the carbon and water cycles that sustain life on earth. When they are degraded, it can set off a devastating chain of events both locally and around the world.

Loss of Species: Seventy  percent of the world‘s plants and animals live in forests and are losing their habitats to deforestation. Loss of habitat can lead to species extinction. This is not only a biodiversity tragedy but also has negative consequences for medicinal research and local populations who rely on the animals and plants in the forests for hunting and medicine.

Carbon Emissions: Healthy forests help absorb greenhouse gasses and carbon emissions that are caused by human civilization and contribute to global climate change. Without trees, more carbon and greenhouse gasses enter the atmosphere. To make matters worse, trees actually become carbon sources when they are cut, burned, or otherwise removed. ―Tropical forests  hold more  than  210 gigatons of carbon, and deforestation represents around 15 per cent of greenhouse gas emissions,‖ according to the WWF.

Water Cycle: Trees play an important part in the water cycle, grounding the water in their roots and releasing it into the atmosphere. In the Amazon, more than half the water in the ecosystem is held within the plants. Without the plants, the climate may become dryer.

Soil Erosion: Without tree roots to anchor the soil and with increased exposure to sun, the soil can
dry out, leading to problems like increased
flooding and inability to farm. The WWF states that scientists estimate that a third of the world‘s arable land has been lost to deforestation since 1960. Cash crops planted after clear cutting or burning — like soy, coffee, and palm oil — can actually exacerbate soil erosion because their roots cannot hold onto
the soil the way trees‘ can.

Life Quality: Soil erosion can also lead to silt entering the lakes, streams, and other water sources. This can decrease local water quality, contributing to poor health in the local population

89. Solution: b)

Kalamkari literally means, Kalam - pen & kari - work, i.e., art work done using a pen. Vegetable dyes are used to colour the designs applied on cloth. The art of painting using organic dyes on cloth was popular in several parts of India, but this style of Kalamkari flourished at Kalahasti (80 miles north of Chennai) and at Masulipatnam (200 miles east of Hyderabad).


The Kalamkari tradition chiefly consists of scenes from Hindu mythology. Figures of deities with rich border embellishments were created for the temples. In Masulipatnam, the weavers were involved in the block printing art, while at Kalahasti, the Balojas (a caste involved in making bangles) took to this art.

Owing to Muslim rule in Golconda, the Masulipatnam Kalamkari was influenced by Persian motifs & designs, widely adapted to suit their taste. The outlines and main features are done
using hand carved blocks. The finer details are later done using the pen. Under the British rule the designs as well as the end use of the fabric differed
- for garments as well as furnishings. During this period floral designs were popular. The artisans were made to create even portraits of English men.



http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 18
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  3 SOLUTIONS                     






























The Kalahasti tradition which developed in the temple region mostly concentrated on themes form Hindu mythology, epics (Ramayana, Mahabharatha), images of Gods and heroes.

The artists use a bamboo or date palm stick pointed at one end with a bundle of fine hair attached to
this pointed end to serve as the brush or pen.

The dyes are obtained by extracting colours form parts of plants - roots, leaves along with mineral salts of iron, tin, copper, alum, etc., which are used as mordants.

Karrupur is a style of Kalamkari that developed in the Thanjavur region during the Maratha rule. The Kalamkari work was a further embellishment to the gold brocade work in the woven fabric, which was used as sarees & dhotis by the royal family during the period of Raja Sarfoji and later Raja Shivaji.

After independence of India, the Handicrafts Development Board took up the task of reviving this art, which had dwindled due to lack of buyers.
The specialty is that the finished products are mellow. Bright colours are used but the finish is not gaudy. The fabric looks better and better with further washing, with the designs standing out
even better against the background. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kalamkari
90. Solution: c)



http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 19
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  3 SOLUTIONS                     


91. Solution: d)

Endemic species are those species of plants and animals which are found exclusively in a particular area. They are not naturally found anywhere else.
A particular type of animal or plant may be endemic to a zone, a state or a country. The above mentioned species are all endemic to Panchmarhi Biospehre Reserve.

92. Solution: d)

The British were uncomfortable with groups who moved about and did not have a fixed home. They wanted tribal  groups to settle down and become peasant cultivators. Settled peasants were easier to control and administer than people who were always on the move. The British also wanted a regular revenue source for the state. So they introduced land settlements – that is, they measured the land, defined the rights of each individual to that land, and fixed the revenue demand for the state. Some peasants were declared landowners, others tenants.

93. Solution: a)

Behind the cornea, we find a dark muscular structure called iris. In the iris, there is a small opening called the pupil. The size of the pupil is controlled by the iris. The iris is the part of that eye which gives it its distinctive colour. When we say that a person has green eyes, we refer actually to the colour of the iris. The iris controls the amount
of light entering into the eye.

94. Solution: a)

Eligibility Conditions and Other Restrictions:
a) Minimum Entry Age: 60 years (completed) Ceiling of maximum pension is for a family as a
whole i.e. total amount of pension under all the policies issued to a family under this plan shall not exceed the maximum pension limit. The family for this purpose will comprise of pensioner, his/her spouse and dependants.
95. Solution: a)

Antioxidants are intimately involved in the prevention of cellular damage -- the common pathway for cancer, aging, and a variety of diseases. The scientific community has begun to unveil some of the mysteries surrounding this topic, and the media has begun whetting our thirst for knowledge. Athletes have a keen interest because of health concerns and the prospect of enhanced performance and/or recovery from exercise. The purpose of this article is to serve as a beginners guide to what antioxidants are and to briefly review their role in exercise and general
health. What follows is only the tip of the iceberg in this dynamic and interesting subject.

Free radicals are atoms or groups of atoms with an odd (unpaired) number of electrons and can be formed when oxygen interacts with certain molecules. Once formed these highly reactive radicals can start a chain reaction, like dominoes. Their chief danger comes from the damage they can do when they react with important cellular components such as DNA, or the cell membrane. Cells may function poorly or die if this occurs. To
prevent free radical damage the body has a defense system of antioxidants.

Antioxidants are molecules which can safely interact with free radicals and terminate the chain reaction before vital molecules are damaged. Although there are several enzyme systems within the body that scavenge free radicals, the principle micronutrient (vitamin) antioxidants are vitamin E, beta-carotene, and vitamin C. Additionally, selenium, a trace metal that is required for proper function of one of the body's antioxidant enzyme systems, is sometimes included in this category. The body cannot manufacture these micronutrients so they must be supplied in the diet.

Vitamin E : d-alpha tocopherol. A fat soluble vitamin present in nuts, seeds, vegetable and fish oils, whole grains (esp. wheat germ), fortified cereals, and apricots. Current recommended daily

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 20
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  3 SOLUTIONS                     


allowance (RDA) is 15 IU per day for men and 12
IU per day for women.

Vitamin C : Ascorbic acid is a water soluble vitamin present in citrus fruits and juices, green peppers, cabbage, spinach, broccoli, kale, cantaloupe, kiwi, and strawberries. The RDA is 60 mg per day. Intake above 2000 mg may be associated with adverse side effects in some individuals.

Beta-carotene is a precursor to vitamin A (retinol) and is present in liver, egg yolk, milk, butter, spinach, carrots, squash, broccoli, yams, tomato, cantaloupe, peaches, and grains. Because beta- carotene is converted to vitamin A by the body there is no set requirement. Instead the RDA is expressed as retinol equivalents (RE), to clarify the relationship. (NOTE: Vitamin A has no antioxidant properties and can be quite toxic when taken in excess.)

96. Solution: d)

·        Target of an increase in manufacturing sector growth to 12-14% per annum over the medium term.


·        An increase in the share of manufacturing in
the country‘s Gross Domestic Product from 16% to
25%     by 2022.

·        To create 100 million additional jobs by 2022 in manufacturing sector.

·        Creation of appropriate skill sets among rural migrants and the urban poor for inclusive growth.

·        An increase in domestic value addition and technological depth in manufacturing.

·        Enhancing the global competitiveness of the
Indian manufacturing sector.

·        Ensuring sustainability of growth, particularly with regard to environment.



97. Solution: c)

























http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 21
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  3 SOLUTIONS                     


98. Solution: d)

A decision is taken by the Central cabinet. The Cabinet Secretary is present in all the meetings of the Cabinet and advises and assists the cabinet in making decisions.

After a decision is taken, the SC or HCs have the power to reverse or repeal and order or decision of
the government if it is illegal, unconstitutional or malafide or arbitrary.

99. Solution: a)

Self-explanatory.

100.            Solution: c)

Self-explanatory.




















































http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 22
