                 Insights Mock Test - 14: 25 Questions and Solutions                  


1)  Which of the following are the outstanding features of India‟s freedom struggle?


1.   The movement popularized democratic ideas and institutions in India
2.   The Indian National Congress was organized on a democratic basis and in the form of a parliament
3.   The freedom struggle was also a struggle for economic development
4.   The National movement failed to defend civil liberties of group affiliated to different political ideologies
Choose the correct answer using the codes below a.   1,2 and 4 Only
b.   1,3 and 4 Only c.   1,2 and 3 Only d.  All are correct


Solutions: c)


What are the outstanding features of the freedom struggle? A major aspect is the values and modern ideals on which the movement itself was based and the broad socio- economic and political vision of its leadership (this vision was that of a democratic, civil libertarian and secular India, based on a selfreliant, egalitarian social order and an independent foreign policy).The movement popularized democratic ideas and institutions in India. The nationalists fought fo r the introduction of a representative government on the basis of popular elections and demanded that elections be based on adult franchise. The Indian National Congress was organized on a democratic basis and in the form of a parliament. It not only permitted but encouraged free expression of opinion within the party and the movement; some of the most important decisions in its history were taken after heated debates and on the basis of open voting.


From the beginning the nationalists fought against attacks by the State on the freedoms of the Press, expression and association, and made the struggle for these freedoms an integral part of the national movement. During their brief spell in power, from 1937 -39, the Congress ministries greatly extended the scope of civil liberties. The defence of civil liberties was not narrowly conceived in terms of one political group, but was extended to include the defence of other groups whose views were politically and ideologically different. The Moderates defended Tilak, the Extremist, and non-violent Congressmen passionately defended revolutionary terrorists and communists alike during their trials.
In 1928, the Public Safety Bill and Trade Disputes‟ Bill were opposed not only by Motilal



http://www.insightsonindia.com                       INSIGHTS                                                                          Page 1
                 Insights Mock Test - 14: 25 Questions and Solutions                  


Nehru but also by conservatives like Madan Mohan Malaviya and M.R. Jayakar. It was this strong civil libertarian and democratic tradition of the national movement which was reflected in the Constitution of independent India.





2)  Consider the following statements with reference to initial days of 1857 Revolt
1.   Bahadur Shah II readily accepted the appeal of rebels to lead their mutiny against the British
2.   Only  about twenty percent of the Company‟s army rebelled against the British
Which of the above statements is/are correct?
a.   1 Only b.   2 Only c.   Both
d.  None


Solution: d)


It was the morning of 11 May 1857. The city of De1h had not yet woken up when a band of Sepoys from Meerut, who had defied and killed the European officers the previous day, crossed the Jamuna, set the toll house on fire and marched to the Red Fort. They entered the Red Fort through the Raj Ghat gate, followed by an excited crowd, to appeal to Bahadur Shah II, the Moghul Emperor— a pensioner of the British East India Company, who possessed nothing but the name of the mighty Mughals — to become their leader, thus, give legitimacy to their cause. Bahadur Shah vacillated as he was neither sure of the intentions of the sepoys nor of his own ability to play an effective
role. He was however persuaded, if not coerced, to give in and was proclaimed the
Shahenshah-e-Hindustan.


The sepoys, then, set out to capture and control the imperial city of Delhi. Simon Fraser, the Political Agent and several other Englishmen were killed; the public offices were either occupied or destroyed. The Revolt of an unsuccessful but heroic effort to eliminate foreign rule, had begun. The capture of Delhi and the proclamation of Bahadur Shah as the Emperor of Hindustan gave a positive political meaning to the revolt and provided a rallying point for the rebels by recalling the past glory of the imperial city. The Revolt at Meerut and the capture of Delhi was the precursor to a
widespread mutiny by the sepoys and rebellion almost all over North India, as well as



http://www.insightsonindia.com                       INSIGHTS                                                                          Page 2
                 Insights Mock Test - 14: 25 Questions and Solutions                  


Central and Western India. South India remained quiet and Punjab and Bengal were only  marginally affected. Almost half the Company‟s sepoy strength of 2,32,224 opted out of their loyalty to their regimental colors and overcame the ideology of the army, meticulously constructed over a period of time through training and discipline.


3)  Consider the following statements with reference to leadership role played by prominet personalities during the 1857 Revolt


1.   Nana Saheb led the rebels in Kanpur
2.   Kunwar Singh, the zamindar of Jagdishpur, led the revolt in Barielly
Which of the above statements is/are correct?
a.   2 Only b.   1 Only c.   None d.  Both


Solution: b)


At Kanpur, the natural choice was Nana Saheb, the adopted son of the last Peshwa,Baji Rao II. He had refused the family title and, banished from Poona, was living near Kanpur. Begum Hazrat Mahal took over the reigns where popular sympathy was overwhelmingly in favour of the deposed Nawab. Her son, Birjis Qadir, was proclaimed the Nawab and a regular administration was organized with important offices shared equally by Muslims and Hindus.


At Barielly, Khan Bahadur, a descendant of the former ruler of Rohilkhand was placed in command. Living on a pension granted by the British, he was not too enthusiastic about this and had in fact, warned the Commissioner of the impending mutiny. Yet, once the Revolt broke out, he assumed the administration, organized an army of 40,000 soldiers and offered stiff resistance to the British.


In Bihar the Revolt was led by Kunwar Singh, the zamindar of Jagdishpur,a 70 year -old man on the brink of bankruptcy. He nursed a grudge against the British. He had been deprived of his estates by them and his repeated appeals to be entrusted with their management again fell on deaf ears. Even though he had not planned an uprising, he
unhesitatingly joined the sepoys when they reached Arrah from Dinapore.




http://www.insightsonindia.com                       INSIGHTS                                                                          Page 3
                 Insights Mock Test - 14: 25 Questions and Solutions                  


4)  Consider the following statements
1.   Both Bombay and Madras remained totally loyal to the British duri ng the 1857
Revolt
2.   The annexation of Jhansi state by the application of the Subsidiary Alliance by Lord Dalhousie was the major reason for Rani of Jhansi to revolt against the British during 1857 Revolt
Which of the above statements is/are INCORRECT?
a.   None b.   Both
c.   1 Only
d.  2 Only


Solution: b)


The most outstanding leader of the Revolt was Rani Lakshmibai, who assumed the leadership of the sepoys at Jhansi. Lord Dalhousie, the Governor -General, had refused to allow her adopted son to succeed to the throne after her husband died and had annexed the state by the application of the Doctrine of Lapse. The Rani had tried everything to reverse the decision. She even  offered to keep  Jhansi  „safe‟ for the British if they would grant her wishes. When it was clear nothing wa s working she joined the sepoys and, in time, became one of the most formidable enemies the British had to contend with. The Revolt was not confined to these major centres. It had embraced almost every cantonment in the Bengal and a few in Bombay. Only the Madras army remained totally loyal.


5)  It is said that the 1857 Revolt was, literally, started over a gun i.e. enfield rifle. With reference to this, consider the following statements
1.   The sepoys had to bite cartridges open to empty the gunpowder present inside
into the rifle‟s muzzle
2.    It was alleged that the cartridges were greased with both cow and pork fat
Which of the above statements is/are correct?
a.   2 Only b.   None
c.   1 Only d.  Both


Solution: d)



http://www.insightsonindia.com                       INSIGHTS                                                                          Page 4
                 Insights Mock Test - 14: 25 Questions and Solutions                  




The rebellion was, literally, started over a gun. Sepoys throughout India were issued with a new rifle, the Pattern 1853 Enfield rifled musket—a more powerful and accurate weapon than the old but smoothbore Brown Bess they had been using for the previous decades. The rifling inside the musket barrel ensured accuracy at much greater distances than was possible with old muskets. One thing did not change in this new weapon — the loading process, which did not improve significantly until the
introduction of breech loaders and metallic, one-piece cartridges a few decades later.

http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/5/5d/Pattern1853Rifle.jpg

To load both the old musket and the new rifle, soldiers had to bite the cartridge open and pour the gunpowder it contained into the rifle's muzzle, then stuff the cartridge case, which was typically paper coated with some kind of grease to make it waterproof,
into the musket aswadding, before loading it with a ball.

It was believed that the cartridges that were standard issue with this rifle were greased with lard (pork fat) which was regarded as unclean by Muslims and tallow (cow fat) which angered the Hindus as cows were sacred to them. The sepoys' British officers dismissed these claims as rumours, and suggested that the sepoys make a batch of fresh cartridges, and grease these with beeswax or mutton fat. This reinforced the belief that
the original issue cartridges were indeed greased with lard and tallow.

Another suggestion they put forward was to introduce a new drill, in which the cartridge was not bitten with the teeth but torn open with the hand. The sepoys rejected this, pointing out that they might very well forget and bite the cartridge, not surprising given the extensive drilling that allowed 19th century British troops to fire three to four rounds per minute. An integral part of the loading procedure involved biting off the bullet from the cartridge so that one hand could hold the musket steady while the other
hand poured the charge of powder into the barrel. This meant that biting a musket





http://www.insightsonindia.com                       INSIGHTS                                                                          Page 5
                 Insights Mock Test - 14: 25 Questions and Solutions                  


cartridge was second nature to the Sepoys, some of whom had decades of service in the

Company's army, and who had been doing musket drill for every day of their service.





6)   Give are the reasons below why rebels failed in attaining their goal during the 1857 revolt. Which of them are correct?
1.   They were poorly served by their leaders with the exception of few
2.   The rebels had no political perspective or a definite vision of the future
3.   Almost half the Indian soldiers fought against their own countrymen
Choose the correct answer using the codes below a.   1 and 3 Only
b.   2 and 3 Only c.   1 and 2 Only d.  All Three


Solution: d)


Although the rebels received the sympathy of the people, the country as a whole was not behind them. The merchants, intelligentsia and Indian rulers not only kept aloof,
but actively supported the British. Meetings were organized in Calcutta and Bombay by them to pray for the success of the British. Despite the Doctrine of Lapse, the Indian rulers who expected their future to be safer with the British liberally provided them
with men and materials. Indeed, the sepoys might have made a better fight of it if they had received their support. Almost half the Indian soldiers not only did not Revolt but fought against their own countrymen. The recapture of Delhi was effected by five columns consisting of 1700 British troops and 3200 Indians. The blowing up of Kashmere Gate was conducted by six British officers and NCOs and twenty-four Indians, of whom ten were Punjabis and fourteen were from Agra and Oudh. Apart from some honourable exceptions like the Rani of Thansi, Kunwar Singh and Maulvi Ahmadullah, the rebels were poorly served by their leaders. Most of them failed to realize the significance of the Revolt and simply did not do enough. Bahadur Shah and Zeenat Mahal had no faith in the sepoys and negotiated with the British to secure their safety. Most of the taluqdars tried only to protect their own interests. Some of them,

like Man Singh, changed sides several times depending on which side had the upper hand. Apart from a commonly shared hatred for alien rule, the rebels had no political



http://www.insightsonindia.com                       INSIGHTS                                                                          Page 6
                 Insights Mock Test - 14: 25 Questions and Solutions                  


perspective or a definite vision of the future. They were all prisoners of their own past, fighting primarily to regain their lost privileges. Unsurprisingly, they proved incapable of ushering in a new political order. John Lawrence rightly remarked that had a single leader of ability arisen among them (the rebels) we must have been lost beyond
redemption.‟




7)   During the first hundred years of the British rule in India, they faced series of rebellions from Indians. Consider the nature of these rebellions in the following statements:
1.   They were often led by deposed rajas and nawabs and other such erstwhile powerful persons
2.   They were sudden and localized
3.   They were mostly reactions to the rapid changes the British introduced in the economy, administration and land revenue system
Which of the above statements is/are correct?
a.   3 and 2 Only b.   2 and 1 Only c.   1 and 3 Only d.  All Three


Solution: d)


The series of civil rebellions, which run like a thread through the first 100 years of
British rule, were often led by deposed rajas and nawabs or their descendants, uprooted and impoverished zamindars, landlords and poligars (landed military magnates in South India), and ex-retainers and officials of the conquered Indian states. The
backbone of the rebellions, their mass base and striking power came from the rack-
rented peasants, ruined artisans and demobilized soldiers. These sudden, localized revolts often took place because of local grievances although for short periods they acquired a broad sweep, involving armed bands of a few hundreds to several thousands.


The major cause of all these civil rebellions taken as a whole was the rapid changes the British introduced in the economy, administration and land revenue system. These changes led to the disruption of the agrarian society, causing prolonged and
widespread suffering among its constituents Above all, the colonial policy of



http://www.insightsonindia.com                       INSIGHTS                                                                          Page 7
                 Insights Mock Test - 14: 25 Questions and Solutions                  


intensifying demands for land revenue and extracting as large an amount as possible produced a veritable upheaval in Indian villages. In Bengal, for example, in less than thirty years land revenue collection was raised to nearly double the amount collected under the Mughals. The pattern was repeated in other us of the country as British rule spread. And aggravating the unhappiness of the farmers was the fact that not even a part of the enhanced revenue was spent on the development of agriculture or the welfare of the cultivator.


8)   Daman-i-koh, in modern Indian history is known for
a.   It is a region  where Santhal rebellion took place against the British
b.   It is a region where the Mughals established their supremacy over Eastern India c.   It is a region where the British executed last living Mughal lineage
d.  None of the above


Solution: a)


Among the numerous tribal revolts, the Santhal hool or uprising was the most massive. The Santhals, who live in the area between Bhagalpur and Rajmahal, known as Daman- i-koh, rose in revolt; made a determined attempt to expel the outsiders — the dikus — and proclaimed the complete „annihilation‟ of the alien  regime.

The Damin-i-koh was a densely forested and hilly area. Even in the valleys there was hardly any human interference except for an occasional Paharia village. That was the situation for centuries. There were two groups of Paharia primitive tribes, namely the Sauria Paharias and the Mal Paharias. They had been living in the Rajmahal Hills, since when it is difficult to trace. They lived mostly in hill tracts. Prior to the arrival of the British, the Paharias lead a life undisturbed by the mighty empires reigning in the region. That was mostly the result of their geographical isolation. The Mughals never seems to have conquered the area, possibly because they failed to penetrate into the deeply forested hilly tracts. They were hill locked and were completely isolated from the outside world. They were also never in any way subordinate to the British Raj till around the end of eighteenth century.

The main problem that faced the British in the early years of their rule in the area was

that the Paharias had become bandits and dacoits in the declining years of Muslim rule

http://www.insightsonindia.com                       INSIGHTS                                                                          Page 8
                 Insights Mock Test - 14: 25 Questions and Solutions                  


and lawlessness prevailed in the region. The pacification of the Paharias and their conversion into a law-abiding people was a major achievement of the early British administration under such people as Captain Brooke, Captain Browne and Augustus Cleveland. The Santals first began to move into the hills and forests of what was later
called Santhal Parganas, towards the end of the 18th century.

The Santals are the most numerous tribe in eastern India. According to their traditions, they were a wandering tribe until they settled down in Chhotanagpur and the adjacent districts. That was around the middle of the 18th century. Towards the end of the century, as the pressure of population was keenly felt and the jungles were being cleared, they moved up towards the virgin forests in and around the Rajmahal Hills. The Permanent Settlement of 1793 forced the landlords to improve productivity of the land. The Santals were increasingly used for land reclamation and improvement. In
1832 the government set apart a large area in Damin-i-Koh for the settlement of the

Santal. The population in this tract increased from 3,000 in 1838 to 82,795 in 1851. The intention of the British administration in permanently settling the Santals in Damin -i- koh was to reclaim the dense forested region. The industrious Santal was accorded a
warm welcome to carry out the arduous task.

The Santhal rebellion of 1855, lead to the formation of Santhal Parganas, which till then

was administratively under Birbhum district.



9)   The Santhal insurrection against the mighty British in 1854 was immensely helped by Gwalas and Lohars. Who were these?
a.   Milkmen and Blacksmith respectively b.   Oppressed farmers
c.   Artisans and craftsmen
d.  None of the above


Solution: a)





http://www.insightsonindia.com                       INSIGHTS                                                                          Page 9
                 Insights Mock Test - 14: 25 Questions and Solutions                  


The Santhal insurrection was helped by a large number of non-tribal and poor dikus. Gwalas (milkmen) and others helped the rebels with provisions and services; lohars (blacksmiths) accompanied the rebel bands, keeping their weapons in good shape.


10) Consider the following statements with reference to Santhal insurrection
1.   The Santhals believed that their actions had the blessings of God
2.   The British could not succeed completely in crushing the Santhal rebellion
Which of the above statements is/are correct?
a.   1 Only b.   Both
c.   None d.  2 Only


Solution: a)


The Santhals believed that their actions had the blessings of God. Sido and Kanhu, the principal rebel leaders, claimed that Thakur (God) had communicated with them and told them to take up arms and fight for independence. Sido told the authorities in a proclamation: „The Thacoor has ordered me saying that  the country is not  Sahibs  . . . The Thacoor himself will fight. Therefore, you Sahibs and Soldiers (will) fight the
Thacoor himself.‟


The rebellion was crushed ruthlessly. More than 15,000 Santhals were killed while tens of villages were destroyed. Sido was betrayed and captured and killed in August 1855
while Kanhu was arrested by accident at the tail-end of the rebellion in February 1866.


11) With reference to the Indigo Revolt of 1859-60, consider the following statements
1.   The peasants were forced to cultivate indigo through  meager forced contracts
2.   The peasant was forced to grow indigo on any land of his choice, but he had to cultivate it at any cost
Which of the above statements is/are correct?
a.   1 Only b.   None
c.   2 Only d.  Both


Solution: a)



http://www.insightsonindia.com                       INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 10
                 Insights Mock Test - 14: 25 Questions and Solutions                  



The most militant and widespread of the peasant movements was the Indigo Revolt of
1859-60. The indigo planters, nearly all Europeans, compelled the tenants to grow indigo which they processed in factories set up in rural (mofussil) areas. From the beginning, indigo was grown under an extremely oppressive system which involved great loss to the cultivators. The planters forced the peasants to take a meager amount
as advance and enter into fraudulent contracts. The price paid for the indigo plants was
far below the market price. The comment of the Lieutenant Governor of Bengal, J.B. Grant, was  that  „the root  of the whole question is the struggle to make the raiyats grow indigo plant, without paying them the price  of it.‟ The peasant was forced to grow indigo on the best land he had whether or not he wanted to devote his land and labour to more paying crops like rice. At the time of delivery, he was cheated even of the due low price. He also had to pay regular bribes to the planter‟s officials.  He was  forced to accept an advance. Often he was not in a position to repay it, but even if he could he
was not allowed to do so. The advance was used by the planters to compel him to go on
cultivating indigo.


12) In just 50 years, the Aral Sea - once the fourth largest inland water body - has turned into world's newest desert. The main reason for this disaster is:
a.   High amount of surface heat in the region caused complete evaporation
b.   The sea‟s water supply was  diverted for irrigation purpose c.   The sea was unscientifically used for fishing and mining
d.  None of the above


Solution: b)


The Aral Sea is an endorheic lake, which means that although it has surface inflow, there is no surface outflow of water. The inflow into the sea is because of two rivers, the
Amu Darya and Syr Darya.

The sea started to shrink because of the ambitious econo mic plans of Soviet leader Joseph Stalin. In 1929, he ordered collectivisation of farms in Central Asia to achieve cotton independence. The lasting legacy of this social and economic transformation was destruction of traditional irrigation in the Aral Sea basin. In the 1940s, under Stalin‟s
Great Plan for the Transformation of Nature, construction of irrigation canals was



http://www.insightsonindia.com                       INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 11
                 Insights Mock Test - 14: 25 Questions and Solutions                  


started on a large scale. Many of the canals were poorly built, allowing water to leak or evaporate.


http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/sea -isnt




13) Recently, a drug named „Teixobactin’ was in news. Why?
a.   It is a first antibiotic which treats malaria
b.   It is a first antibiotic which treats tuberculosis successfully
c.   It is a first antibiotic announced in decades which treats AIDS effectively d.  None of the above


Solution: d)


http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/antibiotic-superbugs


14) With reference to fungi, consider the following statements
1.   Saprotrophs recycle the nitrogen in dead plant matter and release it back into the atmosphere as carbon dioxide (CO2)
2.    “Ecto-mycorrhizal” (EcM) fungi are classic symbionts, exchanging nitrogen for
carbohydrates manufactured by plants through photosynthesis
Which of the above statements is/are INCORRECT?
a.   1 Only b.    None c.   Both
d.  2 Only


Solution: b)


Both are correct.


http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/peek-world-fungi


15) Consider the following statements with reference to zebra‟s stripes
1.   Stripes help the zebra regulate its body temperature
2.   Zebras in areas with lower temperature have fewer and fainter stripes
Which of the above statements is/are correct?


http://www.insightsonindia.com                       INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 12
                 Insights Mock Test - 14: 25 Questions and Solutions                  


a.   1 Only b.   2 Only c.   Both
d.  None


Solution: c)


THERE HAVE been various theories on how the zebra got its stripes, ranging from those which say that the stripes make it difficult for predators to spot it to those which say they help ward off biting flies. A study whichanalysed the impact of 29 environmental factors, such as heat, flies and predators, on zebras across 16 locations in Africa found that temperature was the only variable with which zebra stripes had a correlation. Stripes help the zebra regulate its body temperature as they heat up at different rates and create "eddies of air" that have a cooling effect. This mechanism works best when stripes are bold. As a result zebras in areas with lower temperature
have fewer and fainter stripes.


http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/science-technology-bytes-3


16) Numerous parasites can be transmitted by food including many protozoa and helminths. Which of the following parasite is NOT one of them?
1.   Giardia intestinalis
2.   Cyclospora cayetanensis,
3.    Toxoplasma gondii
4.   Sarcoptes scabiei
Choose the correct answer using the codes below a.   1 Only
b.   2 Only c.   3 Only
d.  4 Only


Solution: d)


http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/science-technology-bytes-3


http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scabies#Cause




http://www.insightsonindia.com                       INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 13
                 Insights Mock Test - 14: 25 Questions and Solutions                  


http://www.cdc.gov/parasites/food.html


17) With reference to the Indigo revolt, consider the following statements
1.   The intelligentsia of Bengal opposed the revolt and expressed sympathy with the
British planters
2.   Din Bandhu Mitra‟s play,  Neel  Darpan, was  inspired by the plight of indigo
growers
Which of the above statements is/are correct?
a.   1 Only b.   2 Only c.   Both
d.  None


Solution: b)


A significant feature of the Indigo Revolt was the role of the intelligentsia of Bengal which organized a powerful campaign in support of the rebellious peasantry. It carried on newspaper campaigns, organized mass  meetings, prepared memoranda on peasants‟
grievances and supported them in their legal battles.


Din Bandhu Mitra‟s play,  Neel  Darpan, was  to gain  great fame  for vividly portraying
the oppression by the planters.


18) With reference to the Holocene epoch, a part of geological timescale, consider the following statements
1.   This epoch‟s primary characteristic is the global changes caused by human activity
2.   First humans appeared during this epoch
3.   The Holocene extinction caused the extinction of dinosaurs from earth


Which of the above statements is/are correct?
a.   3 and 1 Only b.   2 and 3 Only c.   All Three
d.  1 Only


Solution: d)



http://www.insightsonindia.com                       INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 14
                 Insights Mock Test - 14: 25 Questions and Solutions                  



The Holocene Epoch is the current period of geologic time. Another term that is sometimes used is the Anthropocene Epoch, because its primary characteristic is the global changes caused by human activity. This term can be misleading, though; modern humans were already well established long before the epoch began. The Holocene Epoch began 12,000 to 11,500 years ago at the close of the Paleolithic Ice Age and continues through today.
As Earth entered a warming trend, the glaciers of the late Paleolithic retre ated. Tundra

gave way to forest. As the climate changed, the very large mammals that had adapted to extreme cold, like mammoth and wooly rhinoceros, became extinct. Humans, once dependent on these “mega mammals” for much of their food,  switched to smaller game and increased their gathering of plant materials to supplement their diet.
Evidence indicates that about 10,800 years ago, the climate underwent a sharp cold turn lasting for several years. The glaciers did not return, but game and plant materials would have been scarce. As temperatures began to rebound, human population began to increase and we began inventing the processes that would change the planet forever.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Holocene_extinction


http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/science-technology-bytes-3




19) Anand Mohan Bose and Dwarkanath Ganguli were famous in the early days of national movement mainly because
a.   They wrote books highlighting the difficulties faced by the artisans of Bengal b.   They helped farmers form unions and campaigned for the rights of tenants
c.   They organized first violent rebellion of ryots against zamindars in Bengal
d.  None of the above


Solution: b)


A number of young Indian intellectuals supported the peasants‟ cause. These  included Bankim Chandra Chatterjea and R.C. Dutt. Later, in the early I 880s, during the discussion of the Bengal Tenancy Bill, the Indian Association, led by Surendranath
Banerjee, Anand Mohan Bose and Dwarkanath Ganguli, campaigned for the rights of



http://www.insightsonindia.com                       INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 15
                 Insights Mock Test - 14: 25 Questions and Solutions                  


tenants, helped form  ryot‟ unions, and organized huge meetings of upto 20,00 0 peasants in the districts in support of the Rent Bill.


20) In 1875, the peasants in other Ryotwari areas faced major agrarian outbreak.
Following are some of the causes:
1.   The end of the Civil War in 1864 in America brought about an acute depression in cotton exports and a crash in prices
2.    In 1867, the Government raised land revenue by nearly 50 per cent


Which of the above is/are correct?
a.   1 Only b.   2 Only c.   Both
d.  None


Solution: c)


A major agrarian outbreak occurred in the Poona and Ahmednagar districts of Maharashtra in 1875. Here, as part of the Ryotwari system, land revenue was settled directly with the peasant who was also recognized as the owner of his land. Like the peasants in other Ryotwari areas, the Deccan peasant also found it difficult to pay land revenue without getting into the clutches of the moneylender and increasingly losing his land. This led to growing tension between the peasants and the moneylenders most of whom were outsiders — Marwaris or Gujaratis. Three other developments occurred at this time. During the early I 860s, the American Civil War had led to a rise in cotton
exports which had pushed up prices. The end of the Civil War in 1864 brought about an acute depression in cotton exports and a crash in prices. The ground slipped from unde r the peasants‟ feet. Simultaneously, in 1867, „the Government raised land revenue by
nearly 50 per cent. The situation was worsened by a succession of bad harvests.




21) Following are some of the revelations of Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO)'s new  report, “World Fertilizer Trends And Outlook to 2018”. Which of the following is/are NOT correct?
1.   Africa is the largest consumer of fertilizers in the world
2.   Europe has surplus of all three nutrient based fertilizers
3.   In coming years, the demand for fertilizers will surpass the supply



http://www.insightsonindia.com                       INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 16
                 Insights Mock Test - 14: 25 Questions and Solutions                  



Choose the correct answer using the codes below a.   1 Only
b.   2 Only
c.   1 and 3 Only d.  3 Only


Solution: c)


http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/global-fertiliser-use-surpass-200-million-
tonnes-2018-fao-report


22) Recently a research paper called for dingoes of Australia to “rewild” a National Park in far northwest New South Wales by altering the so-called “Dingo Fence”. What are these dingoes?
a.   A sub-species of Kangaroos
b.   A species of a free-ranging dog found mainly in Australia c.   A species of bird which helps in the growth of forest cover d.  None of the above


Solution: b)


http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/dingoes-could-help-saving-australia-s-
native-wildlife-conservationists


http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dingo


23) National De-worming Day was observed on 10th February 2015 in India. With reference to de-worming, consider the following statements
1.   It is a spraying of anti-parasitic sprays in and around schools and village houses
to rid them of parasites, such as roundworm, hookworms, flukes and tapeworm
2.   It is part of National Rural Health Mission


Which of the above statements is/are correct?
a.   1 Only b.   2 Only
c.   Both



http://www.insightsonindia.com                       INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 17
                 Insights Mock Test - 14: 25 Questions and Solutions                  


d.  None


Solution: b)


De-worming

It is administering an antihelmintic drug to a human or animal to rid them of parasites, such as roundworm,  hookworms,  flukes and tapeworm.  Mass deworming  campaigns of school children have been used both as a preventive as well as a treatment method for  helminthiasis  which  includes  soil transmitted  helminthiasis  in children.  Children can be treated by administering for example Mebendazole and Albendazole. The cost is relatively low. One tablet of Albendazole rids the child of parasitic worms which live in the  child‟s  intestines and eat  the  nutrients the  child needs for  healthy mental and physical  development.  This tablet  is safe for both infected  and  non-infected  children and has a pleasant flavor.

Helminths

They  are  a  group   of  parasites   commonly   referred   to  as  worms   and  include schistosomes   and  soil-transmitted   helminths.   Such  infections   are  among  the  most common  infections  in developing  countries.While  mild infections  often go unnoticed, more severe worm infections  can lead to abdominal  pain, listlessness,  iron-deficiency anemia,   malnutrition,   stunting,   and  wasting..   Infections   can  also  cause   cognitive
impairment as well as tissue damage that may require corrective surgery


WHO recommendations

To  reduce  the  worm  burden,  WHO  recommends   periodic  drug  treatment  (De - worming)  of all school-age  children living in endemic areas. WHO is of the view that treating   children   for   worms—which   affect   an  estimated   600  million   school-aged children  worldwide—improves  school  attendance,  health,  and long-run  productivity. Oral de-worming drugs are extremely effective at killing most varieties of worms with a
single dose, at negligible cost.

So, de-worming  treatment  is not only highly effective and inexpensive,  it is easy to administer through public schools and brings benefits to children years after treatment. With  hundreds  of  millions  of  children  still  at  risk  of  worm  infection  worldwide, providing free school-based  de-worming treatment is an  easy  policy “win” for  health, education, and development.
Government Initiatives



http://www.insightsonindia.com                       INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 18
                 Insights Mock Test - 14: 25 Questions and Solutions                  


School Health program under National Rural Health Mission (NRHM), provides for De-worming as per national guidelines on bi-annually supervised schedule. In the state of Bihar  world‟s  largest school-based de-worming  initiative  was taken up earlier and also  the  Delhi  government   had  conducted   such  campaigns.   According   to  WHO estimates, nearly 24 crore children in the age group of 1 -14 years are at risk of intestinal
parasitic worm infestation.


24) With reference to  features of Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya Yojana, consider the following statements
1.   Demand led skill training at no cost to the rural poor
2.   Guaranteed Placement for at least 75% trained candidates
3.   Mandatory coverage of socially disadvantaged groups


Which of the above is/are features of the above mentioned scheme?
a.   1 and 3 Only b.   2 and 3 Only c.   1 and 3 Only d.  All


Solution: d)


Features of Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya Yojana


·         Enable Poor and Marginalized to Access Benefits
Demand led skill training at no cost to the rural poor


·         Inclusive Program Design
Mandatory  coverage  of socially disadvantaged  groups (SC/ST 50%; Minority  15%;
Women 33%)


·         Shifting Emphasis from Training to Career Progression
Pioneers  in  providing  incentives  for  job  retention,  career  progression  and  foreign placements


·         Greater Support for Placed Candidates
Post-placement support, migration support and alumni network




http://www.insightsonindia.com                       INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 19
                 Insights Mock Test - 14: 25 Questions and Solutions                  


·         Proactive Approach to Build Placement Partnerships
Guaranteed Placement for at least 75% trained candidates


·         Enhancing the Capacity of Implementation Partners
Nurturing new training service providers and developing their skills
·         Regional Focus
Greater emphasis on projects for poor rural youth in Jammu and Kashmir (HIMAYAT), the North-East region and 27 Left-Wing Extremist (LWE) districts (ROSHINI)
·         Standards-led Delivery
All  program  activities  are  subject  to Standard  Operating  Procedures  that  are  not open to interpretation by local inspectors. All inspections are supported by geo -tagged,
time stamped videos/photographs







25) The Department of  Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities is part of which of the following ministry?
a.   Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
b.   Ministry of Human Resource Development c.   Ministry of Labour and Employment
d.  Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment


Solution: d)


The Department of Disability Affairs was created in the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment on May 12,2012 to ensure greater  focus on policy matters to effectively address disability issues and to act as a nodal Department for  greater coordination among stakeholders, organizations, State Governments and related Central Ministries. According to the Notification dated December9, 2014 the Department has been renamed
as Department of  Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities.













http://www.insightsonindia.com                       INSIGHTS                                                                       Page 20
