



INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK PRELIMINARY EXAM - 2015


INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST - 27
GENERAL STUDIES
PAPER-I
Time Allowed: 2 Hours                                                                                         Maximum Marks: 200

INSTRUCTIONS
1.   IMMEDITELY AFTER THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE EXAMINATION, YOU SHOULD
CHECK THAT THIS TEST BOOKLET DOES NOT HAVE ANY UNPRINTED OR TORN OR MISSING
PAGES OR ITEMS, ETC. IF SO, GET IT REPLACED BY A COMPLETE TEST BOOKLET.
2.  You have to enter your Roll Number on the Test Booklet in the Box provided alongside. DO NOT Write anything else on the Test Booklet.

4.  This Test Booklet contains 100 items (questions).  Each item is printed only in English. Each item comprises four responses (answers). You will select the response which you want to mark on the Answer Sheet. In case you feel that there is more than one correct response, mark the respo nse which you consider the best. In any case, choose ONLY ONE response for each item.
5.  You have to mark all your responses ONLY on the separate Answer Sheet provided.  See directions in the Answer Sheet.
6.  All items carry equal marks.

7.  Before you proceed to mark in the Answer Sheet the response to various items in the Test Booklet, you have  to  fill  in  some  particulars  in  the  Answer  Sheet  as  per  instructions  sent  to  you  with  your Admission Certificate.

8.  After you have completed filling in all your responses on the Answer Sheet and the examination has concluded, you should hand over to the Invigilator only the Answer Sheet. You are permitted to take away with you the Test Booklet.

9.  Sheets for rough work are appended in the Test Booklet at the end.
10. Penalty for wrong answers :
THERE WILL BE PENALTY FOR WRONG ANSWERS MARKED BY A CANDIDATE IN THE OBJECTIVE TYPE QUESTION PAPERS.
(i)    There are four alternatives for the answer to every question. For each question for which a wrong answer has been given by the candidate, one-third of the marks assigned to that question will be deducted as penalty.
(ii)   If a candidate gives more than one answer, it will be treated as a wrong answer even if one of the given answers happens to be correct and there will be same penalty as above to that question.
(iii)    If a question is left blank, i.e., no answer is given by the candidate, there will be no penalty for that question.


http://www.insightsonindia.com

INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST SERIES FOR CIVIL SERVICES PRELIMINARY EXAM 2015


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 1


1.   Consider the following about the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI).
1.   It is a statutory body.
2.   Union Ministry of Health & Family Welfare is the Administrative Ministry for the implementation of FSSAI.
3.   It provides scientific and technical advice to Central and state governments on food safety.
4.  Only FSSAI can ban an unsafe food from market.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  2 and 4 only b)  1 and 3 only
c)   1, 2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




2.   India has recently slapped anti - dumping duty on imports of certain steel products from China, Malaysia and South Korea. Anti-dumping duty is applied when
a)  Imports are much cheaper than their actual market price
b)  Imports are much costlier than their actual market price
c)   Imports exceed the allowed quota by the government
d)  Countries collude to reduce the quantity of imports to a particular nation




3.   Which of the following is/are the benefits to India by ratifying the India- Bangladesh Land Boundary
agreement?
1.   It will allow Indian security forces seamless access to both sides of the land border.
2.   It will settle the question of citizenship for various people in the disputed enclaves around the land boundary.
3.   It would improve access to the north-eastern states.



Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)   2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




4.  Members of which of the following security forces in India are known as
„Black Cats‟?
a)  National Security Guard
b)  Central Reserve Police Force c)   Rapid Action Force
d)  None of the above




5.   In recorded human history, which of the following human organs have been transplanted?
1.   Heart
2.   Skull and scalp partially
3.   Intestine
4.  Brain

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 3 only b)  1 and 3 only
c)   2, 3 and 4 only
d)  1 and 2 only


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 2
6.  Recently, the Union Government has launched nationwide Jal Kranti Abhiyan. It aims at
a)  Providing all villages with piped drinking water facility
b)  Turning one water scared village in each district of the country into water surplus village
c)   Rejuvenating the natural water
sources in all Indian villages to reduce water deficit and tackle drought
d)  Water saving in all the Indian villages through awareness generation and financial incentives



7.   Kitab-ul-Hind which recorded various aspects of India among other things as seen by a traveller, was written by
a)  Ibn Battuta
b)  Al Biruni
c)   Ibn Juzayy
d)  Shaikh Ali Hazin




8.  Under WTO rules, a nation can ban imports of a particular commodity from a nation in which of the following cases?
1.   To protect domestic industries
2.   On grounds that the imported commodity does not comply with international standards
3.    On ground of public health

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.
9.  In banking, the difference between real and nominal interest rates reflects
a)  Cost of loan to the banks
b)  Rate of Inflation c)   Profit to banks
d)  Difference between repo and reverse repo rate




10. Corporate farming refers to a practice where
1.   Land is owned by the corporate
2.   Farmer undertakes a contract based on a payment to grow crops on his land
3.   Corporate involve themselves in
front end agricultural marketing activities

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 2 only d)  2 only




11. With reference to François Bernier, consider the following statements:
1.   He extensively travelled in India
during the rule of Aurangzeb and
Dara Shikoh
2.   One of his books is considered the first published post-Classical classification of humans into distinct races

Which of the above statements is/are correct?
a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)   2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above

a)  1 Only b)  2 Only c)   Both
d)  None



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 3
12. The Tripartite Free Trade Area (TFTA)
has been signed between a)  African Nations
b)  Asia-Pacific rim nations – USA, Japan, South Korea
c)   West European nations – France, Germany and Greece
d)  South-east Asian nations, Russia and Australia




13. The Constitution confers which of the following rights and privileges on the citizens of India, and denies the same to aliens?
1.   Cultural and educational rights
2.   Right to freedom
3.   Right against exploitation
4.  Right to equality of opportunity

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   3 and 4 only
d)  1, 2 and 4 only


14. Consider the following statements:
1.   Climate refers to the sum total of weather conditions and variations over a large area for a long period of time (more than thirty years)
2.   The elements of weather and climate are the same
3.   Weather refers to the state of the atmosphere over an area at any point of time

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 and 2 Only b)  3 and 1 Only c)   2 and 3 Only d)  All


15. The Government of India Act of 1919, also known as Montagu-Chelmsford Reforms provided for the system of diarchy. This meant that
a)  The legislative sphere of central and provincial government was clearly demarcated
b)  Instead of a single legislative
chamber, two councils
(bicameralism) will take decisions c)   A part of provincial legislation will
be handled by the Governor and the rest by the legislative council
d)  None of the above




16. During President‟s rule in a state
1.   State council of ministers is dissolved
2.   Central government takes over the
executive machinery of the state
3.   The President becomes empowered to make laws with respect to any matter in state list

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only d)  1 only




17. With reference to Permanent Settlement system of land revenue, consider the following statements:
1.   It was an agreement between the East India Company and Bengali landlords to fix revenues to be raised from land
2.   The British officials hopes to encourage investment in
agriculture through this initiative

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 4
3.   By introducing this system, the British hoped to establish a class of yeomen farmers and rich landowners who would be loyal to the Company

Which of the above statements is/are
INCORRECT?

a)  1 and 2 Only b)  1 and 3 Only c)   2 and 3 Only d)  All




18. Consider the following about IAP HealthPhone programme recently launched by Union government.
1.   It is a digital mass education
programme.
2.   It will address malnutrition in women and children.
3.   It is supported by UNICEF.
4.  It is a Public-Private Partnership
(PPP) initiative.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only
b)  1, 3 and 4 only c)   2, 3 and 4 only d)  All of the above




19. Under which of the following writs a court issue command to a public official asking him to perform his official duties that he has failed or refused to perform?
a)  Certiorari
b)  Mandamus c)   Prohibition
d)  Quo-Warranto
20. The Gross National Product (GDP) of a nation is NOT affected in the short-run by
1.   Growing trade deficit
2.   Growing flow of remittances
3.   Cutting down on interest rates in the economy

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 2 only
d)  It is affected by all of the above.


21. Concerning the Central government, which of the following are constitutional mandates/duties?
1.   To devolve a share of income proceeds to states
2.   To protect states from
constitutional breakdown
3.   To protect states from external and internal aggression

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




22. To whom does the below description refer to?


1.   He oversaw the consolidation of British control over much of peninsular India, setting the stage for the British Raj
2.   He was instrumental in enacting
administrative and legal reforms that fundamentally altered civil


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 5
administration and land management practices in India
3.   He introduced a system of circuit
courts with a superior court that met in Calcutta and had the power of review over circuit court decisions

Choose the correct answer using the codes below:

a)  Lord Dalhousie b)  Lord Cornwallis
c)   Lord William Bentinck d)  Lord Ripon




23. Under the system of „Scientific
Forestry‟ in colonial times
a)  New trees are added to a region as per its ecology
b)  Old trees are cut and new mono-
variety of trees are grown in its place
c)   Biodiversity of a forest is enhanced by adding exotic and native species
d)  None of the above




24. With reference to Nader Shah‟s invasion of Mughal India and the subsequent plunder, consider the following statements:
1.   At the time of Nader Shah‟s invasion, Aurangzeb was old and facing succession wars from his sons
2.   He defeated Mughal army at the
Battle of Karnal
3.   Mughal‟s defeat paved the way for the British to fill the power vacuum

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  2 and 3 Only
b)  1 and 2 Only c)   1 and 3 Only d)  All


25. The Ashobaa cyclonic depression over the Arabian Sea has shortly disrupted the normal flow of the southwest monsoon winds because
1.   Southwest monsoon winds have
now turned towards the north and the west after entering the Southern Peninsula
2.   The cyclonic depression has delayed the heating, condensation and precipitation in the Indian ocean

Which of the above is/are true?

a)  1 only b)  2 only
c)   Both 1 and 2
d)  None


26. Consider the following about the role and functions of the RBI.
1.   It is the custodian of the stipulated cash reserves of the Commercial Banks.
2.   It manages the banking needs of the government.
3.   It controls the money supply in the economy.
4.  It manages the Foreign Exchange
Management Act.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 3 only b)  2, 3 and 4 only c)   1, 2 and 4 only d)  All of the above


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 6
27. If the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) declares some wild animals as „vermin‟ it would
1.   Allow their liberal hunting in the forests
2.   Allow their movement from one forest to other
3.   Declare them as no beneficial to humans

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




28. With reference to Manikkavachakar, consider the following statements:
1.   He was a Sangam poet and wrote
Vaishnav hymns in Tamil
2.   His work is a poetic expression of the joy of God-experience, the anguish of being separated from God

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 Only b)  2 Only c)   Both
d)  None




29. Consider the following statements:
1.   India lies in the region of north easterly winds
2.   North-easterly winds originate
from the subtropical high-pressure belt of the northern hemisphere
3.   North-easterly winds are known as
doldrums
a)  3 and 1 Only b)  2 and 1 Only c)   3 and 2 Only d)  All




30. If the tax expenditure of the government increases, it implies that
1.   Government is giving greater tax
exemptions
2.   Revenue expenditure of the government is increasing
3.   Government is spending more tax money in non-plan sector of the economy

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 2 only d)  1 only




31. In India, which of these might lead to inflationary pressures in the short- run?
1.   Printing more money
2.   Rupee Depreciation
3.   High tax rebates to Indian citizens

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 2 only
d)  All of the above

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 7
32. The Greek depression refers to the phenomenon which started with
a)  Greece nearly defaulting on
sovereign debt
b)  Greece suffering very low economic growth rates immediately after the
2008 recession
c)   Greece being pushed out of the European Monetary union because of debt default
d)  The massive austerity programs in Greece leading to high debt levels and unemployment




33. With reference to Subsidiary Alliance, consider the following statements:
1.   Subsidiary Alliance was a system
devised by Lord Dalhousie in 1798.
2.   According to this, the British would be responsible for protecting their ally from external and internal threats to their power
3.   According to this, the ally could enter into agreements with other rulers or engage in warfare only with the permission of the British

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 and 2 Only b)  2 Only
c)   2 and 3 Only
d)  All




34. Which of these activities are legally permitted for banks, but NOT for Non- Banking Financial Institutions (NBFIs)?
1.   Offering loans
2.   Offering deposits
3.   Offering cheque withdrawal facility
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 2 only
d)  All of the above




35. Which of the following may force marine life to poles from the equator?
1.   Rising sea levels
2.   Rising sea temperatures
3.   Increased mineralization of sea water
4.  Increased population of phytoplanktons in the ocean

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   2 and 4 only d)  1 and 3 only




36. Consider the following statements:
1.   The western cyclonic disturbances experienced in the north and north- western parts of India are brought
in by this westerly flow
2.   Western disturbances are subtropical storms
3.   Western Disturbances are important to the development of the Kharif crop in the northern subcontinent

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 and 2 Only b)  2 and 3 Only c)   3 and 1 Only
d)  All


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 8


37. Which one of the following bio- reserves of India is not included in the world network of bioreserve?
a)  Manas
b)  Gulf of Mannar c)   Nokrek
d)  Nanda devi




38. Which of these statements is/are true about Endemic species?
1.   They are naturally found only in an
exclusive area.
2.   They cannot be introduced in areas other than where they are found.
3.   Exotic species and endemic species cannot coexist.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only d)  1 only




39. Consider the following about the scientific technique of growing test- tube babies.
1.   It is done when the female is totally
incapable of giving birth.
2.   Baby is fertilized and grown under laboratory conditions.
3.   It also leads to genetic modifications in the baby.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.
40. Consider the following statements:
1.   In Mahayana and Vajrayana Buddhism, she is a deva or bodhisattva associated with light and the sun
2.   She has been depicted with one,
three, five or six faces and two, six, eight, ten or twelve arms; three eyes; in her many-faced manifestations one of her faces is that of a sow

To which God/Goddess does above description refer to?

a)  Vajravārāhī
b)  Varahi c)   Marichi
d)  Vajrayogini




41. An increase in the carbon dioxide content in the atmosphere would cause
1.   More heat to be retained in the atmosphere
2.   Less moisture to be retained in the air
3.   Erosion of the ozone in the atmosphere

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 only
d)  None of the above

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only
d)  None of the above

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                    Page 9
42. As per recent study, a bird species Yellow-breasted  buntings is near to extinction. Consider the following about it.
1.   It is a „songbird‟.
2.   It is a migratory bird wintering in
India.
3.   The main reason for the decline of the species is habitat destruction.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 2 only
d)  All of the above




43. In the Fourth Anglo-Mysore War, which combined forces defeated Tipu Sultan?
a)  The British East India Company and the Nizam of Hyderabad
b)  The British East India and the
French
c)   The British East India and the
Marathas
d)  The British East India and the
Dutch


44. The Central Vigilance Commissioner and other Vigilance commissioners are appointed by the President on the recommendation  of a select committee including
1.   Prime Minister
2.   Union Home Minister
3.   Leader of Opposition, Lok Sabha
4.  Lok Sabha speaker
5.   Chief Justice of India

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.
b)  1, 3 and 4 only c)   1, 2 and 3 only d)  All of the above


45. In the regional music Pandavani of
Chattisgarh
a)  Tales from Mahabharata are sung as a ballad
b)  Farm songs are recited in unison by
peasants in harvest season c)   War gods are celebrated by powerful group singing and
dancing in temples
d)  A local poetic version of Bhagwat Gita is recited on auspicious religious occasions




46. To which of the following forest types does Bamboos, sal, shisham, sandalwood tree species predominantly belong to?
a)  Tropical evergreen
b)  Tropical dry deciduous
c)   Tropical moist deciduous d)  Tropical semi-evergreen




47. In the mid-oceanic ridges, sea floor spreading leads to
1.   Increases in age of rocks as one moves away from the crest.
2.   Thin layers of sediments on the ocean floor
3.   Occurrence of lava near the ridges

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 2 only
d)  All of the above

a)  2, 4 and 5 only

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                 Page 10
48. Elite Panel of International Cricket Council (ICC) Umpires is chosen by a)  The respective national cricket
boards
b)  The respective international cricket clubs to which the empires belong
c)   The ICC Umpires Selection Panel
d)  A committee consisting of the elite panel of empires of ICC




49. Hydrogen is an important nutrient for plant growth and development. Plants obtain hydrogen from
a)  Air
b)  Water c)   Soil
d)  Manures




50. With reference to a particular school of painting that originated in India, consider the following statements:
1.   The paintings, usually 17 by 11 inches (43 by 28 centimetres), were done on blank sheets, with no attempt made to fill in the backgrounds
2.   It was a watercolour painting produced in the 19th century in India by artists in the Calcutta marketplace for sale to pilgrims
3.   Most usually depicted were the popular Hindu deities, but scenes of contemporary life are also found

Identify the school of painting from below options:

a)  Pahari School of Painting b)  Bengal School of Painting
c)   Kalighat School of Painting
d)  None of the above
51.  Consider the following statements:
1.   The name Pakistan or Pak-stan was coined by Urdu poet Mohammad Iqbal
2.   The Urdu poet Mohammad Iqbal
apoke of the need for a “North- West Indian Muslim state” as an autonomous unit within a single, loose Indian federation

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 Only b)  2 Only c)   Both
d)  None






52. The Khoya Paya web platform lauched by Union government is for people to a)  Report, track and upload
information on missing children
b)  Report, track and upload information on missing/stolen/mishandled goods
c)   Report and track missing women in local regions
d)  Report and track women who are victims of trafficking and prostitution






53. Recent lowering of Repo rate by the
RBI may
1.   Immediately reduce money supply in the economy
2.   Make lending difficult for banks
3.   Lead to immediate reduction in deposit interest rates for people

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                 Page 11
a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   3 only
d)  None of the above




54. Environmental impact
assessment (EIA) is NOT concerned with
1.   Mitigating the developmental effects of a project
2.   Public participation in evaluating
projects
3.   Social impact of a project

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   3 only
d)  1 and 3 only




55. Consider the following statements:
1.   Defence was one of the many reasons why the British took upon themselves the task of town planning from the early years of their rule in Bengal
2.   The Fort William was Calcutta‟s
first significant town planning measure

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 Only b)  2 Only c)   Both
d)  None
56. Which of the following differentiate an ordinary committee from a Parliamentary committee?
1.   It is appointed or elected by the House or nominated by the Speaker/Chairman
2.   It works under the direction of the
Speaker/Chairman.
3.   It presents its report directly to the
President of India.
4.  It is assisted by the Central
Secretariat.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 4 only
d)  All of the above




57. Consider the following about Green
Climate Fund (GCF).
1.   It was established under United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP).
2.   It is aimed at achieving the goal set
out by United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).
3.   It is a mechanism to redistribute money from the developed to the developing world.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above







http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                 Page 12



58. Which one of the following lakes is a salt water lake?
a)  Sambhar
b)  Wular c)   Dal
d)  Loktak




59. As per the Constitution, which of the following is/are NOT a part of the Union Executive?
1.   Vice-President
2.   Attorney General of India
3.   Non-cabinet Ministers
4.  Cabinet Secretary

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  2, 3 and 4 only b)  1 and 4 only
c)   2 and 3 only
d)  4 only




60. Which of the following is/are the eligibility criteria for the office of the Prime Minister?
1.   He should not have been a former
President of India.
2.   He should have been directly elected by the people of India.
3.   He should be the leader of a political party.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   3 only
d)  None of the above
61. Consider the following statements.
1.   Fiscal deficit always leads to inflation in the economy.
2.   Supply side bottlenecks in the economy are caused by low fiscal deficit.

Which of the above is/are true?

a)  1 only b)  2 only
c)   Both 1 and 2 d)  None




62. Gene therapy is a collection of methods that allows correction of a gene defect. It can NOT be administered in
1.   Children
2.   Old age people
3.   Human embryos

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 2 only
d)  It can be administered in all.




63. Consider the following about the Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) recently in news.
1.   The virus causing it comes from bats.
2.   People can be infected after close contact with victims via a respiratory route.
3.   The disease vector has not been firmly established.
4.  Till date there is no vaccine available to prevent it.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                 Page 13
a)  1 and 4 only b)  2 and 3 only
c)   1, 2 and 4 only
d)  All of the above




64. Which one of the following was/were prominent among the Kannada Vachana Sahitya movement?
1.   Basavanna
2.   Akka Mahadevi
3.   Allama Prabhu
4.  Kannappa Nayanar

Choose the correct answer using the codes below:

a)  1,2 and 4 Only b)  1 and 3 Only
c)   1,2 and 3 Only d)  All




65. Consider the following about the effects of Fluoride in water.
1.   Its deficiency in drinking water can
cause tooth decay.
2.   Excess Fluoride concentration in water causes brown mottling of teeth and damage to bones.
3.   Fluoride concentration in water is
also related to „blue-baby‟
syndrome.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.
the energy of sunlight that falls on their leaves and convert it into food energy. When the plants are consumed at the higher trophic levels,  plant‟s stored energy is lost in
1.   Heat to environment
2.   Digestion of the food
3.   Growth and development of the organism

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 2 only
d)  All of the above




67. The government can stabilize or boost the economy by which of the following measures?
1.   Tweaking monetary policy
2.   Providing fiscal stimulus
3.   Welfare transfers

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   2 only
d)  All of the above

a)  1 and 3 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 2 only
d)  All of the above




66. The green plants in a terrestrial ecosystem capture a little fraction of

68. The legitimacy of Special Drawing Rights (SDR) being used for international transactions comes from
1.   IMF authorising its use
2.   Nations willing to use it
3.   Nearly constant value of the SDR

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                 Page 14
a)  1 and 3 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 2 only
d)  All of the above




69. Consider the following.
1.   Growth in the fraction of those who can work and are looking for it
2.   Growth in the fraction of those who find work
3.   Growth in the fraction of those
employed in organized sector

Which of the above correspond correctly with
„Labour Force Participation rate‟ and
„Employment Rate‟?

a)  1 and 2 respectively b)  2 and 1 respectively c)   1 and 3 respectively d)  2 and 3 respectively




70. The system of progressive taxation in the country is in accordance with the a)  Directive principles of State Policy b)  Fundamental Rights
c)   Preamble
d)  All of the above




71.  Consider the following statements:
1.   Jinnah called  for a “Direct Action Day” to press the League‟s demand for Pakistan after the failure of Cabinet Mission talks
2.   The Cabinet Mission plan envisaged creation of Muslim- majority provinces grouped as - Sind, Punjab and North-West Frontier Province into one group,
and Bengal and Assam into another
Which of the above statements is/are
INCORRECT?

a)  1 Only b)  2 Only c)   Both
d)  None




72. Crop rotation can be done by
1.   Growing different crops in different seasons
2.   Growing different crops in different fields
3.   Growing alternate crops in alternate rows in the same field

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only d)  1 only




73. To protect grains from degradation and pests like rats and insects, grains may be stored in
1.   Jute bags
2.   Metallic bins
3.   Clay pots
4.  Grass baskets

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 4 only
c)   1, 3 and 4 only d)  All of the above



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                 Page 15
74. The Indian model of government is also called  as the „Westminster‟ model of government because
a)  Indian constitution was made with the assistance of the British
b)  Indian constitution was modelled very closely on the lines of the British constitution
c)   India follows parliamen tary form of
government
d)  The popular parliamentary house is elected




75. Which of the following provisions ensure the independence and impartiality of the office of the Lok Sabha Speaker?
1.   He can be removed only by a resolution passed by the Lok Sabha by a special majority.
2.   His work and conduct cannot be discussed and criticised in the Lok Sabha except on a substantive motion.
3.   His salary and allowances are not subject to the annual vote of Parliament.
4.  He cannot vote in the first instance.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2, 3 and 4 only
c)   None of the above d)  All of the above




76. The High court has original jurisdiction with respect to which of these matters?
1.   Dispute between two adjoining states
2.   Selective cases involving
Constitutional Interpretation
3.   Disputes relating to the election of
MPs and MLAs
4.  Enforcement of fundamental rights of citizens

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2, 3 and 4 only c)   3 and 4 only
d)  All of the above




77.  In 1946, Mahatma Gandhi visited Noakhali and other riot-torn areas to stop communal violence. Today Noakhali is located in which of the following states?
a)  Bihar
b)  West Bengal c)   Assam
d)  None of the above




78. The Nubra, the Shyok and the Hunza are the tributaries of which of the following rivers?
a)  Brahmaputra
b)  Indus
c)   Jhelum d)  Chenab




79. The Finance Commission is required to make recommendations to the president of India in which of the following matters?
1.   Augmenting the resources of the
PSUs
2.   Augmenting the resources of the states to support local bodies


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                 Page 16
3.   Principles that should govern the grants-in-aid to the states by the Centre

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




80.Consider the following about Manipuri
Dances.
1.   It is a classical dance of India.
2.   In this, there are references to the dances of gods and goddesses who created the universe.
3.   It was introduced by a Vaishnava saint and reformer of Manipur.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 2 only
d)  All of the above




81. Which of the following travellers/scholars  was/were associated with the Vijayanagar Empire and Hampi?
1.   Colin Mackenzie
2.   John Marshall
3.   Alexander Greenlaw
4.  J.F. Fleet

Choose the correct answer using the codes below:

a)  1 and 2 Only
b)  1,2 and 3 Only c)   1,3 and 4 Only
d)  All




82. Consider the following about adjournment and prorogation of the house.
1.   Unlike Adjournment, Prorogation
of the house not only terminates not only the sitting but also the session of the House.
2.   Adjournment and prorogation both are done by the Speaker.
3.   Both do not affect the bills or any other business pending before the House.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




83. Consider the following about the
Union Public Service Commission.
1.   It is an advisory body to the
Government of India.
2.   It presents its annual report directly to the Parliament.
3.   An individual ministry or department has no power to reject the advice of the UPSC.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only d)  3 only

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                 Page 17
84. Which of the following factors affect the amount of insolation received by the Earth at different latitudes?
1.   Tilt of Earth‟s axis
2.   Rotation of earth
3.   Atmospheric circulation
4.  Cloudiness

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 4 only b)  2 and 3 only
c)   1, 3 and 4 only d)  All of the above




85. Consider the following statements.
1.   In general, as we proceed from the equator towards the poles, rainfall goes on decreasing steadily.
2.   The coastal areas of the world
receive greater amounts of rainfall than the interior of the continents.
3.   The rainfall is more over the oceans than on the landmasses of the world.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 2 only
d)  All of the above




86. Consider the following statements.
1.   A species with a high genetic diversity has greater chance to survive climate change.
2.   An ecosystem with high
biodiversity has a greater chance of adapting to environmental change.
a)  1 only b)  2 only
c)   Both 1 and 2
d)  None




87. The process in Eutrophication that is central to reducing biodiversity in a lake is?
a)  Decomposition of organic matter into inorganic matter by algae
b)  Breakdown of organic matter that
consumes oxygen from water
c)   Reduction of organic matter that is the feedstock of aquatic animals
d)  Abundance of flora in the lake
leading to habitat fragmentation and reduced food and space




88.Over half of the e-wastes generated in the developed world are exported to developing countries where some of the important metals can be obtained in the recycling process. These are
1.   Copper
2.   Iron
3.   Silicon
4.  Nickel
5.   Gold

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a.   All except 3 and 4 b.   All except 1 and 2 c.   All except 5
d.  All of the above

Which of the above is/are true?

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                 Page 18
89. Snow-blindness can be caused by exposure to
1.   Ultra-violet rays
2.   High intensity gamma rays
3.   High frequency X-rays

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 only
d)  3 only




90. Consider the following about
Petroleum.
1.   It is formed in absence of oxygen.
2.   While extracting from rocks, it is found above water.
3.   Petroleum deposits usually contain
natural gas deposits too.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




91. Consider the following about reserved and protected forests.
1.   Human activities like hunting and grazing are permitted here.
2.   Reserved forests have more stringent environmental regulations that protected forests.
3.   These areas are declared by the state governments.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




92. Which of the following rights have been granted to the Attorney General of India?
1.   Right to take part in the
proceedings in any of the houses of
Parliament
2.   Right to be a member of a
Parliamentary Committee
3.   Right to all the privileges and immunities granted to the MPs

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




93. Waterlogging is a major problem in agriculture because
1.   It draws salt to the surface of the
soil.
2.   It leads to salt being collected around the roots of the plants.
3.   It reduces the biological activity of microorganisms in the soil.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 2 only
d)  All of the above

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                 Page 19
94. Which of the following would constitute a case of bio-piracy?
1.   MNCs using the bio-resources of a
nation without proper authorization
2.   Individuals and companies patenting indigenous traditional community knowledge
3.   Poaching and hunting of animals to
extract economically expensive parts

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   1 and 2 only
d)  All of the above




95. Tadoba National Park which is known as Maharashtra's oldest and largest National Park is famous for
a)  Tiger Reserve
b)  Elephant Reserve c)   Chinkara Reserve d)  Crocodile Reserve




96. The Caral civilization was recently in news due to discovery of ancient statues. The civilization was present in a)  Columbia
b)  Mexico
c)   Peru
d)  Argentina




97. Fiscal accountability of the executive to the legislature is ensured by which of these?
1.   FRBM Act, 2003
2.   Annual Budgets
3.   Bi-annual Parliamentary financial review
4.  Motions and resolutions in the Lok
Sabha

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 4 only b)  2 and 4 only
c)   1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




98. The government will have to compulsorily borrow not only to finance its plan expenditure but also its non-plan expenditure (consumption requirements) in cases of
1.   Fiscal deficit
2.   Revenue deficit
3.   Primary deficit

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)   2 only
d)  3 only




99. Consider the following about carrier
INS Vikrant.
1.   It has been made in India after importing Russian technology.
2.   It is India‟s largest aircraft carrier.
3.   It will be positioned in the South
China Sea region.
4.  It is capable of being used as a stealth submarine also.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                 Page 20
a)  2 only
b)  1 and 3 only c)   1 and 4 only d)  2 and 3 only




100.           Adipurana,  a 10th-century
Kannada text written in Champu style,
a mix of prose and verse, dealing with the ten lives of the first tirthankara, Adinatha, was written by
a) Ranna b)  Janna c) Pampa d)  Ponna


























































http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                    INSIGHTS                                                                 Page 21
