    




INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK PRELIMINARY EXAM - 2015  


INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST - 22

GENERAL STUDIES  

PAPER-I

Time Allowed: 2 Hours                                                                                           Maximum Marks: 200  


INSTRUCTIONS
1.   IMMEDITELY AFTER THE COMMENCEMENT  OF THE EXAMINATION, YOU SHOULD
CHECK  THAT  THIS  TEST  BOOKLET   DOES  NOT  HAVE  ANY  UNPRINTED   OR  TORN  OR MISSING PAGES OR ITEMS, ETC. IF SO, GET IT REPLACED BY A COMPLETE TEST BOOKLET.
2.  You have to enter your Roll Number on the Test I Booklet in the Box provided alongside. DO NOT write anything else on the Test Booklet.

4.  This  Test  Booklet  contains  100  items  (questions).  Each  item  is  printed  only  in  English.  Each  item comprises four responses (answers). You will select the response which you want to mark on the Answer Sheet. In case you feel that there is more than one correct response, mark the response which you consider the best. In any case, choose ONLY ONE response for each item.
5.  You have to mark all your responses ONLY on the separate Answer Sheet provided.  See directions in the
Answer Sheet.
6.  All items carry equal marks.

7.  Before you proceed to mark in the Answer Sheet the response to various items in the Test Booklet, you have to fill in some particulars in the Answer Sheet as per instructions  sent to you with your Admission Certificate.

8.  After  you  have  completed  filling  in all your  responses  on the Answer  Sheet  and  the examination  has concluded, you should hand over to the Invigilator only the Answer Sheet. You are permitted to take away with you the Test Booklet.

9.  Sheets for rough work are appended in the Test Booklet at the end.
10.  Penalty for wrong answers :
THERE WILL BE PENALTY FOR WRONG ANSWERS MARKED BY A CANDIDATE IN THE OBJECTIVE TYPE QUESTION PAPERS.
(i)    There are four alternatives for the answer to every question. For each question for which a wrong answer has been given by the candidate, one-third of the marks assigned to that question will be deducted as penalty.
(ii)   If a candidate gives more than one answer, it will be treated as a wrong answer even if one of the given answers happens to be correct and there will be same penalty as above to that question.
(iii)     If a question is left blank, i.e., no answer is given by the candidate, there will be no penalty for that question.




    
http://insightsonindia.com


INSIGHTS  ON    INDIA    MOCK    TEST    SERIES    FOR    CIVIL    SERVICES    PRELIMINARY    EXAM    2015    
    



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Page  1    
    
    

1.   Indian art is deeply rooted in religion and it conduces to fulfilling the ultimate aim of life, ‘Liberation’. It means
a)  A vision of the divine
b)  Release from the cycle of birth and death
c)  out of body experience
d)  Release from all earthly bondage and resting in heaven




2.  Miniature painting in India existed in the form of illustrations to the religious texts in which of the following cults
1.   Buddhist
2.  Vaishnav
3.  Mughal
4.  Jain

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.



4.  Lomas rishi cave in Bihar is a typical example of early Indian cave architecture. If you happen to visit Lomas cave, which of these things may come to your notice?
1.   Entrance is a representation in
stone of a hut entrance
2.  No timber has been used in the cave
3.  A carved frieze of stone-made elephants

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above

a)  1 and 4 only b)  3 only
c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




3.  Consider the following statements.
1.   Mughal paintings were not secular, while other schools like Pahari had secular paintings.
2.  Art of stone masonry and stone
carving were imported in Ashoka's times from Persia.
3.  Timber was not used in Harappan architecture.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  2 only

5.  Consider the following statements about Buddhist stupas.
1.   One cannot enter the stupas.
2.  They were constructed by royal patronage when Buddha was teaching.
3.  Jataka stories have also been
engraved on stupas.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




6.  With reference to ecosystem, consider the following statements:
1.   It is self regulating
2.  It is self sustaining

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Page  2    
    
    


3.  Biosphere can also be called as an ecosystem


9.  Consider the following statements about Nalanda.
1.   This place was visited by Buddha
Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 and 3 Only b)  All
c)  2 and 3 Only d)  1 & 2 Only




7.   Consider the following statements about the inscriptions found at Aihole, Karnataka.
1.   Sanskrit as well as Tamil has been used in the inscriptions.
2.  The inscription contains the description of historical defeats of kingdoms.
3.  There is mention about the
poet Kalidasa in the inscriptions.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




8.  In Indian architecture, Mahabalipuram is known to have
1.   Rock cut temples
2.  Monolithic structures
3.  Structural temples
4.  Limestone caves

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only
b)  1, 3 and 4 only c)  2 and 4 only
d)  1, 2 and 3 only
and Mahavira.
2.  Nalanda was an important centre of
Pala sculptures.
3.  Nalanda was a principal centre of
Mahayana (Buddhism) learning.
4.  The Chinese Pilgrims Huien Tsang and Fa-hien studied at Nalanda.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only
b)  1, 3 and 4 only c)  2 and 4 only
d)  All of the above




10. Consider the following features of temple architecture.
1.   The barrel-shaped tower does not crown the sanctum sanctorum or thegarbha-griha
2.  There is a Vimana - temple tower
over the main shrine
3.  The style consists of three distinct types of temples - Rekha Deula, Pidha Deula and Khakhara Deula.

The above mentioned features are found in the temple architecture of which state in India?

a)  Orissa
b)  TamilNadu c)  Karnataka
d)  Madhya Pradesh




11. Which of the following different styles of architecture have been imbibed in Hindu temple architecture?
1.   Champa architecture
2.  Gadag architecture
3.  Maru-Gurjara architecture

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Page  3    
    
    


4.  Khmer architecture
5.  Sreekovil architecture


14. Consider the following about the Pala dynasty.
1.   It ruled eastern-south Asia from 8th
Choose the correct answer using the codes
below.

a)  All except 1 and 4 b)  All except 2 and 3 c)  All except 5
d)  All of the above




12. Consider the following about the
Dravidian style of temple architecture.
1.   It is always square in plan.
2.  Mandapas always cover and
precede the door leading to the cell.
3.  Pillared halls are an invariable feature of temples.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




13. Which of the following is NOT an
Abiotic component of an ecosystem?
1.   Water
2.  Soil
3.  Humidity
4.  Atmosphere
5.  Radiation

Choose the correct answer using the codes below:
-12th century.
2.  Buddhism and Hinduism were subjugated and suppressed under Pala dynasty.
3.  The Pala school of art flourished in the Magadha region of Southern Bihar.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




15. Which of the following features were infused by Islamic architecture in India?
1.   Use of concrete as a factor of construction
2.  Use of lime mortar as a base for decoration
3.  Use of arches and vaults in
construction

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above

a)  1 Only b)  3 Only c)  5 Only d)  None

16. Which of these are the features of Indo-Islamic architecture, but not Hindu architecture?
1.   utilisation of kiosks (chhatris)
2.  tall towers (minars)
3.  half-domed double portals
4.  human worship in decorations and embroidery

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Page  4    
    
    
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 3 only b)  1 and 3 only
c)  2 and 4 only
d)  All of the above




17. Consider the following decorative elements.
1.   Pink sandstone
2.  Octagonal forms
3.  Shallow water-channels
4.  Raising of platforms
5.  Rhythm in structures

Which of the above are features of Persian architecture?

a)  3 and 4 only
b)  1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 c)  1, 2 and 5 only d)  2, 3 and 4 only




18. With reference to migration of an animal species, consider the following statements:
1.   It is a phenomena of short distance
seasonal movement into new region
2.  A young Atlantic salmon leaving
the river of their birth when they have reached a few inches in size can be considered as true migration

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 Only b)  2 Only c)  Both
d)  None


19. Which of these statements is NOT correct about the Indus Valley civilization?
1.   People worshipped the Mother
Goddess or Goddess of fertility.
2.  Dancing was a part of the culture at
Indus valley.
3.  The trade and cultural contacts
were restricted to the other cultures in the Indus valley.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  3 only b)  1 only c)  2 only
d)  All of the above




20.The abacus of Lion capital at Sarnath is supported by a bell-shaped base consisting of a lotus
with dharmachakra. It may best symbolize
a)  Victory of the good over evil b)  Victory of righteousness over
physical force
c)  Path of renunciation in Dharma
d)  All life is governed by the same set of laws




21. With reference to Saprotrophic nutrition, consider the following statements:
1.    It involves processing of dead or
decayed organic matter
2.  Organisms involved usually are protozoa

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 Only b)  Both
c)  None
d)  2 Only

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Page  5    
    
    




22. Buddha is never represented in human form in Buddhist art before the Christian era, as his spirituality was considered too abstract for the purpose. Which of the following forms was he represented in then?
1.   Empty throne
2.  Royal umbrella
3.  Wheel of Law
4.  Triratna symbol


25. “Instead of the classical dignity, sobriety and simplicity, the sculpture is now more and more tending towards ornamentation, creating highly ornate art objects, with strange and unusual imaginary creatures, such as half human, half monsters, etc.” This transformation in sculpture style holds true for the shift in
a)  Gupta sculpture to Medieval
sculpture
b)  Buddhist sculpture to Gupta

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  2 and 3 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  1 and 4 only
d)  All of the above




23. In the Gandhara school of art, Buddha as seated in the typically Indian Yogic posture is a sculpture style that has been borrowed from
a)  Hellenistic tradition of art
b)  Gothic tradition of art c)  Roman sculpture style
d)  None of the above
sculpture
c)  Medieval sculpture to Modern sculpture
d)  Buddhist sculpture to Modern sculpture




26. Consider the following statements about the Kailasa temple at Ellora.
1.   It was built by the Chalukyas.
2.  It is based on Dravidian style of architecture.
3.  It is a rock-cut temple.
4.  It is a part of the Ellora caves.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.




24. In Buddhism, the word Bodhisattva is used for the one who has
a)  Attained enlightenment but is not ready for Nirvana
b)  Attained enlightenment, but is not seeking Nirvana and has decided to teach others out of his compassion
c)  Seeking enlightenment
d)  Who became enlightened and then liberated from the cycle of birth and death

a)  2 and 3 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  1 and 4 only
d)  2, 3 and 4 only




27. Consider the following depictions.
1.   Ravana shaking Mount Kailasha and Siva is pressing down the mountain with his foot.
2.  King of the Naga and his queen
seated on a throne attended by a hand maiden
3.  Krishna teaching Arjuna in the
middle of Mahabharata



http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Page  6    
    
    
Sculptures depicting which of the above can be found at Ellora?

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above


28. Consider the following about Pala paintings.
1.   It is characterised by sinuous line
and subdued tones of colour.
2.  It is totally disconnected from the classical art of Ajanta.
3.  The Pala art flourished under the royal patronage of the Mughals.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 only
d)  All of the above




29. Consider the following statements:
1.   Omnivores are considered as secondary consumers in a food chain
2.  Herbivores are considered as
tertiary consumers
3.  Carnivores are considered as primary consumers in a food chain

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  2 and 3 Only b)  1 Only
c)  1 & 2 Only
d)  All




30. Students and pilgrims in from various countries studies in Buddhist monasteries. They took back to their countries examples of Pala Buddhist


art, in the form of bronzes and manuscripts which helped to carry the Pala style to
1.   Nepal
2.  Java
3.  Tibet
4.  Burma
5.  Sri Lanka

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 , 3 and 4 only b)  2, 4 and 5 only c)  1, 3 and 5 only d)  All of the above


31. Consider the following statements. Assertion (A): Despite Jainism being present
in Western India, no works motivated by
Jainism are found in Western Indian art.

Reason (R): Jainism did not receive any royal patronage by the Kings of the Chalukya Dynasty who ruled Gujarat and parts of Rajasthan and Malwa.

In the context of the statements above, which of these is true?

a)  A and R both are true, and R is the correct explanation for A.
b)  A and R both are true, and R is the
NOT the correct explanation for A. c)  A is correct, R is incorrect.
d)  A and R both are incorrect




32. Deccani school of painting made a significant contribution to the development of the Mughal style in North India. The centres of Deccani school were in
1.   Ahmednagar
2.  Bijapur
3.  Golconda

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Page  7    
    
    


4.  Hyderabad
5.  Tanjore


a)  1 and 2 only
b)  1, 3 and 4 only c)  2, 3 and 4 only
Choose the correct answer using the codes
below.

a)  1 , 3 and 4 only b)  2, 4 and 5 only c)  1, 3 and 5 only d)  All of the above




33. Consider the following statements about the art of painting in Rajasthani and Pahari regions.
1.   These were largely secular in
character.
2.  They drew inspiration from Mughal school of paintings.
3.  Paintings are marked by light colours and bold drawings.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 only
d)  2 only




34. Consider the following statements about the ‘Wildlife institute of India’.
1.   It is an autonomous body.
2.  It is under the Ministry of
Environment and Forests.
3.  It has recently launched an initiative for allowing PSU and Companies to adopt endangered species.
4.  It has proposed that wildlife
conservation efforts spending be counted under Corporate Social responsibility (CSR).

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.
d)  All of the above




35. Consider the following statements:
1.   This biome is home to many species of grasses such as purple needlegrass, wild oats, foxtail, ryegrass, and buffalo grass.
2.  Rain in these biomes usually occurs
in the late spring and early summer
3.  These are known as Pampas in
South America

To which of the following biomes, are the above statements related to?

a)  Savannah Biome
b)  Tropical Grasslands
c)  Temperate Grasslands d)  Taiga




36. 20th Law Commission’s recent reports provide several recommendations to end discrimination against leprosy patients. Consider the legal state of affairs regarding leprosy.
1.   Leprosy is a valid ground for
divorce under personal laws of
India.
2.  Leprosy patients are banned from Contesting election in local bodies in some states.
3.  Lepers Act permits segregation of
lepers into separate asylums.

Choose the correct statements using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Page  8    
    
    




37. Consider the following statements about the recently launched Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana.
1.   It is applicable to people of all age
groups.
2.  Bank account is mandatory for taking benefit from the scheme.
3.  The insurance will be offered by private insurance companies which
will be regulated by LCI and IRDA.


3.  Creosote bush is one of the examples of desert plants

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 and 3 Only b)  2 and 3 Only c)  1 and 2 Only d)  All




40.Consider the following statements.

Choose the correct statements using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 only
d)  All of the above




38. RBI has recently mandated the banks to keep side emergency fund called “Counter cyclical capital buffer”. What purposes will be served by this?
1.   It will restrict the banking sector
from indiscriminate lending in the periods of excess credit growth.
2.  It will help RBI to manage foreign
exchange reserves better. Which of the above is/are correct?
a)  1 only b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None




39. With reference to desert plants, consider the following statements:
1.   They have a short life and the
capacity to leave behind very hardy forms of propagation
2.  They usually have small leaves and
tiny roots to save water
Assertion (A): Ocean acts as the largest carbon sink on earth.

Reason (R): The difference in partial pressure of the CO2 between seawater and air facilitate gaseous exchange.

In the context of the statements above, which of these is true?

a)  A and R both are true, and R is the correct explanation for A.
b)  A and R both are true, and R is the
NOT the correct explanation for A. c)  A is correct, R is incorrect.
d)  A and R both are incorrect




41. One way to increase the carbon sequestration efficiency of the oceans is to add micrometre-sized iron
particles in a certain form in the ocean. The sequestration efficiency of oceans increases because
a)  Iron has the effect of stimulating growth of plankton in the ocean.
b)  It increases the rate of dissolution of CO2 with ocean water.
c)  Adding Iron increases the surface
density of the Ocean allowing for easier gas exchange.
d)  Iron helps increase the
photosynthesis rate of large marine plants.


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Page  9    
    
    




42. The dissolved carbon dioxide is important in the ocean because
1.   It regulates PH of seawater and
thereby health of marine organisms.
2.  It helps marine organisms form
calcareous material.
3.  It helps Phytoplanktons in photosynthesis.


a)  1, 2 and 3 only b)  3 and 4 only
c)  1 only
d)  All of the above




45. Using bio-refining, It is possible to obtain bio-ethanol from
1.   Sea weeds
2.  Corn
3.  Rice straw
Choose the correct statements using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




43. With reference to atmospheric gases, consider the following statements:
1.   The percentage of carbon dioxide in
atmosphere is more than that of argon gas
2.  No other gas found above
troposphere zone of the atmosphere

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 Only b)  2 Only c)  Both
d)  None




44. The Critically Endangered Great Indian Bustards is found in which of the following states of India?
1.   Rajasthan
2.  Gujarat
3.  Maharashtra
4.  Haryana

Choose the correct statements using the codes below.
4.  Coconut
5.  Water hyacinth

Choose the correct statements using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 5 only b)  3 and 4 only
c)  1 and 2 only
d)  All of the above




46. Consider the following benefits.
1.   Reducing coastal eutrophication
2.  Cutting down on global warming
3.  Obtaining fertilizers

Which of these can come from growing extensive sea weeds in the ocean?

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




47. The National Green Tribunal (NGT) can deliver justice only in matters pertaining to which of the following subjects?
1.   Air pollution
2.  Climate change
3.  Biodiversity
4.  Conservation of Water

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  10    
    
    
Choose the correct statements using the codes below.

a)  1, 3 and 4 only b)  3 and 4 only
c)  1 and 2 only
d)  All of the above




48. In high temperature high humidity weather, why does it appear that we are sweating more profusely as compared to even hotter but dry weather situations?
a)  Sweat doesn’t evaporate quickly
due to the high relative humidity outside
b)  In hot humid conditions, hypothalamus (gland controlling secretion) becomes more active
c)  Human body releases more water
in conditions of high humidity
d)  High humidity blocks the secretion glands on the skin and the humidity sticks on the skin




49. Consider the following statements about 3D printing technology.
1.   Objects produced cannot be circular in shape.
2.  Ultraviolet light lasers are used in
the printing process of adding layers.
3.  It cannot be used to produce
components used in aerospace.
4.  Human organs can be produced using 3D bio-printers.

Choose the correct statements using the codes below.

a)  2 and 4 only b)  3 and 4 only c)  1 and 2 only
d)  All of the above




50. The Rajya Sabha recently passed The
Rights of Transgender Persons Bill,
2014. It provides for
1.   Reservation of transgenders in public educational institutions and government jobs.
2.  Establishment of a special
transgender rights court.
3.  Right for transgenders to adopt children

Choose the correct statements using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




51. With reference to lentic ecosystem, consider the following statements:
1.   A wetland ecosystem is an example of lentic ecosystem
2.  In a lentic ecosystem, bacteria are
present only in the benthic zone i.e. which comprises the bottom and shore regions.

Which of the above stateents is/are correct?

a)  None b)  Both
c)  1 Only d)  2 Only




52. Consider the following about E- Samiksha designed by National Informatics Centre (NIC).
1.   It is a part of the Digital India
program.
2.  It is mandatory for all the states to adopt and integrate this system in their governance model.


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  11    
    
    


3.  Using E-Samiksha, District Magistrates can get directly in touch with the panchayats and block heads.


3.  It can chase enemy aircraft at supersonic speeds.
4.  It has been developed indigenously.

Choose the correct statements using the codes
Choose the correct statements using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only d)  1 only
below.



a)  1 and 3 only b)  1 and 4 only c)  2 and 4 only
d)  2, 3 and 4 only




53. Consider the following about the INS Visakhapatnam.
1.   It is built entirely of Indian steel.
2.  It is capable of launching BrahMos missiles from its deck.
3.  It has been designed and processed in Israel.
4.  The ship does not have a weapon
system of its own.

Choose the correct statements using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 4 only c)  2 and 4 only
d)  1, 2 and 3 only




54. The remora species that rides attached to sharks and other fishes is a best example of
a)  Mutualism b)  Parasitism
c)  Commensalism
d)  None of the above




55. Consider the following about the
Indian missile ‘Astra’.
1.   It is a land to air missile.
2.  This is the smallest of the missiles developed by DRDO.
56. With reference to Profundal Zone of pond ecosystem, consider the following statements:
1.   It is well lit zone
2.  This is the main photosynthetic body of the lake.
3.  This zone produces food and
oxygen

Which of the above statements is/are
INCORRECT?

a)  1 and 2 Only b)  2 and 3 Only c)  1 and 3 Only d)  All




57. As per a recent survey less than 30% eligible women got the benefits of Indira Gandhi Matritva Sahyog Yojana (IGMSY). Consider the following about IGMSY.
1.   It provides partial wage compensation to pregnant and lactating women.
2.  It is applicable only upto a maximum of two children from a mother.
3.  It aims at promoting institutional deliveries.

Choose the correct statements using the codes below.

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  12    
    
    


a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




58. The Health minister recently launched Mission ‘Indradhanush for vaccination against 7 preventable diseases. It covers
1.   Tuberculosis
2.  Malaria
3.  Whooping cough
4.  Rotavirus
5.  Rubella
6.  Tetanus



In the above questions, it refers to:
a) Antibiosis b) Parasitism c)  Predation
d)  Colonisation




61. Prime Minister recently inaugurated India’s Healthcare Tourism Portal. It will be useful for Medical tourism as it provides information on
1.   Ayurveda and wellness centres
2.  Details such as costs related to treatment in hospitals
3.  Visa procedures
4.  Travel and stay
Choose the correct statements using the codes
below.

a)  1, 2, 4 and 6 only b)  2, 4 and 5 only
c)  1, 3 and 6 only d)  All of the above




59. The earthquakes near the Himalayan region are generally triggered due to the collision/friction between which of the following tectonic plates?
a)  Indo-Eurasian plate and Central
Asian plate
b)  Eurasian plate and Australian plate c)  Indian plate and Eurasian plate
d)  Indian plate and Central Asian plate





60.“It is a biological interaction between two or more organisms that is detrimental to at least one of them; it can also be an antagonistic association between an organism and the metabolic substances produced by
another.”

Choose the correct statements using the codes below.

a)  1, 2, and 3 only b)  2 and 4 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above



62. Consider the following statements:
1.    It is a partly enclosed coastal body of brackish water with one or more rivers or streams flowing into it.
2.  They form a transition zone
between river environments and maritime environments

The above statements describe which of the following given geographical features?

a)  Isthmus b)  Peninsula c)  Estuary
d)  None of the above

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  13    
    
    


63. India and Bangladesh have decided to take concerted conservation efforts to protect the rare spectacled Langur. Consider the following statements about it.
1.   It is found in Patharia Hills Reserve
Forest.
2.  The primary focus of this conservation effort is to preserve the habitat for the survival of the primates.
3.  It is the ancestor of the endangered
Hoolock Gibbon and Golden
Langur.


1.   The report was published by the World Health Organization (WHO).
2.  The study for the report was done
by the United Nations intergovernmental wing.
3.  The happiness report takes account of the social freedom and
corruption levels in        the country.
4.  The report will be placed before the United Nations general assembly for a resolution and further discussion.

Choose the correct statements using the codes
Choose the correct statements using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above
below.



a)  1 and 2 only b)  3 and 4 only
c)  1, 3 and 4 only d)  All of the above




64. Consider the following statements:
1.   In interactions in a biotic community, colonization is considered as a Positive interaction between species
2.  In interactions in a biotic community, competition is considered as a Negative interaction between species

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 Only b)  2 Only c)  Both
d)  None




65. India was placed at 117th position in the recently released World Happiness Report 2015 among the 158 studied nations. Consider the following.
66. With reference to micronutrients, consider the following statements:
1.   Iodine, vitamin and iron are some of the micronutrients needed for humans
2.  Zinc, one of the micronutrients
needed by plants, is necessary for osmosis and ionic balance

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  None b)  2 Only c)  Both
d)  1 Only




67. Consider the following statements about the occurrence of Volcanoes.
1.   There are no active volcanoes in the coastal belt of South America.
2.  The Andes Mountains and
Indonesian region come under the
Ring of Fire.

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  14    
    
    

3.  Volcanoes are also found in Mid- oceanic ridges.

Choose the correct statements using the codes below.

Choose the correct statements using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




68. With reference to energy flow in an ecosystem, consider the following statements:
1.   All energy needed by living
organisms is provided by reduction process of sugar through respiration and release of energy
2.  The loss of energy through body
heat is far greater in warm-blooded animals, which must eat much
more frequently than those that are cold-blooded
3.  The energy is passed on
from trophic level to trophic level and each time about 10% of the energy is lost

Which of the above statements is/are
INCORRECT?

a)  1 and 2 Only b)  1 Only
c)   3 Only
d)  1 and 3 Only


69. India has emerged as the fourth largest supplier of generic medicines to the United States. Some countries impose stringent regulatory measures on import of generic medicines from
India. Which of these regions do not allow such imports?
1.   West Asia
2.  Africa
3.  Europe
a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  3 only
d)  None of the above




70. Under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) regime
1.   Developing countries do not have any obligation to share reports about HFCs
2.  Developed nations are bound to cut green house gas emissions.

Which of the above is/are true?

a)  1 only b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2 d)  None


71. With reference to deciduous forests, consider the following statements:
1.   They lose their leaves to conserve water or to better survive winter weather conditions
2.  They have xylem vessels with larger
diameters and therefore a greater rate of transpiration (and hence CO2 uptake as this occurs
when stomata are open) during the summer growth period.

Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 Only b)  2 Only c)  Both
d)  None

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  15    
    
    


72. Mosquitoes are more attracted to some human than others. Which of the following factors play a role in it?
1.   Body odour
2.  Amount of CO2 in exhaled air
3.  Body heat
4.  Colour of clothing


a)  North-east Monsoons b)  Cyclonic rainfall
c)  Convectional rainfall
d)  Both (a) and (c)




76. Consider the following statements

Choose the correct statements using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 4 only b)  1 and 3 only
c)  3 only
d)  All of the above


73. The basic cause of Monsoon type of climate is
a)  Difference in the heating and
cooling of land and sea
b)  Deflection of trade winds by coriolis force
c)  Change of seasons frequently in various parts of a sub-continent
d)  The periodic occurrence of warm
currents near oceans that border continents




74. With reference to ecological pyramids, cnsider the following statements:
1.   The bottom of the pyramid represents tertiary producers
2.  The primary producers take energy
from the environment in the form of sunlight and are located at the apex of the pyramid
Which of the above statements is/are correct?
a)  1 Only b)  2 Only c)  Both
d)  None




75. For the survival of winter cereals sown in Punjab, which of the following rains
is vital?
about Tropical Marine climate of
India.
1.   It is found at eastern coasts of
India.
2.  It receives steady rainfall from trade winds all the time.
3.  It is not prone to tropical cyclones.
4.  Trees found in this climate region are normally deciduous.

Choose the correct statements using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 3 only b)  1 and 3 only
c)  2 only
d)  1, 3 and 4 only




77. Consider the following statements.
1.   The eastern coasts of continents within the tropics have much heavier rainfall than the interior or the west coasts.
2.  There is a marked difference in the
temperature between the east and west coasts of countries in latitude
20 degrees to 35 degrees north.

The above is because of the effect of

a)  Eastern cyclonic disturbances in the tropical areas
b)  Jet streams in tropical areas
c)  Presence of warm currents on the eastern coasts at the tropics
d)  Continentality due to several
enclosed areas in the tropics

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  16    
    
    


78. Burmese Python in Florida state of
USA is considered as a)  Invasive species
b)  Non-invasive species c)  Migratory species
d)  None of the above




79. Consider the following statements about rainfalls in various parts of the world.
1.   Both the length of the rainy season
and total amount of rainfall decreases appreciably from the equatorial region polewards towards the desert fringes.
2.  In the Southern hemisphere, rainy season is during the Southern Summer.
3.  The Sudan type of climate has heavy rainfalls due to extreme diurnal ranges.


81. Amongst the mid-latitude deserts, many are found on plateaux and are at a considerable distance from the sea. Which of the following are such deserts?
1.   Gobi
2.  Turkestan
3.  Patagonian
4.  Sahara

Choose the correct statements using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  1 and 4 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




82. The mid-latitude deserts that are sheltered by high mountains around them receive rainfall by
1.   Depressions

Choose the correct statements using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  1 and 2 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




80.The aridity of the hot deserts is mainly due to the effects of
1.   Off-shore trade winds
2.  Off-shore cold currents
3.  Continentality

Choose the correct statements using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  1 and 2 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above
2.  Convectional rainfall
3.  Orographic rainfall

Choose the correct statements using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  1 and 2 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




83. The Warm temperate western margin climate is found in relatively few areas of the world. The basic cause of this type of climate is
a)  Shifting of wind belts
b)  Change in the direction of cold currents
c)  Presence of cyclonic depressions d)  Regular visit of Polar winds to the
regions




http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  17    
    
    


84. Consider the following statements:
1.   At the lowest trophic level (the bottom of the food chain), plants convert about 1% of the sunlight they receive into chemical energy.
2.  The efficiency with which energy or
biomass is transferred from one trophic level to the next is called the ecological efficiency.
3.  Consumers at each level convert on
average only about 10% of the chemical energy in their food to their own organic tissue


a)  1 and 3 only b)  1 and 2 only c)  2 and 3 only d)  3 only




87. Chinook, a famous local wind, comes on the eastern slopes of Rockies in Canada. It is useful because
1.   It makes the snow covered pastures
grazable.
2.  It is a hot wind and warms the local
Which of the above statements is/are correct?

a)  1 and 3 Only b)  2 and 3 Only c)  1 and 3 Only
d)  All
climate.
3.  It brings moderate amount of rainfall with it.

Choose the correct statements using the codes below.


85. The prominence of local winds around the Mediterranean Sea can be explained by which of the following topographic factors?
1.   High Alps in the North
2.  Open Atlantic on the West
3.  Cold air masses from the continental interiors
4.  Sahara deserts in the South

Choose the correct statements using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  1 and 4 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above


86. Which of the following kinds of vegetation are NOT likely to be found in the Mediterranean regions?
1.   Evergreen coniferous forests
2.  Grass
3.  Deciduous forests

Choose the correct statements using the codes below.
a)  1 and 3 only b)  1 and 2 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above


88.Which of the following is/are autotrophs?
1.   Cyanobacteria
2.  Red Algae
3.  Fungi
4.  Green Algae

Choose the correct answer using the codes below:

a)  1 and 2 Only b)  2 and 3 Only c)  3 and 4 Only
d)  1, 2 and 4 Only


89. The recent turnaround of the external sector and the lowering of the current Account deficit can be attributed to which of the following factors?
1.   Lowering of international prices of
crude petroleum
2.  Restrictions on gold imports
3.  Trade diversification process

http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  18    
    
    
Choose the correct statements using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  1 and 2 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above


90.Consider the following statements:
1.   Predators are usually located at the third trophic level in an ecological pyramid
2.  Decomposers are part of the first trophic level of the food chain

Which of the above statemens is/are
INCORRECT?

a)  1 Only b)  2 Only c)  Both
d)  None


91. Since the recent economic slowdown in India, which of the following imports items has registered a decline in growth?
1.   Capital goods
2.  Crude oil related products
3.  Textile and allied products

Choose the correct statements using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  1 and 2 only c)  2 and 3 only d)  1 only




92. With reference to CO2 in ecosystem, consider the following statements:
1.   The concentration of Carbon
Dioxide is more than oxygen in water
2.  Rising CO2 will stimulate plant growth in an ecosystem


Which of the above statements is/are correct?
a)  1 Only b)  2 Only c)  Both
d)  None



93. A keystone species is a species that
a)  Has high biomass and crucial role in a community
b)  Has low biomass but huge role in a community
c)  Has minimal effect on an ecosystem even if its loss is huge
d)  Dwells as parasite on larger
animals


94. Consider the following statements about the state of economic affairs since the beginning of the millennium.
1.   Increasing use of imported inputs
has generally caused a decline in the domestic value added share of total exports.
2.  The foreign value added share in
exports has increased indicating deepening of the process of international production fragmentation.

Which of the above is are/true?

a)  1 only b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None




95. Which of the following schemes had been implemented as a part of India’s Foreign Policy?
1.   Focus Market Scheme
2.  Vishesh Krishi and Gram Udyog
Yoajana
3.  Focus Product schemes
4.  Market Development Assistance


http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  19    
    
    
Choose the correct statements using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  1 and 4 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above


96. An ecotone is a
a)  Transition area between two biomes
b)  Region where a biome ends
c)  Region where ecology is protected from external influences
d)  None of the above


97. Indian trade portal was launched at the end of last year aimed at providing vital information to Indian Industry. Which of the following information will be provided by the portal?
1.   Most favoured nation (MFN) tariff
2.  Details of all Trade agreements in force
3.  Platform for foreign buyers to contact Indian suppliers

Choose the correct statements using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  1 and 2 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above


98. The Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA), which was also endorsed by India at the Ninth Ministerial Conference of WTO, is basically aimed at
1.   Use of electronic payments
2.  Risk management techniques
3.  Giving all member nations of WTO
the Most favoured Nation (MFN) Status


4.  Removal of ban on certain commodities for all member nations

Choose the correct statements using the codes below.

a)  1 and 3 only b)  1 and 4 only c)  2 and 3 only d)  1 and 2 only


99. If the Indian rupee depreciates against Dollar persistently for a long period of time, yet it will not affect India’s overall trade scenario if
a)  Effective exchange rate does not
change much
b)  Real effective exchange rate does not change much
c)  Nominal effective exchange rate does not change much
d)  Foreign exchange reserves remain constant


100.          The Capital account in the external sector consists of
1.   External assistance
2.  External Commercial Borrowings
(ECBs)
3.  Short-term debt
4.  NRI deposits
5.  Invisibles
6.  Portfolio investment

Choose the correct statements using the codes below.

a)  All except 2, 5 and 6 b)  All except 3 and 4
c)  All except 1 and 6
d)  All except 5




http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  20    
    
    



    





































































http://insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Page  21    
    
