


    
                       




INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK PRELIMINARY EXAM - 2015

INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST - 32
GENERAL STUDIES
PAPER-I
Time Allowed: 2 Hours                                                                                          Maximum Marks: 200

INSTRUCTIONS
1.   IMMEDITELY AFTER THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE EXAMINATION, YOU SHOULD
CHECK THAT THIS TEST BOOKLET DOES NOT HAVE ANY UNPRINTED OR TORN OR MISSING PAGES OR ITEMS, ETC. IF SO, GET IT REPLACED BY A COMPLETE TEST BOOKLET.
2. You have to enter your Roll Number on the Test Booklet in the Box provided alongside. DO NOT Write anything else on the Test Booklet.

4. This Test Booklet contains 100 items (questions). Each item is printed only in English. Each item comprises four responses (answers). You will select the response which you want to mark on the Answer Sheet. In case you feel that there is more than one correct response, mark the response which you consider the best. In any case, choose ONLY ONE response for each item.
5. You have to mark all your responses ONLY on the separate Answer Sheet provided. See directions in the Answer Sheet.
6. All items carry equal marks.

7. Before you proceed to mark in the Answer Sheet the response to various items in the Test Booklet, you have to fill in some particulars in the Answer Sheet as per instructions sent to you with your Admission Certificate.

8. After  you  have  completed  filling  in  all  your  responses  on  the  Answer  Sheet  and  the examination has concluded, you should hand over to the Invigilator only the Answer Sheet. You are permitted to take away with you the Test Booklet.
9. Sheets for rough work are appended in the Test Booklet at the end.
10. Penalty for wrong answers :
THERE WILL BE PENALTY FOR WRONG ANSWERS MARKED BY A CANDIDATE IN THE OBJECTIVE TYPE QUESTION PAPERS.
(i)   There are four alternatives for the answer to every question. For each question for which a wrong answer has been given by the candidate, one-third of the marks assigned to that question will be deducted as penalty.
(ii)   If a candidate gives more than one answer, it will be treated as a wrong answer even if one of the given answers happens to be correct and there will be same penalty as above to that question.
(iii)     If a question is left blank, i.e., no answer is given by the candidate, there will be no penalty for that question.


http://www.insightsonindia.com

INSIGHTS ON INDIA MOCK TEST SERIES FOR CIVIL SERVICES PRELIMINARY EXAM 2015


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Page  1    
    



    
                       





1.   The day of the Civil Services Preliminary Examination, 23rd August, 2015 is the first day of which month as per the Saka calendar system?
a)  Shravana
b)  Bhadra
c)  Vaishakha d)  Asvina




2.  The recent lowering of the International
Gold prices can be attributed to
1.   Rise in interest rates in US
2.  Heavy restriction on gold imports in several nations
3.  Highly volatile global exchange rates

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  3 only




3.  Which of these is/are the objectives of the Minimum Retail Price (MRP) Act?
1.   Prevent tax evasion
2.  Protect revenue of firms from fluctuating raw material prices
3.  Protect consumers from profiteering
by retailers



Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




4.  The Consumer Protection Bill, 2015 recently approved by the Cabinet intends to
1.   Establish consume courts at the
Taluk level
2.  Resolve all consumer disputes by arbitration and mediation
3.  Ban all tele-marketing and multi- level marketing in India

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 only
d)  None of the above




5.  Mercy petition decided by the President Article 72 of the Constitution of India are disposed on the advice of the
a)  Prime Minister
b)  Ministry of Home affairs
c)  Parliamentary Committee on Legal affairs
d)  Vice-President






6.  A foreign investment in an Indian company qualifies as Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) if

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  2    
    



    




a)  the investing institution/investor buys more than 10 per cent stake in the company
b)  the investment stays for a period of
more than two years with native company irrespective of the level of investment
c)  the investing institution/investor
seek approval via the government route
d)  None of the above is correct.




7.   Consider the following with reference to environment based grouping Conference of Parties (COP).
1.   The ‘parties’ in COP refers to nations
signatory to UNFCCC.
2.  Kyoto Protocol was signed by COP.
3.  COP has been successful in establishing a binding emission
target for all nations.
                       




a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 4 only c)  1 and 3 only d)  3 and 4 only




9.  Which of the statements regarding cricket governance in India is INCORRECT?
a)  State Cricket associations in India
allow people without a background in national/international cricket to get membership.
b)  Government does not own any State
or National cricket association in
India.
c)  A political (people’s) representative cannot be a member of a Private State Cricket association.
d)  None of the above

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




8.  Which of the following government schemes is/are targeted at Tribals?
1.   Development of Particularly
Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PVTGs)
2.  Investment in TRIFED
3.  Tribal Protection Scheme
4.  Higher Education Revival Scheme


10. The International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea (ITLOS) can settle disputes relating to
1.   Use of resources in International
waters
2.  Accident involving two national vessels in International waters

Which of the above is/are correct?

a)  1 only b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  3    
    



    




11. Consider the following about the International Astronomical Union (IAU).
1.   It is an Intergovernmental
organization.
2.  It is an organ of United Nations.
3.  It approves all space missions that extend beyond the orbit of Earth around the Sun.
4.  It is the internationally recognized
authority for assigning designations to celestial bodies.
                       




14. Representatives from most of the princely states joined the Constituent assembly (CA)
a)  immediately after the formation of
the CA
b)  after Cabinet Mission Plan was accepted by Indian National Congress
c)  after the acceptance of Mountbatten
Plan of 1947
d)  after the constitution was adopted by the CA

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 4 only b)  1 and 2 only c)  4 only
d)  2, 3 and 4 only




12. World Student Day as declared by United Nations is celebrated on the birthday of
a)  Dr. APJ Abdul Kalam
b)  Pandit JN Nehru
c)  Rabindranath Tagore d)  Dr. Rajendra Prasad




13. Coronary stents recently in news is related to
a)  Treatment of a heart related disease b)  Harmful strains that can be used to
make biological weapons
c)  Organ transplant in disabled people d)  a mechanism to reverse the flow of blood in the body causing death



15. The Constitution of India establishes an independent judiciary to serve which of these purposes?
1.   To protect the supremacy of the
Constitution
2.  To settle any disputes between
Centre and states
3.  For the judiciary to be able to exercise the power of Judicial review

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




16. In the Table of Precedence
1.   Members of Parliament (MPs) are placed higher than Chief Ministers of States.
2.  Governors (inside their respective
states) are placed higher than former
Presidents.



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  4    
    



    




3.  Chief Justice of India is placed higher than Union Cabinet Ministers.
                       




b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only d)  3 only

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




17. The Foreign policy of India advocates a)  Stopping the arms race leading to disarmament in both conventional
and nuclear weapons
b)  Stopping the arms race in conventional weapons but retaining nuclear weapons
c)  No particular stand on disarmament
and nuclear weapons stockpile d)  Development of the arms and
nuclear weapons industry only to an extent of generating gainful employment




18. Which of the following is/are correct concerning the elections to Rajya Sabha?
1.   The nominee must be a domicile of
the state from which he wishes to be elected.
2.  Voting is by secret ballot system.
3.  The elections are organized by the
Election Commission of India.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only



19. A political party will be recognized as a
‘National Party’ if
a)  it is registered with the Election
Commission of India (ECI)
b)  it is registered with the ECI and is recognized as a state party in at least four states
c)  if it has consecutively won at least 2
seats in the Parliament for at least two general election
d)  if the donation collected by the party
registered with ECI exceeds a certain amount as decided by ECI




20.Clear constitutional recognition to the existence of political parties in India for the first time was given by
a)  The establishment of Election
Commission of India
b)  The Anti-defection provisions in the
Tenth schedule of the Constitution
c)  The establishment of the Inter-State
Council of India
d)  The 73rd and 74th amendment to the
Constitution of India




21. Which of the following statements is INCORRECT concerning tribunals in India?
a)  Only the Central government is
authorized by the Constitution to establish tribunals.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  5    
    



    




b)  Tribunals can be established for settling disputes other than administrative disputes.
c)  Appeal from the tribunals lie to both
the High Courts and Supreme Court.
                       




4.  Tender constitutional interpretations of human rights provisions in the Constitution when requested by President
d)  Central Administrative Tribunal in India exercises original jurisdiction in relation to service matters of Central government employees.




22. What is the objective(s) behind the specification of regional languages in the Eighth schedule?
1.   These languages are to be used for enriching Hindi Language
2.  Members of these languages are represented in the Official Languages Commission.
3.  Restricting the choice of state
government’s official language

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




23. The National Human Rights
Commission is authorized to
1.   Enquire suo moto in cases of human rights violation
2.  Intervene in a proceeding involving allegation of human rights pending before a court of India
3.  Take action against those guilty of
human rights violation
Choose the correct answer using the codes
below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 4 only c)  1 and 3 only d)  2 and 3 only




24. Which of these statements regarding the office of Attorney General of India is INCORRECT?
a)  He has the right to take part in the
proceedings of both houses of
Parliament.
b)  Advocate General of India is subordinate to Attorney General of India.
c)  Attorney General of India forms part
of the Union Executive.
d)  His office does not come under the
Union Law ministry.




25. The Comptroller General of India is responsible to
a)  The Parliament
b)  The Constitution of India c)  The President of India
d)  Public Accounts Committee of Lok
Sabha



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  6    
    



    




26. Consider the following statements.
                       




municipality and the administrative structure of which resembles that of
Assertion (A): The Chief Election
Commissioner and other election commissioners enjoy security of tenure.

Reason (R): Their terms are specified and fixed by the Constitution of India.

In the context of the statements above, which of these is true?

a)  A and R both are true, and R is the correct explanation for A.
b)  A and R both are true, and R is the
NOT the correct explanation for A. c)  A is correct, R is incorrect.
d)  A is incorrect, R is correct





27. The Chief Minister of a Union Territory is appointed by
a)  The Administrator of the UT on the
recommendation of the Central government

b)  The President of India on the recommendation of the Administrator of the UT

c)  The President of India based on the recommendation of the Cabinet

d)  The Administrator of the UT based on his personal discretion




28. As per the 74th Constitutional Amendment Act, a ‘Nagar Panchayat’ is a term used for
a)  a village panchayat that has been
recently given the status of a
a Municipality
b)  an area in transition from a rural area to an urban area
c)  a conglomeration of all panchayats that comes under a common Metropolitan Planning Committee
d)  a panchayat that is temporarily being governed by a Municipality or Municipal corporation




29. State Bills relating to which of the following categories can be reserved for Presidential assent by the Governor?
1.   Bills that impinge on the
fundamental rights of citizens
2.  Bills that prima facie appear ultra vires the constitution
3.  Bills that contravene Central laws

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




30. Biofertilizers improves the productivity of crops because
a)  it increase the nutrient content of the soil
b)  it makes greater amount of nutrients available to the plant from the same soil
c)  it inflates the root hairs increasing
their mineral absorption capacity d)  All of the above


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  7    
    



    
                       


31. The Coalition Support Fund (CSF) programme to Pakistan given by the US is provided for
a)  Developing tribal and backward
areas in Pakistan
b)  Combating insurgency in neighbouring Afghanistan
c)  Improving defence bases of Pakistani
Army
d)  Implementing several socio- economic programs of USA running in Pakistan
32. Coastal erosion can be caused by
1.   Wave action
2.  Tidal currents
3.  High Winds

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




33. ‘Maritime domain awareness’ recently in news is related to
1.   Safety and security of the maritime
domain
2.  Environment of Oceans
3.  Navigable waterways

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only
c)  None of the above
d)  All of the above
34. 35. Consider the following about Ramon
Magsaysay Award    .
1.   It is given for exemplary political and economic work.
2.  It is only awarded within Asia.
3.  It is awarded by the Noble Prize committee.
4.  It can be awarded to organizations too.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 4 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




35. The Competition Commission of India
(CCI) is
a)  an executive body that regulates mergers and acquisitions between private bodies
b)  a statutory body which monitors monopolistic and unfair trade practices in Indian markets
c)  an executive body that settles disputes between firms relating to mergers and acquisitions
d)  a statutory body that ensures that all budding start-ups in India have enough competence and resources to compete with multi-national companies


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  8    
    



    




36. The newest member of the World Trade
Organization (WTO) is a)  China
b)  Russia
c)  Kazakhstan d)  Ukraine
                       




b)  A satellite which helps provide accurate earth coordinates for navigation purposes
c)  A satellite that guides rocket
launches till the upper space d)  A satellite that monitors the
navigational activities on earth


37. As per a study conducted by conducted by Bangladesh-India Joint Tiger Census Project, what are the reasons for the declining population of Bengal tiger?
1.   Lack of proper forest management
2.  Animal-human conflict
3.  Loss of habitat
4.  Unchecked poaching

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 3 and 4 only b)  2 and 4 only
c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




38. Tour de France is an annual multiple stage bicycle race primarily held in France. The race route passes through which of these mountain chains?
a)  High Atlas b)  Alps
c)  Cordillera Central d)  Beaufort Range




39. What does a regional navigational satellite mean?
a)  A satellite which helps other satellites and space station to
navigate in space


40.Union Government recently launched Deendayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana (DUGJY). The scheme aims to provide
a)  Uninterrupted electricity supply to
each rural household across the country
b)  Electricity to all Village panchayats and Public buildings
c)  Financial support to all visually
impaired people that need an eye operation
d)  Scholarships to meritorious visually
impaired children from every village in India




41. Consider the following statements about a species found in India.
1.   It is a critically endangered bird species as per IUCN.
2.  It can be found in Gujarat,
Maharashtra and Rajasthan.
3.  An artificial breeding programme for the species was recently announced by the government.
4.  Greater population of the species is found in grasslands.

The statements above are related to which of these species?

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Page  9    
    



    




a)  Spoon Billed Sandpiper b)  White-bellied heron
c)  Great Indian Bustard d)  Forest owlet




42. Which of these can be the closest Indian counterpart to the recently tested ‘Long March-5’ belonging to China’s space programme?
a)  Indian manned space mission
b)  Mars Orbiter Mission
c)  Geo-synchronous Satellite Launch
Vehicle
d)  GAGAN and IRNSS




43. Consider the following about the All India Council of Sports constituted recently by the government.
1.   President of India will be its ex- officio chairman.
2.  It will financially support all states to establish a council of sports.
3.  Its recommendations will not be
binding on the government.
4.  It will adjudicate all complaints, disputes and malpractices associated with sports.
                       




44. Surakshit Khadya Abhiyan launched recently by the Union government aims at
a)  Creating awareness about food
hygiene and food safety
b)  Safeguarding all food storage warehouses and cold storages from pests and damage
c)  Minimizing post harvest losses of food grains, fruits and vegetables
d)  Organizing periodical makeshift food testing camps in all villages of India




45. Deep Space Climate Observatory
(DSCOVR) is used for
a)  purposes of earth observation
b)  studying the cosmic rays, particles and waves in deep space
c)  studying cyclical movements of distant celestial bodies
d)  helping satellites launched from
earth to navigate in space and communicate with earth




46. Estuaries and recesses in coastlines that form bays can tackle heavy storms, cyclones and tsunamis. These bays are
formed by
Choose the correct answer using the codes
below.

a)  1, 3 and 4 only b)  3 only
c)  1 and 2 only
d)  All of the above
a)  Turtle shells b)  Coral reefs
c)  Sea grass
d)  Mangroves








http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  10    
    



    




47. Ocean acidification can affect marine life by
1.   Inhibiting shell growth in marine animals
2.  Affecting the growth of phytoplanktons
3.  Reducing the amount of coral reefs
formed
                       




c)  Bringing back all leading Indian researchers working abroad
d)  None of the above




50. Monetary policy decision is presently made by
a)  Solely by the RBI governor

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




48. Which of the following e-wastes can
NOT be recycled?
1.   Lead
2.  Copper
3.  Gold
4.  Silver
5.  Platinum

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 4 only
b)  1, 2 and 3 only c)  3 and 5 only
d)  All of these can be recycled.




49. Atal Innovation Mission concerns with a)  Deploying additional funding to institutes of higher education,
learning and research
b)  Providing a platform to academics, entrepreneurs and researchers to
foster culture of innovation
b)  A Monetary policy committee constituted by the government in RBI
c)  A committee of RBI headed by RBI governor holding veto power over decisions
d)  The RBI Governor and Deputy Governors after taking concurrence from government




51. The GST Bill seeks to establish a GST Council. It will consist of
1.   Union Finance Minister
2.  Finance Secretary
3.  Ministry of Planning
4.  Minister of Finance from each state government

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 4 only
b)  1, 2 and 3 only c)  1 and 2 only
d)  3 and 4 only

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  11    
    



    




52. In India the provision of double citizenship
a)  is provided to a select class of foreign investors on strategic grounds
b)  applies to all Indian diplomats
serving outside India
                       




c)  1 and 3 only d)  2 and 4 only




55. Consider the following statements.
c)  applies to minors of Indian diplomats born outside India
d)  does not exist as Indian laws and constitution provides for only single citizenship




53. It is difficult to get Vitamin C in our daily cooked meals because
a)  Food containing Vitamin C cannot be
cooked
b)  Vitamin C gets destroyed by heat during cooking
c)  If food containing Vitamin C is heated, then its absorption is the body is negligible
d)  Heating Vitamin C with water makes
it toxic.




54. Consider the following about Jute fibre.
1.   It is extracted from the leaves of the
Jute plant.
2.  It is cultivated during the rainy season.
3.  It is grown mainly in the Southern
Indian region.
4.  Jute is also made from the outer covering of coconut.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  3 and 4 only
Assertion (A): Chalk used in blackboards is highly soluble in water.

Reason (R): Minerals are generally highly soluble in water.

In the context of the statements above, which of these is true?

a)  A and R both are true, and R is the correct explanation for A.
b)  A and R both are true, and R is the
NOT the correct explanation for A. c)  A is correct, R is incorrect.
d)  Both A and R are incorrect.




56. Lemonade is prepared by mixing lemon juice and sugar in water. You wish to add ice to cool it. In which case would it
be possible to dissolve more sugar in the
water more quickly?
a)  Adding ice cubes before mixing sugar and lemon
b)  Adding ice cubes after adding sugar and lemon
c)  Solubility will remain same
irrespective of the order of adding ice to the water
d)  Dissolving half the sugar before
adding ice cubes and half later


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  12    
    



    




57. The synthesis of food in plants generally occurs
a)  in between leaves and stems
b)  in roots and from there it is carried to leaves which absorb it
c)  in the upper part of the brown stems away from the root
d)  in the leaves of the plant
                       




b)  Copper is cheaper than stainless steel thus reducing the price of the vessel.
c)  Copper can conduct heat better than the stainless steel.
d)  It increases the toughness and durability of the stainless steel vessel this way.




58. Fungi depend on which mode of nutrition?
1.   Autotrophic
2.  Heterotrophic
3.  Saprotrophic
4.  Parasitic

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 4 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only d)  3 only




59. Sorter’s disease, an occupational hazard, is related to the
a)  Wool industry
b)  Silk Industry
c)  Cotton Industry
d)  Plastic and Polymer Industry




60.Stainless steel vessels used for cooking are generally provided with copper at the bottom. What can be a possible reason behind it?
a)  It is easier to clean copper than the
stainless steel.
61. Special type of substances, indicator, is used to test whether a substance is acidic or basic. Which of these is/are natural indicators?
1.   Turmeric
2.  Lichens
3.  Tulsi leaves
4.  Skin of Papaya

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 4 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  3 and 4 only d)  1 and 2 only




62. Acid rain can be harmful for
1.   Buildings
2.  Monuments
3.  Plants
4.  Animals

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  3 and 4 only
d)  All of the above



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  13    
    



    




63. Organic matter can be added to the soil to
1.   Improve Nutrient base of soil
2.  Reduce the acidity of soil
3.  Increase the activity of microorganisms in the soil
                       


Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 3 only b)  2, 3 and 4 only c)  1 and 4 only
d)  All of the above
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




64. Migratory birds flying for long distances generally fly high in the sky. What can
be the possible reason(s)?
1.   They can escape thunder and rain.
2.  Wind flow is helpful at such heights.
3.  Conditions are cold which allow them to disperse heat generated by flight muscles.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




65. While going through a tropical rainforest, you are likely to find which of these species?
1.   Red-eyed frog
2.  New World Monkey
3.  Toucan
4.  Lion Tailed Macaque

66. If you are stuck in a storm that is accompanied by lightning, what should you NOT do?
1.   Take shelter under an isolated tree
2.  Sit near a widow
3.  Take cover under a bus
4.  Go in an open garage

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only
b)  2, 3 and 4 only c)  1, 2 and 4 only d)  1, 3 and 4 only




67. Consider the following statements.
1.   The Eastern coast of India has greater frequency of cyclones than the Western coast.
2.  The Western coast of India has
greater intensity of cyclones than the
Eastern coast.

Which of the above is/are true?

a)  1 only b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2 d)  None



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  14    
    



    




68. Consider the following statements.
                       




b)  Country X has necessarily an increasing population.
Assertion (A): Loamy soil is not suitable for
growing crops.

Reason (R): It cannot hold water which is essential for plant growth.

In the context of the statements above, which of these is true?

a)  A and R both are true, and R is the correct explanation for A.
b)  A and R both are true, and R is the
NOT the correct explanation for A. c)  A is correct, R is incorrect.
d)  Both A and R is incorrect.




69. Why do we get muscle cramps after heavy exercise?
a)  Bones and muscles are at different temperatures.
b)  The gel like liquid in muscle cell
becomes hard due to high body temperature.
c)  Muscle cells respire anaerobically to
produce lactic acid due to unfulfilled heavy demand for oxygen.
d)  High blood circulation expands
muscle cells due to heavy demand for oxygen which stretches the muscles too much.




70. A country X has an age pyramid which is broad at its base and keeps narrowing
till it reaches the top. What does it imply about the population of the country?
a)  Country X has a highly unstable population growth rate.
c)  Country X is necessarily facing a decline in population.
d)  Country X has both high death rates and birth rates.




71. Cooperative sector industries can be
1.   Owned by workers
2.  Owned by raw material suppliers
3.  Owned by producers of raw materials
4.  Operated by raw material suppliers
5.  Operated by producers of raw material

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 4 and 5 only b)  2, 3 and 4 only c)  1, 2 and 3 only d)  All of the above




72. Which of these factors have helped the cotton industries to spread geographically?
1.   Humidity, one of the key
requirements of the industry, can be created artificially
2.  Raw cotton is a weight losing raw
material
3.  Wide availability of labour

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  15    
    



    







73. The conditions for growing rice and wheat are not same because
1.   Rice requires bright sunshine
whereas wheat does not.
                       




2.  Terrace farming retains the shape of the slope.
3.  In terrace farming hills are ploughed up and down unlike contour ploughing.
2.  Wheat requires well drained soil whereas rice requires soil which can retain water.
3.  Rice requires heavy rainfall whereas
wheat requires moderate rainfall.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




74. In India, natural gas can be extracted from which of these regions?
1.   Jaisalmer
2.  Tripura
3.  Krishna Godavari delta
4.  Andhra Pradesh

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1, 2 and 4 only b)  2, 3 and 4 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




75. What is the difference between contour ploughing and terrace farming?
1.   Contour ploughing alters the shape of the slope.
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  None of the above




76. If International trade is allowed freely then eventually it will lead to which of the following?
a)  A handful of nations will accumulate all the wealth of the global economy.
b)  Production and distribution of all commodities will become concentrated at one geographical location.
c)  Some nations will become specialized in production of certain goods and services.
d)  All global labour will concentrate at the nation which has the highest exports.




77. The difference between ‘Broad money’
and ‘Narrow money’ is based on
a)  RBI’s authority to issue them freely in security markets
b)  Liquidity of money supply
c)  Their use by either government or household sector
d)  The ease with which bonds can be
issued on each of them


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  16    
    



    







78. If the currency of India appreciates in the foreign exchange market, it will
1.   Increase India’s foreign exchange reserves
2.  Make imports costly in India
3.  Increase the fiscal deficit of India
                       




b)  2 and 3 only c)  3 only
d)  1 and 3 only




81. The atmosphere is held around the earth by
a)  Primordial heat from inside the earth
Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  2 and 3 only c)  1 and 3 only
d)  None of the above




79. Income tax in India is
a)  Levied, collected and appropriated by Central government
b)  Levied, collected by Central
government; and shared with state governments
c)  Levied by Central government, but
collected and appropriated by state governments
d)  Levied, collected and appropriated
by state governments




80.Capital receipts of the Government of
India includes
1.   Grants by foreign government
2.  Earnings from interest rates on loans previously forwarded
3.  Borrowing from market

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only
b)  Magnetic force around the earth that attracts all charged dust particles
c)  Coriolis force and adhesive frictional force between the earth and atmosphere
d)  Gravitational force of the Earth




82. Arrange these layers of earth in increasing order of their thickness.
1.   Crust
2.  Mantle
3.  Core

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a) 132 b) 231 c) 123 d)  321



83. Which of the following are responsible for changing landform on the earth?
1.   Volcanoes
2.  Sea-waves
3.  Glaciers
4.  Rivers
5.  Wind

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.


http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  17    
    



    




a)  1 and 5 only
b)  1, 3, 4 and 5 only c)  2, 3 and 4 only
                       




2.  Efficiency of production process as each factor is increased
d)  All of the above




84. Loess found in desert areas is
a)  an accumulation of fine and light sand spread over large distances
b)  a collection of mushroom rocks
narrow at bottom and wide at top
c)  a high sand dune that is formed as a result of heavy desert storms
d)  a land near oasis that is rich in humus and minerals




85. Veblen goods in economic terms are those goods whose
a)  price is directly proportional to their supply in the market
b)  price is directly proportional to their
demand in the market
c)  price does not relate to their demand in the market
d)  price and demand are inversely related




86. The atmospheric layer that helps in radio transmission is
a)  Troposphere
b)  Thermosphere c)  Stratosphere
d)  Mesosphere




87. Marginal efficiency of capital means
1.   Expected rate of return from additional Investment
Which of the above is/are true?

a)  1 only b)  2 only
c)  Both 1 and 2
d)  None




88.Consider the following about Nyaya school of Vedic philosophy.
1.   It holds that human suffering results
from mistakes produced by activity under wrong knowledge.
2.  Liberation can be gained through
right knowledge.
3.  The school has contributed to the development of theory of logic.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above




89. Buddhists teach that suffering can be ended by direct understanding and perception of ‘dependent origination’. This points out to
a)  The vagueness of the idea of a cause and effect
b)  Interdependence of events in existence
c)  Independence of the existence of the
Self
d)  God being the origin of all beings in existence.

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  18    
    



    







90.Subash Chandra Bose resigned from the congress presidentship and organised forward Bloc for a more vigorous national struggle in 1939. This was because
a)  He came to believe that Gandhi's Non-violent Movement might not bring independence
b)  He did not trust that the Indian National Congress is fighting for Indian freedom
c)  He was pressurized by the British to resign from the Congress
d)  He wanted to support the activities of
the Congress from outside
                       




c)  It was annulled after the First World
War ended.
d)  Program of Swadeshi was adopted to protest against the division.




93. Consider the following with reference to the Indian freedom struggle during the First World War.
1.   Mainstream political leadership lent
support to the British in the war.
2.  No anti-colonial activities were witnessed during the entire period in India.
3.  The Surat Pact was signed during this period.




91. Consider the following about the 1857 mutiny.
1.   It was during the reign of Governor
General Canning.
2.  Mangal Pandey led the Mutiny.
3.  It started from Delhi.
4.  The mutiny did not spread to South
India.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only d)  1 and 4 only




92. Which of the following about Partition of Bengal is INCORRECT?
a)  It was ordered by Curzon.
b)  All India Muslim League supported the division of Bengal.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only d)  1 only




94. In the Government of India Act, 1919
1.   Principle of diarchy was introduced
2.  Local bodies and provincial legislatures were given autonomy.
3.  Franchise base of Central as well as provincial legislatures was increased.

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above

http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  19    
    



    




95. Kuka movement in Punjab, 1872, aimed at
a)  Purifying the Sikh religion by removing all the abuses, superstitions and ill-practices
b)  Making Sikh land independent from
British control
c)  Secure lower land rent and lower taxes from British officials
d)  Achieve justice for the martyrs of the
1857 mutiny




96. Consider the following about C.
Rajagopalachari.
1.   He was the last Governor-general of
India.
2.  He founded the Swatantra party.
3.  He pioneered several temple entry movements in India.
4.  He was described by Gandhi as the
“keeper of my conscience”.
                       




d)  Congress launched the second phase of Civil Disobedience movement in the session.



98. Which of these statements concerning Jugantar party formed in 1906 is correct?
a)  The party involved itself in grass root work of education and uplifting rural dalits.
b)  It was based on a socialistic ideology and believed in negotiation with the government.
c)  Aurobindo Ghosh was one of the founder members.
d)  All of the above




99. The most significant event between the
7th and 11th century was the Tripartite struggle centered on Kannauj that lasted for more than two centuries between the
Choose the correct answer using the codes
below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 4 only
d)  All of the above




97. The Karachi session, 1931, of the
Congress was important because
a)  The goal of complete independence, Swaraj, was declared here.
b)  Congress spelt the true meaning of
Swaraj in this session.
c)  Congress decided to participate in
the Second Round Table Conference.
1.   Pala Empire
2.  Rashtrakuta Empire
3.  Chalukya Empire
4.  Chola dynasty

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 4 only
d)  All of the above



http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  20    
    



    




100.          Which of the following can be the possible reason(s) behind the disintegration of the Gupta Empire?
1.   Death of Emperor Harsha
2.  Invasion of the Huns
3.  Complete drain of economic resources towards the end of
Harsha’s tenure
                       

Choose the correct answer using the codes below.

a)  1 and 2 only b)  1 and 3 only c)  2 and 3 only
d)  All of the above










































http://www.insightsonindia.com                                                                                                                  INSIGHTS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Page  21    
    
