    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    




1.  Solution: d)

About the program here http://envfor.nic.in/division/national-wetland- conservation-programme-nwcp

Financial assistance under NWCP is provided for two components i.e. Management Action Plan (MAP) and Research Projects. Under the Scheme, 100% assistance is provided for activities. Conservation and management of wetlands is primarily vested with the State/UTs, who are in physical possession of the area. After identification of wetlands under the Scheme, the State/UTs are to submit long-term comprehensive Management Action Plans (MAPs) for a period of 3-5 years, preferably 5 years, coinciding with the Plan period.

Under the Scheme, Ministry also sponsor multidisciplinary research projects by academic/ managerial/ research institutions on various aspects of wetland conservation to supplement execution of MAP in more realistic manner.




2.  Solution: d)

First statement is wrong because if the vale is XII, then it’s considered as ‘extreme’. Please check the table below:



I. Not felt                      Not felt except by a very few under especially favorable conditions.


II. Weak                        Felt only by a few persons at rest, especially on upper floors of buildings.




III. Weak
Felt quite noticeably by persons indoors, especially on upper floors of buildings. Many people do not recognize it as an earthquake. Standing motor cars may rock slightly. Vibrations
similar to the passing of a truck. Duration estimated.




IV. Light
Felt indoors by many, outdoors by few during the day. At night, some awakened. Dishes, windows, doors disturbed; walls make cracking sound. Sensation like heavy truck striking building.
Standing motor cars rocked noticeably.


V. Moderate                 Felt by nearly everyone; many awakened. Some dishes, windows broken. Unstable objects overturned. Pendulum clocks



    
    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    



may stop.


VI. Strong                    Felt by all, many frightened. Some heavy furniture moved; a few instances of fallen plaster. Damage slight.




VII. Very Strong
Damage negligible in buildings of good design and construction; slight to moderate in well-built ordinary structures; considerable damage in poorly built or badly designed structures; some
chimneys broken.




VIII. Severe
Damage slight in specially designed structures; considerable damage in ordinary substantial buildings with partial collapse. Damage great in poorly built structures. Fall of chimneys, factory
stacks, columns, monuments, walls. Heavy furniture overturned.




IX. Violent
Damage considerable in specially designed structures; well- designed frame structures thrown out of plumb. Damage great in substantial buildings, with partial collapse. Buildings shifted off
foundations.


X. Extreme         Some well-built wooden structures destroyed; most masonry and frame structures destroyed with foundations. Rails bent.




XI. Extreme
Few, if any (masonry), structures remain standing. Bridges destroyed. Broad fissures in ground. Underground pipe lines completely out of service. Earth slumps and land slips in soft
ground. Rails bent greatly.


XII. Extreme       Damage total. Waves seen on ground surfaces. Lines of sight and level distorted. Objects thrown upward into the air.




Regarding second statement, if the statement meant ‘intensity’, it could have been considered partially correct (Because intensity refers to the amount of destruction caused to lives and property). But as it is mentioned ‘magnitude’, majority of aftershocks wil have lesser magnitude than the mainshocks. Hence the statement is
wrong.








    
    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    

3.  Solution: b)

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eichhornia_crassipes#Invasive_species

The roots of Eichhornia crassipes naturally
absorb pollutants,including lead, mercury, and strontium-90, as well as some organic compounds believed to be carcinogenic, in concentrations 10,000 times that in the surrounding water. Water hyacinths can be cultivated for waste water treatment.

Water hyacinth is reported for its efficiency to remove about 60–80 % nitrogen (Fox et al. 2008) and about 69% of potassium from water (Zhou et al. 2007). The roots of water hyacinth were found to remove particulate matter and nitrogen in a natural shallow eutrophicated wetland (Billore et al. 1998)




4.  Solution: a)

http://www.thehindu.com/features/homes-and-gardens/tackling-detergents-in- water-bodies/article7161992.ece

After the washing of the hair or the clothes or the utensils the detergent is now in the environment. This water contains phosphates which is a limiting nutrient for many water bodies. Once the phosphates reach a lake or a stagnant water body it can result in an explosion of algal, water hyacinth, water weeds and other growth, thus eutrophying or killing a water body by depleting it of oxygen.




5.  Solution: b)

http://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Coimbatore/growing-threat-to-great-indian- hornbills/article7137163.ece

The magnificent birds which were a common sight in the evergreen rain forests of the
Western Ghats are now forced, due to deforestation, to adapt themselves to hollows in silver oak trees which form part of thick coffee plantations in Singara and Moyar and some tea plantations in the lower part of the Nilgiri hills.




6.  Solution: a)

http://news.nationalgeographic.com/energy/2015/04/150428-audi-ediesel-made- from-water-air/








    
    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    

7.  Solution: c)

To ban fishing within 12 nautical miles is subject of the State Governments, which is imposed in the interests of the livelihood of fishermen. The Fishing ban of different periods have been imposed by the coastal State Governments since last many years or say decades; For example, West-Bengal, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Kerala impose ban of 47-days (applicable from 1988-89); in Odisha it is 60 days (applied since 2000); Gujarat, Maharashtra and Goa impose ban of 67 days (effective from
1989-90) and Daman & Diu are imposing ban of 75 days, whereas in Karnataka it is
applied for 57 days.

It was also decided that a uniform ban of 61 days will be applied in the area of the Indian EEZ (beyond 12 nautical miles). The above proposal was agreed by all the coastal states/UTs except Kerala.

No foreign fishing vessel is allowed in Indian waters. Besides, in case, any foreign vessel is found engaged in illegal fishing in the Indian waters, the Indian Coast Guard is taking strict action against such vessel and it is punished as per the law, which includes seizure of foreign vessel(s) and its arrest of its crew members.




8. Solution: a)

To protect confidential information pertaining to Defence Sector from Cyber-attack , government has taken a number of steps including setting up of Cyber Operation Centres for threat management and mitigation as part of Framework for Enhancing Cyber Security of Indian Cyberspace. To protect important and confidential data from Cyber-attack, the operational networks of the Armed Forces are air gapped from internet. Further, Defence Services have established Cyber Emergency Response Teams (CERTs) to prevent and react to cyber-attacks. Safeguards have been instituted in the form of audits and physical checks. Policies, guidelines and procedures are laid down and cyber security advisories are issued from time to time.




9.  Solution: c)

https://www.oecd-nea.org/law/legal-documents.html




10.           Solution: d)

The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) had conducted a nationwide survey on milk adulteration in 2011 through its five regional offices. A total of 1791 samples were drawn from 33 states and were tested in the Government
laboratories. 68.4% of the samples were found to be non-conforming to the



    
    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    

prescribed standards. Out of these samples, in 46.8% samples, milk found to be sub- standard in respect of Fat and Solid Not Fat (SNF) contents. Another 44.69% of the samples (548) in respect of skim milk powder were found to be non-conforming to the prescribed standards where presence of glucose was detected in 477 samples. A total of 103 samples (5.75%) were found to be adulterated with detergents.




11. Solution: b)

Please scan through these lists twice thrice. You may not be able to remember all. But it is important to have an idea, as UPSC keeps asking questions based on these.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_national_parks_of_India http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wildlife_sanctuaries_of_India http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biosphere_reserves_of_India
The last one is the most important of all.




12.Solution: d)

The ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA) which was established on 28 January
1992 includes a Common Effective Preferential Tariff (CEPT) to promote the free flow of goods between member states. When the AFTA agreement was originally signed, ASEAN had only six members (Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand). Vietnam joined in 1995, Laos and Burma in 1997, and Cambodia in 1999. The newcomers have not fully met AFTA's obligations, but they are officially considered part of the AFTA as they were required to sign the agreement upon entry into ASEAN, and were given longer time frames in which to meet AFTA's tariff reduction obligations.

The next steps are to create a:

•    single market and production base

•    competitive economic region

•    region of equitable economic development

•    region fully integrated into the global economy

Since 2007, ASEAN countries have gradually lowered their import duties with member nations. The target is zero import duties by 2016.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Association_of_Southeast_Asian_Nations





    
    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    

13.Solution: d)

Both rivers Bhavani and Amaravati have their basins located in Tamil Nadu and
Kerala.

River Kaveri is not perennial as it doesn’t receive rain throughout the year.




14.Solution: d)

Marking a major shift in implementation, the Government is focusing on involving people living on the banks of the river to attain sustainable results. Drawing from the lessons learnt from previous implementation, the program also focuses on involving the States and grassroots level institutions such as Urban Local Bodies and Panchayati Raj Institutions in implementation. The program would be implemented by the National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG), and its state counterpart organizations i.e., State Program Management Groups (SPMGs).

In order to ramp up progress, the Centre will now take over 100% funding of various activities/ projects under this program.

‘Namami Gange’ will focus on pollution abatement interventions namely Interception, diversion & treatment of wastewater flowing through the open drains through bio-remediation / appropriate in-situ treatment / use of innovative technologies / sewage treatment plants (STPs) / effluent treatment plant (ETPs); rehabilitation and augmentation of existing STPs and immediate short term measures for arresting pollution at exit points on river front to prevent inflow of sewage etc.




15. Solution: d)

It is technical, but you just need to have a basic idea of it. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Evolution#Mechanisms

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inheritance_of_acquired_characteristics

The inheritance of acquired characteristics is a hypothesis that physiological changes acquired over the life of an organism (such as the enlargement of a muscle through repeated use) may be transmitted to offspring. It is also commonly referred to as
the theory of adaptation equated with the evolutionary theory
of French naturalist Jean-Baptiste Lamarck known as Lamarckism.

Pangenesis was Charles Darwin's hypothetical mechanism for heredity. The pangenesis theory, similar to Hippocrates's views on the topic, imply that the whole
of parental organisms participate in heredity.




    
    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    

16.Solution: d)

The Minister of State (I/C) for Petroleum & Natural Gas Shri Dharmendra Pradhan informed the Rajya Sabha in a written reply that various agencies have estimated the shale gas and oil resource potential in selected sedimentary basins/ sub basins in India as per the details below:

i) 300 to 2100 tcf of shale gas in the country (as available in public domain);

ii) 290 tcf of shale gas in four basins namely, Cambay, KG, Cauvery and Damodar;

iii) 6.1 tcf of technically recoverable shale gas in 3 basins, namely, Cambay, KG & Cauvery.

iv) 584 tcf of sale gas and 87 Billion barrel of shale oil in 4 basins namely, Cambay, KG, Cauvery and Damodar;

v) 187.5 tcf of shale gas in 5 basins namely, Cambay, KG, Cauvery, Ganga & Assam and Assam - Arakan;

vi) 45 tcf of Shale Gas in Gondwana basin (including Damodar).




17. Solution: a)

The Bill provides for among other things:-


i. Establishment of the National CAF and the State CAFs to credit amounts collected by State Governments and Union Territory Administrations to compensate loss of forest land diverted for non-forest purpose.


ii. Constitution of a National Authority to manage and utilise amounts credited to the
National CAF.


iii. Constitution of a State Authority in each State and Union Territory to manage and utilise the amounts credited to the State CAFs.


iv. Establishment of a Monitoring Group to assist the National Authority in monitoring and evaluation of activities undertaken from amounts released from the National CAF and State CAFs.

This would mitigate impact of diversion of such forest land.











    
    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    

18.Solution: d)

Many animals have evolved to exhibit some form of camouflage, which is an adaptation that allows animals to blend in with certain aspects of their environment. Camouflage increases an organism's chance of survival by hiding it
from predators. This gives the animal a higher probability of being able to
successfully reproduce and carry on the species. Camouflage is also used by some predators as a tool for hunting.
Examples and explanations have been given here. http://study.com/academy/lesson/what-is-camouflage-in-animals-definition-
examples-quiz.html

19.Solution: d)

http://www.parliamentofindia.nic.in/ls/intro/p21.htm

All these committees deal with the scrutiny of the government expenditure. If a Minister is a part of such committees, it will create conflict of interest situation. Hence, it is avoided. Moreover, the minister might influence the proceedings of the meetings.

20.           Solution: c)

http://www.nature.com/scitable/knowledge/library/the-nitrogen-cycle-processes- players-and-human-15644632


































    
    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    

21.Solution: d)

Scavengers are a part of the food web, a description of which organisms eat which other organisms in the wild. Organisms in the food web are grouped into trophic, or nutritional, levels. There are three trophic levels. Autotrophs, organisms that produce their own food, are the first trophic level. These include plants and algae. Herbivores, or organisms that consume plants and other autotrophs, are the second trophic level. Scavengers, other carnivores, and omnivores, organisms that consume both plants and animals are the third trophic level.

Examples can be found here. http://www.factmonster.com/ipka/A0768543.html



22.           Solution: d)

Dissolved oxygen enters water through the air or as a plant byproduct. From the air, oxygen can slowly diffuse across the water’s surface from the surrounding atmosphere, or be mixed in quickly through aeration, whether natural or man-made. The aeration of water can be caused by wind (creating waves), rapids, waterfalls, ground water discharge or other forms of running water. Man-made causes of aeration vary from an aquarium air pump to a hand-turned waterwheel to a large dam.

http://www.fondriest.com/environmental-measurements/parameters/water- quality/dissolved-oxygen/#2




23.           Solution: d)

Emigration is the act of leaving one's native country with the intent to settle elsewhere. Conversely, immigration describes the movement of persons into one country from another. Both are acts of migration across national boundaries.




24.           Solution: b)

Over 2700 species of flowering plants, 160 species of fern and fern allies, countless types of flowerless plants, mosses, fungi, algae, land lichens are found in the sholas of the Nilgiris. No other Hill station has so many exotic species.

The Nilgiri tahr animal can be found in the hills.

Much of the Nilgiris natural Montane grasslands and shrublands interspersed
with sholas has been much disturbed or destroyed by extensive tea plantations, easy



    
    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    

motor vehicle access and extensive commercial planting and harvesting of non-
native eucalyptus and wattle plantations Acacia dealbata, Acacia mearnsii and cattle grazing. In addition there is one large, and several smaller hydro-
electric impoundments in the area. Scotch broom has become an ecologically
damaging invasive species.




25.           Solution: a)

Unlike coal-fired or oil-fired generation, nuclear power generation does not directly produce any sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, or mercury (pollution from fossil fuels is blamed for 24,000 early deaths each year in the U.S. alone.

Large amounts of radioactive contamination were spread across Europe due to the Chernobyl disaster, and cesium and strontium contaminated many agricultural products, livestock and soil.

The greenhouse gas emissions from nuclear fission power are much smaller than those associated with coal, oil and gas, and the routine health risks are much smaller than those associated with coal.




26.           Solution: c)

This has been explained here properly. Please go through http://www.charteredclub.com/service-tax-on-food-served-in-restaurant/




27.           Solution: c)

An angel investor or angel (also known as a business angel or informal
investor or angel funder) is an affluent individual who provides capital for a business start-up, usually in exchange for convertible debt or ownership equity. A small but increasing number of angel investors organize themselves into angel groups or angel networks to share research and pool their investment capital, as well as to provide advice to their portfolio companies.

Angel investors are usually found among an entrepreneur's family and friends. The capital they provide can be a one-time injection of seed money or ongoing support to carry the company through difficult times.



Angel investors give more favorable terms than other lenders, as they are usually investing in the person rather than the viability of the business. They are focused on
helping the business succeed, rather than reaping a huge profit from their




    
    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    

investment. Angel investors are essentially the exact opposite of a venture capitalist.





28.           Solution: d)

This is a very comprehensive document released by the government. Please go through the first few pages that discuss the rationale for Change in institutions in india.

http://pib.nic.in/newsite/pdfdisplay.aspx?docid=404




29.           Solution: c)

You need to understand that FDI and FII are ‘investments’, not a source of ‘income’. SO they can’t be counted under NIA.

Remittances are earned by Indian nationals working abroad and sent to their family. Same is done by foreign nationals working in India. So, the net is taken into account.
If you want to read in detail, it is explained here very comprehensively. http://www.yourarticlelibrary.com/macro-economics/nfia-net-factor-income-from-
abroad-nfia-significance-and-components/30266/




30.           Solution: d)

The current account is bridged by FDI and FII. It does not include them. Instead it includes private remittances; trade in invisibles, and the trade deficit. Moreover, short-term investments made by the government in the nations abroad also get counted in the current account.

Loans and grants all come under the capital account.




31.Solution: a)

Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) is the primary instrument of Reserve Bank of India for modulating liquidity and transmitting interest rate signals to the market. It refers to the difference between the two key rates viz. repo rate and reverse repo rate. Informally, Liquidity Adjustment Facility is also known as Liquidity Corridor.
While repo injects liquidity into the system, the Reverse repo absorbs the liquidity
from the system. RBI only announces Repo Rate. The Reverse Repo Rate is linked to
Repo Rate and is 100 basis points (1%) below repo rate.



    
    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    




32.           Solution: c)

http://jandhanyojana.net/how-to-become-a-bank-mitra/




33.           Solution: a)

Reverse repo rate is the rate at which the central bank of a country (Reserve Bank of India in case of India) borrows money from commercial banks within the country. It is a monetary policy instrument which can be used to control the money supply in the country.


An increase in the reverse repo rate will decrease the money supply and vice-versa, other things remaining constant. An increase in reverse repo rate means that commercial banks will get more incentives to park their funds with the RBI, thereby decreasing the supply of money in the market.

So, the reverse repo takes away funds from the bank (cash is not with them).




34.           Solution: a)

The Northern Iraq offensive began on 5 June 2014, when the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL; sometimes referred to as the Islamic State (IS)) and aligned forces began a major offensive in northern Iraq against the Iraqi government, following earlier clashes, which began in December 2013.

ISIL and aligned forces captured several cities and other territory, beginning with an attack on Samarra on 5 June followed by the seizure of Mosul on 10 June
and Tikrit on 11 June. As Iraqi government forces fled south on 13 June,
the Kurdish forces took control of the oil hub of Kirkuk, part of the disputed territories of Northern Iraq.




35.           Solution: b)

The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) is an international organization working in the field of nature conservation and sustainable use
of natural resources. It is involved in data gathering and analysis, research, field projects, advocacy, lobbying and education. IUCN's mission is to "influence, encourage and assist societies throughout the world to conserve nature and to ensure
that any use of natural resources is equitable and ecologically sustainable."






    
    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    

Over the past decades, IUCN has widened its focus beyond conservation ecology and now incorporates issues related to gender equality, poverty
alleviation and sustainable business in its projects. Unlike other international NGOs, IUCN does not itself aim to mobilize the public in support of nature conservation. It tries to influence the actions of governments, business and other stakeholders by providing information and advice, and through lobbying and partnerships. The organization is best known to the wider public for compiling and publishing the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species, which assesses the conservation status of species worldwide.

IUCN has a membership of over 1200 governmental and non-governmental organizations.




36.           Solution: a)

http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2015/03/26/world/middleeast/yemen-crisis- explained.html?_r=0

Its explained comprehensively in this article.




37.           Solution: c)

President Pranab Mukherjee inaugurated Namaste Russia, a festival of Indian culture in Moscow during the last leg of his tour in Russia.

Namaste Russia will be six month long festival i.e. form May to November 2015. The festival seeks to enthrall the Russian audience with cultural events from India.

The festival is being hosted under the patronage of Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR) and Ministry of Culture of the Russian Federation. As part of the inauguration of this festival, Kathak dance performance was given by a team of dancers choreographed by Padma Bhushan Kumudini Lakhia.

This festival seeks to enhance and boost cultural bonds that build solid bridges of friendship and understanding between peoples of both countries.

The festival will be toured in various regions in Russia that will help people living in different regions of Russia to deepen their engagement with contemporary and classical Indian Culture. As part of this festival, an exhibition of Indian painting and
sculpture will be also organized.










    
    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    

38.           Solution: c)

WHO can declare a country Ebola free, if no new cases are reported over two incubation periods of virus i.e. 21 days.

In case of Liberia, no new cases of Ebola were reported in past 42 days i.e. twice the number of days the virus requires to incubate. The last confirmed death in Liberia was reported on 27 March 2015.

The current outbreak is the deadliest in history. It was initially centred on Guinea’s remote south-eastern region of Nzerekore in early 2014 and later had spread to Liberia and Sierra Leone. Liberia was worst hit among the western African nations in this outbreak.




39.           Solution: a)

Lithium chloride is mainly used for the production of lithium metal by electrolysis of a LiCl/KCl melt at 450 °C (842 °F). LiCl is also used as a
brazing flux for aluminium in automobile parts. It is used as a desiccant for drying air streams.[5] In more specialized applications, lithium chloride finds some use
in organic synthesis, e.g. as an additive in the Stille reaction. Also, in biochemical applications, it can be used to precipitate RNA from cellular extracts.[8]
Lithium chloride is also used as a flame colorant to produce dark red flames. Lithium chloride is used as a relative humidity standard in the calibration of
hygrometers.

Lithium salts affect the central nervous system in a variety of ways. While
the citrate, carbonate, and orotate salts are currently used to treat bipolar disorder, other lithium salts including the chloride were used in the past. For a short time in the 1940s lithium chloride was manufactured as a salt substitute, but this was prohibited after the toxic effects of the compound were recognized.

It is Potassium chloride which is widely used as salt substitute but with certain precautions (for ex, People with kidney failure, heart failure or diabetes should not use this salt substitute without medical advice).





40.           Solution: c)

By signing of MoU Indian and Iranian commercial entities will be able to commence negotiations for finalization of a commercial contract.






    
    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    

Under the contract, Indian firms will lease two existing berths at the Chabahar Port and operationalize them as container and multi-purpose cargo terminals

The port is strategically located in Sistan-Balochistan Province on Iran’s southeastern coast. It will act as strategic utility for India.

It will also help India to save transportation costs as it will be used to ship crude oil and urea.

India will get sea-land access route to Afghanistan bypassing Pakistan.

Thus it will open opportunities for Indian companies to explore Afghanistan’s mineral wealth, believed to be worth $1-3 trillion, for mutual benefit.

The availability of functional container and cargo terminal at the port will provide
Afghanistan’s garland road network system alternate access to a sea port.




41.Solution: b)

The Chakma also known as the Daingnet people , is an ethnic group concentrated in the Chittagong Hill Tracts of Bangladesh. Today, the geographic distribution of Chakmas is spread across Bangladesh and parts of northeastern India (mainly in Mizoram), western Burma, China and diaspora communities in North
America, Europe, South Korea, Japan and Australia.

Within the Chittagong Hill Tracts, the Chakma are the largest ethnic group and make up half of the region's population. The Chakma are divided into 46 clans or Gozas. They have their own language, customs and culture, and profess Theravada Buddhism. The Chakma Royal Family is one of the major Buddhist royal houses of the South Asia.




42.           Solution: d)

The energy that we get from biofuels originally came from the sun. This solar energy was captured through photosynthesis by the plants used as feedstocks (raw materials) for biofuel production, and stored in the plants' cells.

Many different plant materials can be used for biofuel:

•    Sugar crops (such as sugar cane or sugar beet), or starch (like corn or maize) can be fermented to produce ethanol, a liquid fuel commonly used for transportation.








    
    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    

•    Natural oils from plants like oil palm, soybean, or algae can be burned directly in a diesel engine or a furnace, or blended with petroleum, to produce fuels such as biodiesel.

•    Wood and its byproducts can be converted into liquid biofuels, such as methanol or ethanol, or into woodgas.

•    Wood can also be burned as solid fuel, like the familiar firewood. Chipped waste biomass, such as the tops of trees discarded by logging operations, can be burned in specially designed furnaces.

Researchers are working to improve biofuel production processes. Before bioenergy can make a larger contribution to the energy economy, feedstocks, agricultural practices, and technologies that are efficient in their use of land, water and fossil fuel must be developed.




43.           Solution: d)

5th and 6th schedule directly concern themselves with tribal governance as all the special provisions made under the constitution fall under it. For e.g. constituting a tribal advisory council; giving tribals control over land and forests etc.

7th schedule is concerned with the division of legislative power between Centre and States. It concerns with forests; welfare; mining and minerals which have a direct bearing on the tribal community in India.

10th schedule is about anti-defection.




44.           Solution: b)

Cumulus



















Detached, generally dense clouds and with sharp outlines that develop vertically in



    
    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    

the form of rising mounds, domes or towers with bulging upper parts often resembling a cauliflower.

The sunlit parts of these clouds are mostly brilliant white while their bases are relatively dark and horizontal.

Over land cumulus develops on days of clear skies, and is due diurnal convection; it appears in the morning, grows, and then more or less dissolves again toward evening.

For more, Please refer this link:

http://www.srh.noaa.gov/srh/jetstream/clouds/cloudwise/types.html




45.           Solution: d)

The protected area (PA) network in India has helped to conserve a significant part of the country's biodiversity.

Most PAs in India have a core zone with national park status and a peripheral buffer zone, which can be either a wildlife sanctuary or a reserve forest. Resource use has been restricted to the buffer zones, where it has been regulated, while core areas are completely closed. A 1991 amendment to the Wildlife Protection Act specifies that, in wildlife sanctuaries, the chief wildlife warden must certify that any manipulation does not harm wildlife, and that the manipulation be approved by the state government.

State governments have constituted national parks with legislations such as Kaziranga and Manas national park. This is because forests and their conservation comes in the concurrent list.




46.           Solution: d)

Read the causes in detail (you can overlook technical details), because this is the most comprehensive account of climate change you can get for UPSC.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Climate_change#Causes
To understand how plate tectonics can force climate change, consider this example: The position of the continents determines the geometry of the oceans and therefore
influences patterns of ocean circulation. The locations of the seas are important in
controlling the transfer of heat and moisture across the globe, and therefore, in determining global climate. A recent example of tectonic control on ocean circulation
is the formation of the Isthmus of Panama about 5 million years ago, which shut off




    
    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    

direct mixing between the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. This strongly affected
the ocean dynamics of what is now the Gulf Stream and may have led to Northern
Hemisphere ice cover.




47.           Solution: c)

Protection of national flag and honour is a part of Fundamental rights for which laws have been enacted.

Labour rights have been covered by mentioning equal wage for equal work for men and women; ensuring a living wage for labourers; their participation in the management of industries etc.





48.           Solution: a)

To address the longevity risks among the workers in unorganized sector and to encourage the workers in unorganized sector to voluntarily save for their retirement

•   The APY is focussed on all citizens in the unorganized sector. All bank account holders may join APY. APY is applicable to all citizen of India aged between
18-40 years.
•   The scheme is administered by the Pension Fund Regulatory and
Development Authority (PFRDA) through NPS architecture.
•   Under the APY, there is guaranteed minimum monthly pension for the subscribers ranging between Rs. 1000 and Rs. 5000 per month. GoI will also co-contribute 50% of the subscriber’s contribution or Rs. 1000 per annum, whichever is lower. Government co-contribution is available for those who are not covered by any Statutory Social Security Schemes and is not income tax payer. The pension is guaranteed by GoI.




49.           Solution: d)

Highlights of The Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana:

•   Eligibility: Available to people in the age group of 18 to 50 and having a bank account. People who join the scheme before completing 50 years can, however, continue to have the risk of life cover up to the age of 55 years subject to payment of premium.

•    Premium:  Rs 330 per annum. It will be auto-debited in one instalment.





    
    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    

•    Payment Mode:  The payment of premium will be directly auto-debited by the bank from the subscribers account.

•    Risk Coverage: Rs. 2 Lakh in case of death for any reason.

•    Terms of Risk Coverage: A person has to opt for the scheme every
year. He can also prefer to give a long-term option of continuing, in which case his account will be auto-debited every year by the bank.

•    Who will implement this Scheme?: The scheme will be offered by Life Insurance Corporation and all other life insurers who are willing to join the scheme and tie-up with banks for this purpose.

Accidental insurance is covered under PM Suraksha Bima Yojana.




50.           Solution: b)

NITI Ayog is not concerned with economic planning, it is concerned with economic policy. That is the major difference between this and Planning Commission.

Parliament used to approve the five year plans and even now the annual budget (an economic plan) is approved by the Parliament.

Zila panchayats consolidate the plans received by the lower tiers and forward it to the
District Planning Committee.

51. Solution: d)

The Prime Minister's Office (PMO) consists of the immediate staff of the Prime Minister of India, as well as multiple levels of support staff reporting to the Prime Minister.

•    The PMO provides secretarial assistance to the Prime Minister - virtual 'think tank' of the PM.

•    It is headed by the Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister.

•    The PMO includes the anti-corruption unit and the public wing dealing with grievances.

•    The office houses the Prime Minister and few selected officers of Indian Civil Service who work with him to manage and coordinate government and his office.

•    The Prime Minister through his office coordinates with all ministers in the central union cabinet, minister of independent charges and governors and
ministers of state government.




    
    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    

•    Monitors the actions taken by the PM in earlier meetings.

•    It generally handles all activities not assigned to any particular department.

•    Its importance increases wrt to cabinet too as PM is the coordinator of the
Cabinet.




52.           Solution: a)

A welfare state is a concept of government in which the state plays a key role in the protection and promotion of the economic and social well-being of its citizens. It is based on the principles of equality of opportunity, equitable distribution of wealth, and public responsibility for those unable to avail themselves of the minimal provisions for a good life. The general term may cover a variety of forms of economic and social organization. The sociologist T.H. Marshall identified the modern welfare state as a distinctive combination of democracy, welfare, and capitalism (not fully).

Even though Kautilya’s and Ashoka’s state were not democratic, they were welfare states.




53.           Solution: d)

Constitution of India prescribes that Minister will be appointed on the advice of PM
and CM respectively in Centre and States.

The 91st amendment restricts the Council of Ministers to 15% of the total strength of
Lok Sabha.

Other conventions like Majority party leader; coalition leader etc. are also followed when appointing Ministers.




54.           Solution: d)

It has been explained beautifully in the later half of the article

http://zeenews.india.com/business/news/finance/rupees-free-fall-how-it-will- impact-you_82322.html

FDI will be affected because foreign investors are sensitive to a) the value of the currency that determines the actual value of their investment; and b) the confidence in the Indian economy because of a depreciating rupee. In the long run however, these investors may be more interested in investing due to the lower value of rupee in
the exchange market.




    
    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    




55.           Solution: a)

If an individual ministry has taken the decision, which has not been considered by the cabinet, the president can send the file for re-consideration.

Also, the president can not just ask for the files, but also ask details about the decisions that are to be taken in the council of ministers.

However, he cannot suspend it, if it enjoys confidence in the Lok Sabha.




56.           Solution: b)

The primary object of an adjournment motion is to draw the attention of the House to a recent matter of urgent public importance having serious consequences and in regard to which a motion or a resolution with proper notice will be too late. The matter proposed to be raised should be of such a character that something very grave which affects the whole country and its security has happened and the House is required to pay its attention immediately by interrupting the normal business of the House.

The adjournment motion is thus an extraordinary procedure which, if admitted, leads to setting aside the normal business of the House for discussing a
definite matter of urgent public importance.




57.Solution: d)

According to Ayurveda, water stored in a copper vessel has the ability to balance all the three doshas in your body, (vata, kapha and pitta) and it does so by positively charging the water. The water stored in a copper vessel is known as ‘tamara jal’ and is supposed to be consumed after storing the water in a copper vessel for at least eight hours.

Copper also helps cleanse and detox your stomach, regulate the working of your liver and kidneys, and proper elimination of waste and ensures the absorption of nutrients from food.

58.           Solution: c)

Fringing reef is distinguished from the other two main types (barrier reefs and atolls) in that it has either an entirely shallow backreef zone (lagoon) or none at all. If a fringing reef grows directly from the shoreline (see photo, right) the reef flat extends
right to the beach and there is no backreef. In other cases (e.g., most of the





    
    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    

Bahamas), fringing reefs may grow hundreds of yards from shore and contain extensive backreef areas with numerous seagrass meadows and patch reefs.

This type of coral reef is the most common type of reef found in
the Caribbeanand Red Sea. Darwin believed that fringing reefs are the first kind of reefs to form around a landmass in a long-term reef growth process.

59.           Solution: b)

Respiration( taking in oxygen) is carried out both at night and in the day. But, at night no photosynthesis takes place, so the plant is only taking in oxygen, not CO2. In the day, photosynthesis also takes place, which counters the effect of respiration on gases around the plant. So, during the night, concentration of CO2 is more, and oxygen is less around the plant.
During the day, more oxygen and less CO2 is present around the plant as compared to at night.

60.           Solution: a)

Aadhar is a biometrics-based digital identity assigned for a person's lifetime, verifiable online instantly in the public domain, at any time, from anywhere, in a paperless way. It is designed to enable government agencies to deliver a retail public service securely based on biometric data (fingerprint, iris scan and face photo), along with demographic data (name, age, gender, address, parent/spouse name, mobile phone number) of a person. The data is transmitted in encrypted form over the internet for authentication, aiming to free it from the limitations of physical presence of a person at a given place.

61.Solution: d)

Plant biotechnology continues to create new opportunities in agriculture, environmental biology, chemical production, and medicine. The development of genetically modified crops with valued traits like herbicide and pest resistance, drought and salt tolerance, or increased yield requires different
combinations of expression elements to achieve optimum effects.

Applications like engineering plants for phytoremediation or biofuel research often involve complex design and assembly of DNA elements that require advanced cloning tools.

62.           Solution: a)

Read the intro only that too generally. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pioneer_10 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Voyager_1
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/New_Horizons


    
    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    

63.           Solution: d)

Article 143 read verbatim: “Power of President to consult Supreme Court ( 1 ) If at any time it appears to the President that a question of law or fact has arisen, or is likely to arise, which is of such a nature and of such public importance that it is expedient to obtain the opinion of the Supreme Court upon it, he may refer the question to that Court for consideration and the Court may, after such hearing as it thinks fit, report to the President its opinion thereon

(2) The President may, notwithstanding anything in the proviso to Article 131, refer a dispute of the kind mentioned in the said proviso to the Supreme Court for opinion and the Supreme Court shall, after such hearing as it thinks fit, report to the President its opinion thereon.”

64.           Solution: d)

Although it is a technical topic, UPSC keeps asking questions on this. Go through this link and get a general idea of how these crops are made, and why they are made.

http://cls.casa.colostate.edu/transgeniccrops/what.html http://cls.casa.colostate.edu/transgeniccrops/how.html
65.           Solution: b)






































    
    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    




66.           Solution: a)

For changing powers, special majority is required; for number of judges it is not.

The original Constitution of 1950 envisaged a Supreme Court with a Chief Justice and 7 puisne Judges - leaving it to Parliament to increase this number. In the early years, all the Judges of the Supreme Court sat together to hear the cases presented before them. As the work of the Court increased and arrears of cases began to cumulate, Parliament increased the number of Judges from 8 in 1950 to 11 in 1956,
14 in 1960, 18 in 1978 and 26 in 1986. As the number of the Judges has increased, they sit in smaller Benches of two and three - coming together in larger Benches of 5 and more only when required to do so or to settle a difference of opinion or controversy.




67.           Solution: d)

This link contains the places famous for all types of handicraft in India. Just scan through it once.

http://www.mapsofindia.com/maps/crafts/




68.           Solution: d)

The Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, also Commission on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources,
and CCAMLR, is part of the Antarctic Treaty System. The Convention was opened for signature on 1 August 1980 and entered into force on 7 April 1982 by the
Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, headquartered in Tasmania, Australia. The goal is to preserve marine life and environmental integrity in and near Antarctica.

It was established in large part to concerns that an increase in krill catches in
the Southern Ocean could have a serious impact on populations of other marine life which are dependent upon krill for food.

The Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the Convention on Biological Diversity is an international agreement on biosafety, as a supplement to the Convention on Biological Diversity. The Biosafety Protocol seeks to protect biological diversity from the potential risks posed by genetically modified organisms resulting from modern
biotechnology.







    
    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    

69.           Solution: c)

Consider this food chain. With this you can draw common links to other type of marine food chains.

•    primary producer/autotrophs—organisms, like plants, that produce food.
Examples: phytoplankton, algae

•    primary consumer/heterotroph—an animal that eats primary producers.
Examples: mussels, oysters, krill, copepods, shrimp

•    secondary consumer/heterotroph—an animal that eats primary consumers. Examples: blue claw crab, lobster, seastar, humpback whale, silverside

•    tertiary consumer/heterotroph—an animal that eats secondary consumers. Examples: shark, dolphin

•    apex predator/heterotroph—an animal at the top of the food chain with no predators. Examples: shark, dolphin

•    decomposer/detritivores—organisms that break down dead plant and animal material and wastes and release it again as energy and nutrients in the ecosystem. Examples: bacteria, fungi, worms, crabs




70.           Solution: c)

The Gregorian calendar is based upon the solar system and hence it has 365 days. The Hindu calendar is based upon the lunar and solar systems. With the new moon appearing after every 27.1/2 days, the 12 lunar months take 354 days. The difference of 11 days is adjusted every three years when an additional month called adhik-mas is added. The difference between the two calendars explains why the dates of Hindu festivals vary every year. The names of the 12 months are Chaitra, Vaishakh, Jyeshth, Ashadh, Shravan, Bhadrapad (Bhadon), Ashvin, Kartik, Margashirsha (Aahan), Poush, Magh and Phagun. Hindus sometimes use abbreviated forms for some months.




71. Solution: b)

Second statement is wrong. It is West coast which receives abnormal rainfall during
El Nino.

It is because of low pressure in eastern Pacific (i.e. western coast of South and North
America) the region receives heavy rainfall. Whereas, its western counterpart,





    
    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    

including India receive low rainfall thanks to high pressure created by El Nion in the region.




72.           Solution: d)

The National Seeds Policy provides for intellectual property protection to new varieties and set up institutes for the planned development of the sector. The policy has nine major thrust areas including the production of quality seeds by the private sector, establishing state seed testing laboratories, access to breeder seed, etc

The main features of the National Seeds Policy, 2002

•   Development of new and improved varieties of plants
•   Timely availability of quality seeds
•   Compulsory registration of seeds
•   Creation of infrastructure facilities
•   Quality assurance, promotion of seed industry,
•   Abolition of licensing for seed dealers,
•   Facility for import of best quality seeds,
•   Encouragement to export of seeds
•   Creation of Seed Banks and National Seed Grid.

These initiatives will encourage investment in research and development, thereby ensuring availability of high yielding varieties of seeds which will lead to higher production and improving the economic condition of the farmers in the country.




73.           Solution: a)

The meaning of Lai Haraoba is the festival of gods and goddesess. It is performed for the Umang-Lai (forest deity). Ougri Hangen, song of creation and Heijing Hirao a ritualistic song is sung on the last day of Lai Haraoba festival.

Mizo are traditionally known as a ‘singing tribe’. The regional folk songs of Mizoram constitute the richest heritage of Mizos. Saikuti, a poetess of Mizoram composed songs in praise of warriors, brave hunters, young men aspiring to be great warriors and hunters etc.

As per Mizo custom during the Chapchar Kut festival not only singing, dance should also continue throughout the festival. Special occasion for singing and dancing is called ‘chai’ and songs are known as ‘chai hia’ (chai songs).








    
    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    

74.           Solution: d)











































75.Solution: d)

It has been explained beautifully in this article. http://www.unesco.org/mab/doc/ekocd/chapter11.html



76.           Solution: d)

UPSC keeps asking questions based on Environment related organizations in India. Here is the complete list with links to relevant Wikipedia pages.

Subordinate and statutory bodies

•    Andaman & Nicobar Islands Forest and Plantation Development
Corporation (Public Sector Undertaking)

•    Animal Welfare Board of India


    
    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    

•    Botanical Survey of India (BSI), Kolkata

•    Central Pollution Control Board

•    Central Zoo Authority, New Delhi

•    Directorate of Forest Education (DFE), Dehradun

•    Forest Survey of India (FSI), Dehradun

•    Indira Gandhi National Forest Academy (IGNFA), Dehradun

•    National Afforestation and Eco-Development Board

•    National Biodiversity Authority, Chennai

•    National Ganga River Basin Authority

•    National Institute of Animal Welfare

•    National Museum of Natural History (NMNH), New Delhi

•    National Tiger Conservation Authority

•    National Zoological Park (NZP), New Delhi

•    Zoological Survey of India (ZSI), Kolkata

Autonomous bodies

•    Govind Ballabh Pant Institute of Himalayan Environment and Development, Almora

•    Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education (ICFRE), Dehradun

•    Arid Forest Research Institute

•    Forest Research Institute (India)

•    Himalayan Forest Research Institute and many others

•    Indian Institute of Forest Management

•    Indian Plywood Industries Training and Research Institute

•    Wildlife Institute of India (WII)




77.Solution: c)

The Global Competitiveness Report 2014-2015 assesses the competitiveness landscape of 144 economies, providing insight into the drivers of their productivity



    
    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    

and prosperity. The report remains the most comprehensive assessment of national competitiveness worldwide, providing a platform for dialogue between government, business and civil society about the actions required to improve economic prosperity. Competitiveness is defined as the set of institutions, policies and factors that determine the level of productivity of a country. The level of productivity, in turn, sets the level of prosperity that can be earned by an economy.

The different aspects of competitiveness are captured in 12 pillars, which compose the Global Competitiveness Index that include terms like innovation; skills etc.




78.           Solution: a)

Skim through the introduction part. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Free-radical_theory_of_aging
The chain reaction caused by free radicals can lead to cross-linking of atomic structures. In cases where the free radical-induced chain reaction involves base pair molecules in a strand of DNA, the DNA can become cross-linked. Such cross linking and damage to cells can even lead to cancer.




79.           Solution: a)

Vitamin B6 - Part of an enzyme needed for making new cells; important to nerve function

Vitamin C - Antioxidant; part of an enzyme needed for protein metabolism;
important for immune system health; aids in iron absorption

Vitamin E- Antioxidant; protects cell walls
You can read more here http://www.emedicinehealth.com/vitamins_their_functions_and_sources-
health/article_em.htm

80.           Solution: d)

Some types of nanoparticles are expected to be benign and used for making paints and sunscreen lotion etc. However, there are also dangerous nanosized particles and chemicals that are known to accumulate in the food chain and have been known for many years. The list and processes are mentioned in the link below.

http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Nanotechnology/Health_effects_of_nanoparticles#N
anotoxicology:_Health_effects_of_nanotechnology




    
    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    




81.Solution: c)

Non-physical savings essentially mean financial savings by households; corporate and the government. Major portion comes from the households and private sector.

This saving is mostly in the form of bank deposits, securities, insurance or investment.

If inflation levels are high, the returns on both deposit and investment will be low. This will discourage saving.

However, if all other options happen, they will push the volume and base of savings up and will help in overall growth of the Indian economy.




82.           Solution: d)

Samkhya is strongly dualist. Sāmkhya philosophy regards the universe as consisting of two realities; Puruṣa (consciousness) and prakriti (matter). Jiva (a living being) is that state in which puruṣa is bonded to prakriti in some form. This fusion, state the Samkhya scholars, led to the emergence of buddhi (“spiritual awareness”) andahankara (individualized ego consciousness, “I-maker”). The universe is described by this school as one created by Purusa-Prakriti entities infused with various permutations and combinations of variously enumerated elements, senses, feelings, activity and mind. During the state of imbalance, one of more constituents overwhelm the others, creating a form of bondage, particularly of the mind. The end of this imbalance, bondage is called liberation, or moksha by Samkhya school of Hinduism.

The existence of God or supreme being is not directly asserted, nor considered relevant by the Samkhya philosophers. Sāṃkhya denies the final
cause of Ishvara (God). While Samkhya school of Hinduism considers the Vedas as a
reliable source of knowledge, it is an atheistic philosophy




83.           Solution: d)

The Ājīvika school is known for its Niyati doctrine of absolute determinism, the premise that there is no free will, that everything that has happened, is happening and will happen is entirely preordained and a function of cosmic principles. Ājīvika considered the karma doctrine as a fallacy. Ajivika metaphysics included a theory of atoms similar to the Vaisheshika school of Hinduism, where everything was composed of atoms, qualities emerged from aggregates of atoms, but the aggregation
and nature of these atoms was predetermined by cosmic forces. Ājīvikas were



    
    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    

atheists and rejected the authority of the Vedas, but they believed that in every living being is an Atman (soul) – a central premise of Hinduism and Jainism




84.           Solution: d)

The novel Samskara is an accurate estimate of brahmin society in the sixties or more correctly the brahmin societies of all times which suffer the serious problems of backwardness despite having intellectuals among them. Reason behind all silly problems that emerge is that their energy is directed by age-old convictions, beliefs, customs, traditions and superstition. Ananthamurthy raises questions on very sensitive issues like rituals, samskara, untouchability, sex, community feeling. He scans human weakness such as greed, lust and lack of human concern in the Brahmin community. Ananthamurthy’s characters favour freedom from the life in shackles of ritualistic performances. Naranappa the rebel character is anti brahminical in deeds ,but Praneshacharya who earned the title 'the crest jewel of vedic learning' rejects the double standard thinking after the death of his wife Bhagirathi. He wants to settle his life with Chandri a prostitute. The sudden death of Naranappa brings the real examination of Acharya's ideals, learning, and wisdom. This event brings a real man out of Acharya's being, burdened with suffocating scriptural knowledge. He wants to live like an ordinary man neither a righteous brahmin nor the crest jewel of vedic learning.




85.           Solution: d)

Originally the theatre form Swang, was mainly music-based. Gradually, prose too, played its role in the dialogues. The softness of emotions, accomplishment of rasa alongwith the development of character can be seen in this theatre form. The two important styles of Swang are from Rohtak and Haathras. In the style belonging to Rohtak, the language used is Haryanvi (Bangru) and in Haathras, it is Brajbhasha.

Bhavai is the traditional theatre form of Gujarat. The centers of this form are Kutch and Kathiawar. The instruments used in Bhavai are: bhungal, tabla, flute, pakhaawaj, rabaab, sarangi, manjeera, etc. In Bhavai, there is a rare synthesis of devotional and romantic sentiments.




86.           Solution: b)

Pala art, also called Pala-Sena art or Eastern Indian art, artistic style that flourished in what are now the states of Bihar and West Bengal, India, and in what is now Bangladesh. Named for the dynasty that ruled the region from the 8th to the 12th century ce, Pala style was transmitted chiefly by means of bronze sculptures and
palm-leaf paintings, celebrating the Buddha and other divinities.


    
    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    

Pala-period bronzes, which were cast by the lost-wax process, consist of an alloy of eight metals. They represent various divinities and, being mainly small in size and thus portable, were intended for private worship. In terms of style, the metal images largely continued the Gupta tradition of Sarnath but endowed it with a certain heavy sensuousness. They differ little from contemporary stone sculptures of the region but surpass them in the precise definition of ornamental detail, in a certain elegant virtuosity, and in their emphasis on plasticity. The bronze sculptures from this area played an important part in the diffusion of Indian influence in Southeast Asia.




87.           Solution: a)

It was considered for a long time that the Himalayas stood as a natural barrier to protect India against invasions. But, the passes in the northwest mountains such as the Khyber, Bolan, Kurram and Gomal provided easy routes between India and Central Asia. These passes are situated in the Hindukush, Sulaiman and Kirthar ranges. From prehistoric times, there was a continuous flow of traffic through these passes. Many people came to India through these passes as invaders and immigrants. The Indo-Aryans, the Indo-Greeks, Parthians, Sakas, Kushanas, Hunas and Turks entered India through these passes. The Swat valley in this region formed another important route. Alexander of Macedon came to India through this route. Apart from invading armies, missionaries and merchants came to India using these routes. Therefore, these passes in the northwest mountains had facilitated trade as well as cultural contacts between India and the Central Asia.




88.           Solution: c)

Mesolithic or Middle Stone Age falls roughly from 10000 B.C. to 6000 B.C. It was the transitional phase between the Paleolithic Age and Neolithic Age. Mesolithic remains are found in Langhanj in Gujarat, Adamgarh in Madhya Pradesh and also in some places of Rajasthan.

In the sites of Mesolithic Age, a different type of stone tools is found. These are tiny stone artifacts, often not more than five centimeters in size, and therefore called microliths. The hunting-gathering pattern of life continued during this period.

However, there seems to have been a shift from big animal hunting to small animal hunting and fishing. The use of bow and arrow also began during this period. Also, there began a tendency to settle for longer periods in an area. Therefore, domestication of animals, horticulture and primitive cultivation started. Animal bones are found in these sites and these include dog, deer, boar and ostrich. Occasionally, burials of the dead along with some microliths and shells seem to have
been practiced.




    
    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    




89.           Solution: d)

Knowledge of surface ocean currents is essential in reducing costs of shipping, since traveling with them reduces fuel costs. In the wind powered sailing-ship era, knowledge was even more essential. A good example of this is the Agulhas Current, which long prevented Portuguese sailors from reaching India. In recent times,
around-the-world sailing competitors make good use of surface currents to build and
maintain speed. Ocean currents are also very important in the dispersal of many life forms. An example is the life-cycle of the European Eel.

Ocean currents are important in the study of marine debris, and vice versa. These currents also affect temperatures throughout the world. For example, the ocean current that brings warm water up the north Atlantic to northwest Europe also cumulatively and slowly blocks ice from forming along the seashores, which would also block ships from entering and exiting inland waterways and seaports, hence ocean currents play a decisive role in influencing the climates of regions through which they flow. Cold ocean water currents flowing from polar and sub-polar regions bring in a lot ofplankton that are crucial to the continued survival of several key sea creature species in marine ecosystems. Since plankton are the food of fish, abundant fish populations often live where these currents prevail.

Ocean currents can also be used for marine power generation, with areas off of
Japan, Florida and Hawaii being considered for test projects.




90.           Solution: d)

Mahavira regarded all objects, both animate and inanimate, have souls and various degrees of consciousness. They possess life and feel pain when they are injured.

Mahavira rejected the authority of the Vedas and objected to the Vedic rituals. He advocated a very holy and ethical code of life. Even the practice of agriculture was considered sinful as it causes injury to the earth, worms and animals. Similarly the doctrine of asceticism and renunciation was also carried to extreme lengths by the practice of starvation, nudity and other forms of self-torture.

91.Solution: a)

Bentinck took effective steps to prevent the ritual of child sacrifice at Saugar Island in Bengal. He not only prohibited female infanticide but declared them as punishable crime. Moreover, he declared the welfare of subjects was his cause in India. This was
also seen in the several laws and regulations he enacted.







    
    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    

William Bentinck adopted a policy of non-intervention and non-aggression with Indian states. If at all he interfered in the affairs of the Indian states, it was only to end any form of misgovernment and never to annex any territory.

The introduction of English Education was a significant event of Lord William Bentinck’s administration. He appointed a committee headed by Lord Macaulay to make recommendations for the promotion of education.




92.           Solution: a)

Henry Vivian Derozio - founder of the Young Bengal Movement - was born in
Calcutta in 1809 and taught in the Hindu College, Calcutta. He died of cholera in
1833. His followers were known as the Derozians and their movement the Young
Bengal Movement.

They attacked old traditions and decadent customs. They also advocated women’s rights and their education. They founded associations and organized debates against idol worship, casteism and superstitions.




93.           Solution: d)

The Extremists had no faith in the British sense of justice and fair play. They pointed out the forceful means by which the British had taken control of India. They believed that political rights will have to be fought for. They had the spirit of self-reliance and self-determination.

Their main objective was to attain Swaraj or complete independence and not just self-government. In contrast, the main Demands of Moderates

•   Expansion and reform of legislative councils.
•   Greater opportunities for Indians in higher posts by holding the ICS
examination simultaneously in England and in India.
•   Separation of the judiciary from the executive.
•   More powers for the local bodies.
•   Reduction of land revenue and protection of peasants from
•   unjust landlords.
•   Abolition of salt tax and sugar duty.
•   Reduction of spending on army.
•   Freedom of speech and expression and freedom to form associations









    
    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    

94.           Solution: a)

The Swadeshi Movement involved programmes like the boycott of government service, courts, schools and colleges and of foreign goods, promotion of Swadeshi goods, Promotion of National Education through the establishment of national schools and colleges. It was both a political and economic movement.

The Swadeshi Movement was a great success. In Bengal, even the landlords joined the movement. The women and students took to picketing. Students refused using books made of foreign paper.

The government adopted several tough measures. It passed several Acts to crush the movement. The Swadeshi volunteers were beaten badly. The cry of Bande Mataram was forbidden. Schools and colleges were warned not to allow their students to take part in the movement or else their, aid would be stopped. Some Indian government employees lost their jobs. Extremist leaders Bala Gangadhar Tilak, Lala Lajpat Rai, Bipin Chandra Pal and Aurobindo Ghosh were imprisoned and deported.




95.           Solution: c)

Lucknow Pact, (December 1916), agreement made by the Indian National Congressheaded by Maratha leader Bal Gangadhar Tilak and the All-India Muslim League led by Muhammad Ali Jinnah; it was adopted by the Congress at
its Lucknow session on December 29 and by the league on Dec. 31, 1916. The meeting
at Lucknow marked the reunion of the moderate and radical wings of the Congress. The pact dealt both with the structure of the government of India and with the relation of the Hindu and Muslim communities.

On the former count, the proposals were an advance on Gopal Krishna Gokhale’s “political testament.” Four-fifths of the provincial and central legislatures were to be elected on a broad franchise, and half the executive council members, including those of the central executive council, were to be Indians elected by the councils
themselves. Except for the provision for the central executive, these proposals were largely embodied in the Government of India Act of 1919. The Congress also agreed to separate electorates for Muslims in provincial council elections and for weightage in their favour (beyond the proportions indicated by population) in all provinces except the Punjab and Bengal, where they gave some ground to the Hindu and Sikh minorities. This pact paved the way for Hindu-Muslim cooperation in the Khilafat movement and Mohandas Gandhi’s non-cooperation movement from 1920.




96.           Solution: a)

In 1937 elections were held under the provisions of the Government of India Act of
1935. Congress Ministries were formed in seven states of India. On 1 September 1939


    
    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    

the Second World War broke out. The British Government without consulting the people of India involved the country in the war. The Congress vehemently opposed it and as a mark of protest the Congress Ministries in the Provinces resigned on 12
December 1939. The Muslim League celebrated that day as the Deliverance Day. In
March 1940 the Muslim League demanded the creation of Pakistan.




97.           Solution: a)

The Khilafat movement was a very important event in the political history of India. The Muslims of India had a great regard for the Khilafat (Caliphate) which was held by the Ottoman Empire. During World War I, the Ottoman Empire (Turkey) joined the war in favour of Germany. But Turkey and Germany lost the war and a pact commonly known as Istanbul Accord was concluded between the Allied Forces on
3rdNovember 1918. According to this Pact the territories of Turkey were to be divided
among France, Greece and Britain.

During the war the Indian Muslims were in a very awkward position, because they had a deep-rooted devotion to the caliphate. They had profound respect for this holy institution. Therefore, their support to the British Government was subject to the safeguard and protection of the holy places of Turkey and on the condition that Turkey will not to be deprived of its territories. But the British Government could not fulfill both of these promises. The Treaty of Savers 1920 was imposed on Turkey and its territories like Samarna, Thrace and Anatolia were wrested from it and
distributed among European countries. A wave of anger swept across the Muslin World and the Indian Muslims rose against the British Government. Muslim leaders like Maulana Abdul Kalam Azad, Moulana Muhammad Ali Johar, Moulana Shoukat Ali and others reacted against the British Government policy and were put behind the bars.

98.           Solution: d)

Here is a list of schemes. Please go through the minor descriptions and the ministry who is running the scheme.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_government_schemes_in_India




99.            Solution: c)

The Sustainable Agriculture Initiative (SAI) Platform is the main food and drink industry initiative supporting the development of sustainable agriculture worldwide.

In 2002 Nestlé, Unilever and Danone created the Sustainable Agriculture Initiative
(SAI) Platform, a non-profit organization to facilitate sharing, at precompetitive



    
    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    

level, of knowledge and initiatives to support the development and implementation of sustainable agriculture practices involving the different stakeholders of the food chain.

SAI Platform today counts over 60 members, which actively share the same view on sustainable agriculture seen as "the efficient production of safe, high quality agricultural products, in a way that protects and improves the natural environment, the social and economic conditions of farmers, their employees and local communities, and safeguards the health and welfare of all farmed species".

Among the latest services and deliverables produced, the SAI Platform developed (or co-developed) Principles and Practices for sustainable water management at farm level; recommendations for Sustainability Performance Assessment (SPA); a standardised methodology for the dairy sector to assess green house gas
emissions; an Executives Training on Sustainable Sourcing; and many more.




100.         Solution: b)

According to the theory the onset of SW Monsoon over Indian subcontinent is driven by the shift of the subtropical westerly jet northwards from over the plains of India towards the Tibetan Plateau. This shift is due to the intense heating of the Plateau during the summer months. This shift of the westerly jet to the north of the Himalayas is not a slow and gradual process, as expected for most changes in
weather pattern. The primary cause of these is believed to be the height of the
Himalayas. As the Tibetan Plateau heats up the low pressure created over it pulls the westerly jet northwards. Due to lofty Himalayas, the westerly jet is inhibited from moving northwards. However, with continuous dropping pressure, sufficient force is created for the movement of the westerly jet across the Himalayas after a significant period. As such, the shift of the jet is sudden and abrupt causing
the bursting of SW Monsoon rains onto the Indian plains. The reverse shift happens
for the NE Monsoon. (Source – Wikipedia)























    
    
SIGHTS  MOCK    TESTS    –    2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TES      T    –    24    SOLUTIONS    

    
http://www.insightsonindia.com  

    

    






































































    
