                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  5 SOLUTIONS                     


1.   Solution: d)

This discrimination was the result of majoritarianism in SL.

The relation between the Sinhalese and Sri-Lankan Tamils has been strained since Sri Lanka gained independence from Britain in 1948, which ensued at the time when the nation‘s constitution was being drawn. The introduction of the Sinhala-only act in 1956 triggered riots in Sri Lanka. Further discrimination against the Tamil population in Sri Lanka in cultural, political, economic areas led to some Tamils harboring resentment against the Sinhalese groups and the Government.

Militant groups demanding independence for Tamils known as TNT and later as Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) formed in 1972. Since then, many Sinhalese and Tamils have been caught in this conflict and killed. The start of the civil war is said to have been in the July of 1983 with a deadly attack by LTTE on the Sri Lankan army. Many peace talks failed between the government and LTTE. From 1983 till the end of the civil war in 2009, there continued many offensive attacks both by LTTE and the Sri Lankan army. Attack by suicide bombers had become a trademark of the LTTE. This war forced many Tamils to find new homes in other countries like Canada and Australia.

In 2009, the Sri Lankan government mounted a concerted effort to use armed forces to eliminate the LTTE and their terrorism. While they were successful, there have been several allegations of human rights abuses by the Sri Lankan government. The war also resulted in thousands of Tamils being displaced from their homes and pushed into refugee camps in other regions. The rights of Tamils (refugees and otherwise) continues to be an important diplomatic issue the Sri Lankan government is dealing with.

2.   Solution: c)

Europium has no significant biological role and is relatively non-toxic compared to other heavy metals. Most applications of europium exploit the phosphorescence of europium compounds.

Europium is all around us, sprinkled inside billions of fluorescent sources around the world. Fluorescent lamps are coated with a variety of phosphor compounds, including europium, and filled with a mercury vapor. Electric current excites the mercury, and the energy is released again as ultraviolet light. When this ultraviolet light strikes the phosphor compound coated on the inside of the lamp, it glows with a unique color.





















http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                            Page 1
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  5 SOLUTIONS                     



Fluorescent lamps are coated inside with a variety of phosphor compounds, including europium, and filled


with a mercury vapor. They glow when struck by ultraviolet light


Europium emits bright reds and blues that really stand out. Another element, terbium, gives out greens. By combining the reds, greens and blues from different compounds, compact fluorescent lamps (CFLs) can emit white light, and run for hundreds of hours longer than incandescent bulbs. The same europium ions also enable bright reds and blues on a wide variety of display screens, from televisions to smart tablets and phones.

http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/unpacking-europium-mainstay-lighting-industry

3.   Solution: d)




























The nations which practice federalism. No need to remember all. Only those with which India has a close relationship or neighbourhood.



4.   Solution: d)

Scientists have found out what imparts iridescence to wings of insects and scales of fish.  Researchers have revealed that disordered layers of crystals give a silvery sheen to fish and a coloured, iridescence to insect wings. These crystal  layers  are the ―universal explanation‖ for the colourful reflections of many  creatures, say the researchers at the University of Bristol and University of Western Australia.

The study was published in the journal Interface this week.

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                            Page 2
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  5 SOLUTIONS                     


These creatures have evolved nano-scale structures that exploit light. The scales of these organisms are made up of microscopic layers of crystals that have a range of different thicknesses. As these crystals are arranged in a disorderly manner, they prevent light waves from propagating through a material. The light waves "bounce around inside the layers" and are eventually reflected back. These surfaces reflect more light than many man- made structures, producing colourful metallic iridescence or dazzling silver shine that we see in the natural world.

This phenomenon can be copied by humans to produce hyper-reflective surfaces like reflectors to make LED
lights more efficient, says a news report in BBC.

http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/scientists-find-what-imparts-sparkle-fish-scales-and-insect-wings

5.   Solution: d)

The western coast and northeastern India receive over about 400 cm of rainfall annualy. However, it is less
than 60 cm in western Rajasthan and adjoining parts of Gujarat, Haryana and Punjab. Rainfall is equally low in the interior of the Deccan plateau, and east of the Sahyadris. Why do these regions receive low rainfall? A third area of low precipitation is around Leh in Jammu and Kashmir. The rest of the country receives moderate rainfall. Snowfall is restricted to the Himalayan region.



6.   Solution: a)

This has been explained in the previous question. One of the examples can be the recent cyclone Hudhudh which devastated the Andhra Pradesh coasts.

7.   Solution: d)

Refer to the section 11.6.1 for the description of all phenomena connected with the refraction of light.

8.   Solution: c)























http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                            Page 3
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  5 SOLUTIONS                     



9.   Solution: b)

Federations are contrasted with unitary governments.

Under the unitary system, either there is only one level of government or the sub-units are subordinate to the central government. The central government can pass on orders to the provincial or the local government. But in a federal system, the central government cannot order the state government to do something. State government has powers of its own for which it is not answerable to the central government. Both these governments are separately answerable to the people.

10. Solution: d)

Drainage patterns as shown in the image with description





































11. Solution: b)

A rectangular drainage pattern develops on a strongly jointed rocky terrain. The radial pattern develops when streams flow in different directions from a central peak or dome like structure. A combination of several patterns may be found in the same drainage basin.



http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                            Page 4
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  5 SOLUTIONS                     


Since the Himalayan rivers are perennial; flow through large distances and great height, they are deeper and longer than the peninsular rivers.



12. Solution: a)

Some of the key features of federalism :

1 There are two or more levels (or tiers) of government.

2 Different tiers of government govern the same citizens, but each tier has its own JURISDICTION in specific matters of legislation, taxation and administration.

3 The jurisdictions of the respective levels or tiers of government are specified in the constitution. So the existence and authority of each tier of government is constitutionally guaranteed.

4 The fundamental provisions of the constitution cannot be unilaterally changed by one level of government. Such changes require the consent of both the levels of government.

5 Courts have the power to interpret the constitution and the powers of different levels of government. The highest court acts as an umpire if disputes arise between different levels of government in the exercise of their respective powers.

6 Sources of revenue for each level of government are clearly specified to ensure its financial autonomy.

7. The federal system thus has dual objectives: to safeguard and promote unity of the country, while at the same time accommodate regional diversity.

Therefore, two aspects are crucial for the institutions and practice of federalism. Governments at different levels should agree to some rules of power-sharing. They should also trust that each would abide by its part of the agreement. An ideal federal system has both aspects : mutual trust and agreement to live together. Panchayati Raj fits this description.



13. Solution: c)

http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/steep-decline-predatory-fish-population-past-40-years-says-study
















http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                            Page 5
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  5 SOLUTIONS                     


14. Solution: d)

Defence and currency are in the realm of the CG, hence directions can be given. Naxalism comes under law and order, which is in state list. So, no directions can be forced on the state governments.



15. Solution: c)

Increasing consumption of anti-depressants by humans is affecting bird populations, according to a recent study. The drugs find their way into the food chain of other species through sewage and effluent.

http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/prozac-has-negative-effect-bird-population-finds-study



16. Solution: d)

Social differences unite and well as divide. It depends on how a society reacts to it. If there is mutual respect and recognition of the uniqueness of each social class, it leads to greater cohesion and harmony.

Multi-cultural countries may or may not have social divisions. In societies where social differences tend to match with economic or other stark differences, experience social divisions. For e.g. blacks in America were socially different as well as economically very weak. And hence were discriminated against.

17. Solution: c)

Social divisions can be best accommodated in a democracy because every community has a say in the final outcome of a policy, law, rule, division of resources. Besides, it is all done through thoughtful, transparent and broad-based political negotiation.

While it is true that the politics of the day reflects these social divisions, it by no way means that it also exacerbates it. It can actually act as a binder and bring cohesion in divided social interests by acting as a bridge between them.



18. Solution: a)

Germany and Denmark have emerged as the top two green performers of 2014 (based on perception), according to the fourth edition of the Global Green Economy Index (GGEI). Sweden and Norway, on the other hand, have scored the highest based on performance.

The report applauds the countries‘ performance in both economic and  environmental categories of the index
and recognises their role as global green leaders.

The GGEI, produced by a private US-based consultancy called Dual Citizen LLC, releases a ranking of countries based on their performance in the global green economy as evaluated by expert practitioners. The report says it serves as an important communications tool for policy makers, international organisations and the private sector to evaluate green performance of countries.

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                            Page 6
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  5 SOLUTIONS                     


The United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) defines green economy as one that results in improved human well-being and social equity, while significantly reducing environmental risks and ecological scarcities. Such an economy is low carbon, resource efficient and socially inclusive.

For More: http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/germany-and-denmark-are-top-green-performers- according-global-green-economy-index



19. Solution: a)

After detecting a stimulus, organisms must provide a response in order to account for the change. A tropism is a response that an organism makes to a stimulus. An example of a common tropism in plants
is phototropism(light response). Plants grow towards light sources, and if the direction of light is changed, the
plant will also change its direction of growth to accommodate for survival.

Another example would be geotropism (response to gravity). Jellyfish, which are marine organisms, swim based on gravity, and when the force of gravity is changed in their environment, they also change their swimming activity to accommodate. Likewise, humans have gravity receptors in our balance, or vestibular, systems, and we use this to adjust to gravity during our daily activities.

Hydrotropism (hydro- "water"; tropism "involuntary orientation by an organism, that involves turning or curving as a positive or negative response to a stimulus") is a plant's growth response in which the direction of growth is determined by a stimulus or gradient in water concentration.



20. Solution: d)




















21. Solution: d)

Existence of stark social divisions, coupled with very high economic inequality and heavy politicization of the same, may threaten democracy.



http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                            Page 7
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  5 SOLUTIONS                     


Mere existence of social differences or economic inequality does not threaten democracy. They are in fact part and  parcel  of any democratic nation‘s life. In fact, political  expressions of social divisions like gender etc. help fight such divisions collectively.



22. Solution: b)

http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/india-finally-get-national-air-quality-index http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Air_pollution#Pollutants


23. Solution: c)

The eddy covariance (EC) system is widely favoured by scientists across the world to measure the exchange of carbon dioxide, water vapour, methane, various other gases, and energy between the surface of earth and the atmosphere in different ecosystems. Advanced versions are increasingly being used by rice scientists to arrive at a fairer measure of emissions in rice ecosystems which have for long been targeted as major villains in pushing up agricultural GHGs.

http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/rice-fields-carbon-sinks



24. Solution: d)

Having several religions with their own approach to living is fine in a multi-cultural nation. The problem begins when religion is seen as the basis of the nation. The example of Northern Ireland shows the dangers of such an approach to nationalism. The problem becomes more acute when religion is expressed in politics in exclusive and partisan terms, when one religion and its followers are pitted against another. This happens when beliefs of one religion are presented as superior to those of other religions, when the demands of one religious group are formed in opposition to another and when state power is used to establish domination of one religious group over the rest. This manner of using religion in politics is communal politics.

Communal politics is based on the dea that religion is the principal basis of social community. Communalism involves thinking along the following lines. The followers of a particular religion must belong to one community. Their fundamental interests are the same. Any difference that they may have is irrelevant or trivial for community life

In its extreme form communalism leads to the belief that people belonging to different religions cannot live as equal citizens within one nation. Either, one of them has to dominate the rest or they have to form different nations.








http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                            Page 8
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  5 SOLUTIONS                     


25. Solution: d) Secular state
Communalism was and continues to be one of the major challenges to democracy in our country. The makers of our Constitution were aware of this challenge. That is why they chose the model of a secular state. This choice was reflected in several constitutional provisions.

    There is no official religion for the Indian state. Unlike the status of Buddhism in Sri Lanka, that of Islam in Pakistan and that of Christianity in England, our Constitution does not give a special status to any religion.
    The Constitution provides to all individuals and communities freedom to profess, practice and propagate any religion, or not to follow any.
    The Constitution prohibits discrimination on grounds of religion.
    At the same time, the Constitution allows the state to intervene in the matters of religion in order to ensure equality within religious communities. For example, it bans untouchability. Understood in this sense, secularism is not just an ideology of some parties or persons. This idea constitutes one of the foundations of our country.

Communalism should not be seen as a threat to some people in India. It threatens the very idea of India. That is why communalism needs to be combated. A secular Constitution like ours is necessary but not sufficient to combat communalism.



26. Solution: a)

MICROORGANISMS WHICH dwell on millions of tonnes of plastic pieces floating in oceans are turning out to be a huge help in cleaning the ocean surface. They not only break down the pollutant by eating it, but also make it sink. Analysis of over 1,000 images of plastic material drifting along Australian coastline has shown that diatom was the most common algae which kept on collecting on plastic pieces till they sank. There could be other complex creatures which feed on microbes and toxins. The observations can help explain why plastic pollution on ocean surfaces is not growing at the rate scientists feared it would. It could also give clues to new and improved waste disposal mechanisms on land.

http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/science-technology-briefs-0

27. Solution: a)

Sri Paramhansa was more into spiritual and devotional matters. His disciple swami Vivekananda was into opposing casteism and establishing a casteless society.

Other personalities like Gandhi, Ambedkar are well known.









http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                            Page 9
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  5 SOLUTIONS                     


28. Solution: d)

Partly due to their efforts and partly due to other socio-economic changes, castes and caste system in modern India have undergone great changes. With economic development, large scale URBANISATION, growth of literacy and education, OCCUPATIONAL MOBILITY and the weakening of the position of landlords in the villages, the old notions of CASTE HIERARCHY are breaking down. The landlords often belonged to upper castes and sought to perpetuate the discrimination meted out to the lower castes. Since they were powerful in the villages, the domination over the lower castes was also adhered to by other villagers.

Now, most of the times, in urban areas it does not matter much who is walking along next to us on a street or eating at the next table in a restaurant. The Constitution of India prohibited any caste-based discrimination and laid the foundations of policies to reverse the injustices of the caste system.



29. Solution: b)

Gender divisions are based on gender roles. A gender role is a theoretical construct in the social
sciences and humanities that refers to a set of social and behavioral norms that, within a specific culture, are widely considered to be socially appropriate for individuals of a specific sex. Socially accepted gender roles differ widely between different cultures. Proponents of gender role theory assert that observed gender differences in behavior and personality characteristics are, at least in part, socially constructed, and therefore, the product of socialization experiences; this contrasts with other models of gender that assert that gender differences are "essential" to biological sex. Gender differences exist in almost all societies. With differences in the norms adopted, this suggests that gender differences are, at least partly, influenced by culture.



30. Solution: b)

National Commission for Women composition

(a)   A Chairperson, committed to the cause of women, to be nominated by the Central Government.

(b)   Five Members to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst persons of ability, integrity and standing who have had experience in law or legislation, trade unionism, management of an industry potential of women, women‘ s voluntary organisations ( including women activist ), administration, economic development, health, education or social welfare;  Provided that at least one Member each shall be from amongst persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes respectively;

(c)    A Member-Secretary to be nominated by the Central Government



National Commission for protection of Child rights does not have any reservation for women.

Child Welfare Committees

As per the provisions of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act 2000 (amended in 2006) State governments are required to establish a CWC or two in ever district. Each CWC should consist of a

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 10
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  5 SOLUTIONS                     


chairperson and four members. The chairperson should be a person well versed in child welfare issues and at least one member of the board should be a woman. The CWC has the same powers as a metropolitan magistrate or a judicial magistrate of the first class. A child can be brought before the committee (or a member of the committee if necessary) by a police officer, any public servant, CHILDLINE personnel, any social worker or public spirited citizen, or by the child himself/herself.



31. Solution: c)

Aircraft CAN significantly reduce their role in global warming by choosing the correct flight route. When an aircraft passes through a region in the sky where the air is extremely cold and moist, a condensation trail (contrail) gets formed and stays for hours. Like normal clouds, contrails prevent heat from escaping the planet. Such cold and moist air in the sky is found around high pressure systems. If aircraft can avoid such regions, they can prevent formation of contrail. Studies have shown that global warming caused by contrails could be
as large as that caused by carbon dioxide emissions from aircraft. http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/science-technology-briefs-0 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Contrail#Contrails_and_climate


32. Solution: c)

Chipko movement is important this year for both Prelims and coming mains. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chipko_movement

Kittiko-Hachchiko  movement - In 1984, the Karnataka government set up a company called Karnataka Pulpwood Limited. About 30,000 hectares of land was given virtually free to this company for 40 years. Much of this land was used by local farmers as grazing land for their cattle. However the company began to plant eucalyptus trees on this land, which could be used for making paper pulp. In 1987, a movement called Kittiko- Hachchiko (meaning, pluck and plant) started a non-violent protest, where people plucked the eucalyptus plants and planted saplings of trees that were useful to the people.



33. Solution: d)

Pressure groups are meant to raise political issues. A political issue is any issue that affects the power distribution in a society. The means can be giving speeches, mobilizing people, meeting the political executive putting up their demands etc. For e.g. the Student Unions which fight for rights of the students raise essentially political issues.

But, these organizations do not seek for themselves a share in institutional political power (legislature, executive etc.).






http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 11
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  5 SOLUTIONS                     


34. Solution: b) http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/combing-operation http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chitosan


35. Solution: d)

The Election commission offers special facilities for large, established and thus recognized parties. They are rebate on land, tax exemption, a publicity slot on all-India radio, a unique election symbol etc.

A party that has government in a state can also be recognized as a national party like BSP. The criteria is that it should get more than 6% of total votes in the general election in at least four states.



36. Solution: d)

Over the last three decades, the number and strength of these parties has expanded. This made the Parliament of India politically more and more diverse. No one national party is able to secure on its own a majority in Lok Sabha (except the last general elections 2014). As a result, the national parties are compelled to form alliances with State parties. Since 1996, nearly every one of the State parties has got an opportunity to be a part of one or the other national level coalition government. This has contributed to the strengthening of federalism and democracy in our country.



37. Solution: b)

The ECI only implements whatever directives re framed. It does not have the power to issue such powerful directives. This directive came out in a SC judgement.



38. Solution: a)

Refer to http://adamcap.com/schoolwork/what-makes-democracy-work/ for a comprehensive evaluation of
democracy. It‘s a good  article.



39. Solution: d)

Evidence across history and countries, shows that democracies have generally have lower rates of economic growth than dictatorships. This is because of their collective decision-making structures and the number of filters, and tests that these decisions have to pass. Moreover, democracies often follow a middle path between the road to economic growth and environmental sustainability. This is to achieve economic equity and mete out justice to all sections of society.


http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 12
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  5 SOLUTIONS                     




40. Solution: a)

An example of this can be Sri Lanka. Even though it is a democratic state, the majoritarianism by the Sinhalese community has been threatening the very existence of a total integrated SL state. The SL tamils have been raising their voice both violently and non-violently for a long period of time. This has also resulted in a civil war. If they will be always denied a share in political power, SL can no longer be called a democracy.



41. Solution: b)

The STRENGTHof a material decreases with its density. But it is possible to construct a super strong structure using a material of very low density by arranging vertical, diagonal and horizontal beams in a way that the weight load gets distributed. This geometric concept has been known for decades, but it is for the first time actual models of polymer, ceramic and metals have been created which are unusually strong for their densities. The design could be used for constructing structures deployed in the space as carrying heavy load increases the cost of the launch.

http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/science-technology-briefs-0



42. Solution: d)

A democracy needs to deepen and widen in order to a) include more left out groups in decision-making process; and b) devolve more power to self-govern via decentralization of decision-making process. These two ensure greater democracy in the country. And this is the challenge most successful democracies will face in the coming years including India and U.S.

Extension of the federal principle means nothing but giving the local government similar autonomy and authority as that of the state governments in India.



43. Solution: b)

A salt-water lake separated from the sea by the sandbars and spits is called lagoon. Lagoons are commonly divided into coastal lagoons and a toll lagoons. They have also been identified as occurring on mixed-sand and gravel coastlines. There is an overlap between bodies of water classified as coastal lagoons and bodies of water classified as estuaries. Lagoons are common coastal features around the world.



44. Solution: b)

Education and forests come in the concurrent list. Banking is in the Union list. Rest fall in the state list as these matters need to be sensitive to local needs. No national uniformity is required whether in laws or policies as far as the state list subjects are concerned.

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 13
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  5 SOLUTIONS                     




45. Solution: d)

A country can not be federal just because it has several provinces. Even Britain has provinces for that matter, but is not federal. The conditions for being a federation has already been explained in the previous explanations.



46. Solution: a)

Lesser Himalayas -While the Pir Panjal range forms the longest and the most important range, the Dhaula Dhar and the Mahabharat ranges are also prominent ones. The famous valley of Kashmir, the Kangra and Kullu Valley are located in Himachal Pradesh. This region is well known for its hill stations.



47. Solution: b)

In the lower course, due to gentle slope, the velocity of the river decreases which results in the formation of riverine islands. Majuli, in the Brahmaputra River is the largest inhabited riverine island in the world.

The rivers in their lower course split into numerous channels due to the deposition of silt. These channels are known as distributaries.

These phenomena can be seen in the Northern Plains.



48. Solution: c)

A SMALL,PORTABLE and inexpensive device to detect nuclear radiation has been created for public use. The device was developed following the nuclear accident in Fukushima in 2011 as people in Japan were unsure of radiation levels in their homes, food, water and environment. The instrument is a gamma ray spectrometer
and can also measure radiations other than nuclear which everyone is exposed to in day-to-day life. The device can even give information about the intensity of the radiation and identify the type of radionuclide (atom with unstable nucleus) emitting it. It can also tell if the radiation levels are dangerous. The radiation detector is not yet commercially available, but is expected to be priced at less than $150.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gamma_ray_spectrometer#Planetary_gamma-ray_spectrometers



49. Solution: a)

According to the variations in relief features, the Northern plains can be divided into four regions. The rivers, after descending from the mountains deposit pebbles in a narrow belt of about 8 to 16 km in width lying parallel to the slopes of the Shiwaliks. It is known as bhabar. All the streams disappear in this bhabar belt. South of this belt, the streams and rivers re-emerge and create a wet, swampy and marshy region known as terai. This


http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 14
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  5 SOLUTIONS                     


was a thickly forested region full of wildlife. The forests have been cleared to create agricultural land and to settle migrants from Pakistan after partition.

The Terai is the most productive region in Nepal with the majority of the country's industries. Agriculture is the basis of the economy. Major crops include rice, wheat , pulses , sugarcane , jute , tobacco, and maize. In the eastern districts from Parsa to Jhapa they support agro-based industries: jute factories, sugar mills, rice mills and tobacco factories.

You may refer to http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Terai



50. Solution: c)

Rising carbon dioxide levels are lowering the nutritional quality of food crops. For the first time, it has been shown through a field study that elevated carbon dioxide levels curb plants‘ ability to convert nitrates into proteins.

The study used wheat samples grown in Phoenix, Arizona, US, under carbon dioxide levels expected in the next few decades. Three different test on the plant leaf showed a fall in nitrate assimilation. On an average, the increased carbon dioxide levels caused a decline of 8 per cent in protein concentration of the crop. The study was published in Nature Climate Change on April 6.

Proteins are vital for human nutrition and wheat accounts for one-fourth of protein in human diet globally. In previous studies, food crops such as rice and barley have also shown a similar fall in protein content due to high carbon dioxide levels. Researchers estimate that the increase in carbon dioxide levels could lead to a 3 per cent reduction in  protein content in the human diet.

http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/crops-losing-protein

http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2014/05/140507-crops-nutrition-climate-change-carbon-dioxide- science/




51. Solution: c)

Shevroy hills are a detached portion of the Eastern ghats; and Javadi hills are extension of the Eastern Ghats. Refer to http://westernghat.org/


52. Solution: a)

SLEEPING WITH the light switched on at night is very harmful for breast cancer patients undergoing treatment. Exposure to light stops the production of melatonin, a hormone produced in the body only during night-time. Melatonin is vital to the success of tamoxifen, a widely used breast cancer drug. In absence of melatonin, tumours become resistant to the drug. Even extremely weak light, comparable to that coming from

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 15
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  5 SOLUTIONS                     


beneath the door, is enough to impact melatonin production. Analysis of rats implanted with human breast cancer cells showed that melatonin on its own delays tumour formation and brings down their growth rate. The study could make exposure to light a new variable in cancer research. It also has implications for people who work late in the night, or sit for long hours in front of television or computer screen

http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/science-technology-briefs-2 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Melatonin#Plants


53. Solution: d)

http://www.defenders.org/coral-reef/basic-facts



54. Solution: d)




































A river starts meandering only when it has become slow and bed erosion has reduced or become almost zero. At such points the tendency for bank erosion is high.



http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 16
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  5 SOLUTIONS                     


55. Solution: d)

Main features of the Himalayan Rivers :

i. Himalayan rivers have large basins.

ii. Many of them make spectacular gorges. iii. They are perennial in nature.
iv. They perform intensive erosional activities upstream and carry large amount of load of sand and silt. v. In plains they iluw forming large meanders due to gentle scope.
vi. They form numerous depositional features like flood plain, river bluffs and levees.

A levee, embankment, floodbank or stopbank is an elongated naturally occurring ridge or artificially constructed fill or wall, which regulates water levels. It is usually earthen and often parallel to the course of a river in its floodplain or along low-lying coastlines





























56. Solution: d)

Indian Space Research Organisation, fresh from the success of its Mars mission, has unveiled its next mundane campaign starting with the launch of the third regional navigation satellite on Oct. 10.


IRNSS-1C will be the third piece in the Indian navigation fleet dubbed the ―Indian GPS‖.




http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 17
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  5 SOLUTIONS                     


It will be flown on the indigenous PSLV-C26 rocket from Sriharikota at 1.56 a.m., according to an ISRO update on Wednesday.

The Indian Regional Navigation Satellite System is a seven-satellite fleet. It is being put up to ensure precise information on location and time for civil and military users on land, sea and air.

It will also help manage transport fleet, provide aid for hikers and travellers, in disaster management, cell phone applications, mapping and driving. It can also support operations within a radius of 1,500 km in the sub-continent. The navigation fleet forms the troika of Indian satellites along with communication and earth observation (remote sensing) satellites. IRNSS-1A was sent to space in July 2013 and 1B in April this year. ISRO plans to complete the navigation ring within two years.




57. Solution: a)

http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/science/lockheed-makes-breakthrough-in-nuclear- fusion/article6505488.ece

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tritium



58. Solution: c)

In Tibet the Brahmputra carries a smaller volume of water and less silt as it is a cold and a dry area. In India it passes through a region of high rainfall.

Here the river carries a large volume of water and considerable amount of silt. The Brahmaputra has a braided channel in its entire length in Assam and forms many riverine islands. Every year during the rainy season, the river overflows its banks, causing widespread devastation due to floods in Assam and Bangladesh. Unlike other north Indian rivers the Brahmaputra is marked by huge deposits of silt on its bed causing the river bed
to rise. The river also shifts its channel frequently.

Moreover, it meets several tributaries in India like Lohit, Dihang etc. due to which the overall discharge of the river increases considerably.



59. Solution: b)

The IMPACT of exposure to pesticide methoxychlor stays for generations and can cause diseases related to the kidney and ovaries. Methoxychlor was introduced in 1948 as a safer alternative to DDT. However, it is known to disrupt the endocrine system. Scientists suspect that the transgenerational impact of methoxychloris due to its ability to control how genes are turned on and off, even though it does not have an impact on the DNA

http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/science-technology-briefs-2 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Methoxychlor
http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 18
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  5 SOLUTIONS                     




60. Solution: d)

The main water divide in Peninsular India is formed by the Western Ghats, which runs from north to south close to the western coast. Most of the major rivers of the Peninsula such as the Mahanadi, the Godavari, the Krishna and the Kaveri flow eastwards and drain into the Bay of Bengal. These rivers make deltas at their mouths. There are numerous small streams flowing west of the Western Ghats. The Narmada and the Tapi are the only long rivers, which flow west and make esturies. The drainage basins of the peninsular rivers are comparitevely small in size.

The Narmada Basin

The Narmada rises in the Amarkantak hills in Madhya Pradesh. It flows towards the west in a rift valley formed due to faulting. On its way to the sea, the Narmada creates  many  picturesque locations. The ‗Marble rocks‘, near Jabalpur where the Narmada flows through a deep  gorge,  and the ‗Dhuadhar falls‘ where the river plunges over steep rocks, are some of the notable ones.



61. Solution: d)

Healthy lakes and their shores not only provide us with a number of environmental benefits but they influence our quality of life and they strengthen our economy.

Proper lake function can ease the impact of floods and droughts by storing large amounts of water and releasing it during shortages.  Lakes also work to replenish groundwater, positively influence water quality of downstream watercourses, and preserve the biodiversity and habitat of the area.  When the ecological puzzle pieces of a lake come together and the lake is able to work as it should, the big picture is clear, we all stand to benefit from this important resource.

Lakes can provide us with prime opportunities for recreation, tourism, and cottage or residential living.  They are also respected by many people for their historical and traditional values and may be a source of raw drinking water for a municipality. Lakes can also be used as a water supply for industry and an irrigation source for agriculture.

So you see lakes are more than just a simple body of water used by many people to enjoy recreational activities.  They are important ecosystems that, when respected and cared for, can sustain a healthy balance of aquatic life, provide us with much enjoyment, and help support our socio-economic needs.  It is our responsibility to continue to practice stewardship in our lakes by keeping them healthy for all, especially those who depend on them.











http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 19
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  5 SOLUTIONS                     


62. Solution: d)

























63. Solution: d)

The Himalayas harbour a hardy range of animals, which survive in extreme cold. Ladhak‘s freezing high altitudes are a home to yak, the shaggy horned wild ox weighing around one tonne, the Tibetan antelope, the bharal (blue sheep), wild sheep, and the kiang (Tibetan wild ass). Furhtermore, the ibex, bear, snow-leopard and very rare red panda are found in certain pockets.



64. Solution: c)

Solar CELLS can reach a temperature of 130o Celcius under normal operating conditions and for every degree rise in temperature, their efficiency decreases by about half a per cent. But the problem of overheating can be overcome by covering the cell with an extremely thin layer of silica glass embedded with microscopic pyramidical structures. By controlling the shape of the pyramids the infrared light of the sun, which is the primary carrier of heat, can be radiated back into the atmosphere.

http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/science-technology-briefs-2





65. Solution: a)

Explanation for this and the next question are same.






http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 20
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  5 SOLUTIONS                     







66. Solution: d)

Explanation in the map below. The Map shows wildlife reserves of India.







































67. Solution: d)

Project Tiger, Project Rhino, Project Great Indian Bustard and many other eco-developmental projects have been introduced.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Asiatic_Lion_Reintroduction_Project

68. Solution: c)

Land boundary – around 7,000 Kms

Coastline (including Andaman, Nicobar and Lakshadweep ) – more than 15,000 Kms


http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 21
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  5 SOLUTIONS                     


India has the largest border with Bangladesh not Pakistan or China.

Bangladesh = 4,053 km Burma = 1,463 km Bhutan = 605 km
China = 3,380 km
Pakistan = 2,912 km



69. Solution: d)

Himalayas are fold mountains formed by the collision of the Indian plate with the European plate. As they are fairly young, all the features associated with young mountains having soft rocks are seen in Himalayas. Therefore, Himalayan mountains form an unstable zone.

Refer to http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Himalayas#Geology for understanding it better through several diagrams and explanations.



70. Solution: a)

The general physiographic divisions from south to north are:

1.   The outer Himalayas (Shivalik)

2.   The lesser Himalayas (central zone)

3.   The Great Himalayas (northern zone)

The Shivalik range consists of lower hills (elevation — 600 m above sea level). The hills of the region are composed of highly unconsolidated deposits which results in a high rate of erosion and deforestation.

The lesser Himalayas are spotted by a gradual elevation towards the Dhauladhar and the Pir Panjal ranges. The rise is more rapid in the Shimla hills, to the south of which is the high peak of church — Chandni (3647 m). North of the river Sutlej, the rise is steady.

The Kangra valley is a longitudinal trough which is at the foot of the Dhauladhar range. Dhauladhar (which means the The White Peak) has a mean elevation of nearly 4,550 meters. It has a rapid rise of 3,600 m above the Kangra valley. The largest of the lesser Himalayan ranges, the Pir Panjal, branches off from the
Greater Himalayan range near the bank of the Sutlej. A number of glaciers exist and several passes lie across
the Pir Panjal. The Rohtang Pass (3,978 m) is one of these.

The Great Himalayan range (5,000 to 6,000 meters) runs along the eastern boundary and is slashed across by the Sutlej. Some of the famous passes in this range are Kangla (5,248 m), Bara Lacha (4,512 m), Parang (5,548 m) and Pin Parbati (4,802 m).

The Zaskar Range, the easternmost range, separates Kinnaur and Spiti from Tibet. It has peaks rising over an elevation up to 6,500 m. Some of the well-known peaks are Shilla (7,026 m) and Riwo Phargyul (6,791 m); these

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 22
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  5 SOLUTIONS                     


are among the highest peaks in this range. There are many glaciers over the Zaskar and the Great Himalayan ranges.



71. Solution: b)

http://www.worldatlas.com/aatlas/populations/ctypopls.htm

Use the arrows (adobe flash) to sort the list increasing or decreasing by every criteria mentioned. For e.g. you will find that India has the 19th highest population density!!!


72. Solution: a)

More than 130 delegates comprising top policymakers, leading scientists and representatives from stakeholder groups gathered in Berlin on October 23 for the Global Intergovernmental and Multi-stakeholder meeting of the sixth Global Environment Outlook (GEO6) report.An initiative of the United Nations Environment Programme, GEO assesses the state, trends and outlook of the world‘s environment.

The fifth edition of the report, which was launched in 2012 during Rio+20 Summit, revealed that out of the 90 most significant environmental goals, progress had been made on only four. Building on that information, GEO6, expected to be launched in mid-2017, will take into account regional assessment processes and attempt to analyse policies that will help attain these unfinished goals, states a UNEP press release.

The delegates advocated the use of innovative technologies, capacity-building, incorporation of indigenous knowledge and state-of-the-art technical analysis. They hope GEO6 will provide a more inclusive assessment of the environment. The underlying approach of this platform will be the perspective that the environment is inextricably linked to sustainable development.

GEO is a series of reports on the state of the global environment that is released periodically by UNEP. Five reports have been published so far—from GEO1 in 1997 to GEO5 in 2012. Geo6 will provide scientific evidence and future-looking environmental policy perspectives to contribute to UNEP‘s mission to enhance development.

http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/un-prepares-launch-global-environment-outlook-report



73. Solution: d)

The information on literacy was collected in all censuses. The definition of literacy had been 'both ability to read and write in any language. In all the censuses besides data on literacy, additional information was also collected. In 1872 the information about 'youths upto age 20 attending school, college or under private tuition' was recorded. In 1881 Census, the information was collected whether the individuals were under instruction or not, if not, whether they were able to read and write. In 1891 Census, besides the information regarding the
language in which the person was literate the foreign language known (if any) was also recorded. From 1901 to

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 23
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  5 SOLUTIONS                     


1941 censuses, there was an additional question whether the literate knew English or not. Information on the standard of education was collected for the first time in 1941 census and after that it was asked in every subsequent censuses. In 1971 the information on Literacy and Educational level was collected from each individual.

74. Solution: d)

http://populationcommission.nic.in/PublicationDetails/11_984_1.aspx



75. Solution: d)

There are six major controls of the climate of any place. They are: latitude, altitude, pressure and wind system, distance from the sea (continentality), ocean currents and relief features.

Due to the curvature of the earth, the amount of solar energy received varies according to latitude. As a result, air temperature decreases from the equator towards the poles. As one goes from the surface of the earth to higher altitudes, the atmosphere becomes less dense and temperature decreases. The hills are therefore cooler during summers. The pressure and wind system of any area depend on the latitude and altitude of the place. Thus it influences the temperature and rainfall pattern. The sea exerts a moderating influence on climate: As the distance from the sea increases, its moderating influence decreases and the people experience extreme weather conditions. This condition is known as continentality (i.e. very hot during summers and very cold during winters). Ocean currents along with onshore winds affect the climate of the coastal areas, For example,
any coastal area with warm or cold currents flowing past it, will be warmed or cooled if the winds are onshore.



76. Solution: a)

Particle pollution (also known as "particulate matter") in the air includes a mixture of solids and liquid droplets. Some particles are emitted directly; others are formed in the atmosphere when other pollutants react. Particles come in a wide range of sizes. Those less than 10 micrometers in diameter (PM10) are so small that they can get into the lungs, potentially causing serious health problems. Ten micrometers is smaller than the width of a single human hair.

     Fine particles (PM2.5). Particles less than 2.5 micrometers in diameter are called "fine" particles. These particles are so small they can be detected only with an electron microscope. Sources of fine particles include all types of combustion, including motor vehicles, power plants, residential wood burning, forest fires, agricultural burning, and some industrial processes.

     Coarse dust particles. Particles between 2.5 and 10 micrometers in diameter are referred to as "coarse." Sources of coarse particles include crushing or grinding operations, and dust stirred up by vehicles traveling on roads.






http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 24
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  5 SOLUTIONS                     


77. Solution: c)

India has mountains to the north, which have an average height of about 6,000 metres. India also has a vast coastal area where the maximum elevation is about 30 metres. The Himalayas prevent the cold winds from Central Asia from entering the subcontinent. It is because of these mountains that this subcontinent experiences comparatively milder winters as compared to central Asia.



78. Solution: b)

http://geography.about.com/od/physicalgeography/a/coriolis.htm



79. Solution: a)

The monsoons are experienced in the tropical area roughly between 20° N and 20° S. To understand the mechanism of the monsoons, the following facts are important.

(a) The differential heating and cooling of land and water creates low pressure on the landmass of India while the seas around experience comparatively high pressure.

(b) The shift of the position of Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) in summer, over the Ganga plain (this is the equatorial trough normally positioned about 5°N of the equator – also known as the monsoontrough during the monsoon season).

(c) The presence of the high-pressure area, east of Madagascar, approximately at 20°S over the Indian Ocean. The intensity and position of this high-pressure area affects the Indian Monsoon.

(d) The Tibetan plateau gets intensely heated during summer, which results in strong vertical air currents and the formation of high pressure over the plateau at about 9 km above sea level.

(e) The movement of the westerly jet stream to the north of the Himalayas and the presence of the tropical easterly jet stream over the Indian peninsula during summer.



80. Solution: a)

The Inter Tropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ,) is a broad trough of low pressure in equatorial latitudes. This is where the northeast and the southeast trade winds converge. This convergence zone lies more or less parallel to the equator but moves north or south with the apparent movement of the sun.



81. Solution: a)

El Nino: This is a name given to the periodic development of a warm ocean current along the coast of Peru as a
temporary replacement of the cold Peruvian current. ‗El Nino‘ is a Spanish word meaning ‗the child‘, and


http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 25
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  5 SOLUTIONS                     


refers to the baby Christ, as this current starts flowing during Christmas. The presence of the El Nino leads to an increase in sea-surface temperatures and weakening of the trade winds in the region.



82. Solution: d)

First two question statements are Self-explanatory.

Third statement explanation: The low-pressure conditions, over northwestern India, get transferred to the Bay of Bengal by early November. This shift is associated with the occurrence of cyclonic depressions, which originate over the Andaman Sea. These cyclones generally cross the eastern coasts of India cause heavy and widespread rain. These tropical cyclones are often very destructive.



83. Solution: a)

The molecules of air and other fine particles in the atmosphere have size smaller than the wavelength of visible light. These are more effective in scattering light of shorter wavelengths at the blue end than light of longer wavelengths at the red end. The red light has a wavelength about 1.8 times greater than blue light. Thus, when sunlight passes through the atmosphere, the fine particles in air scatter the blue colour (shorter wavelengths) more strongly than red. The scattered blue light enters our eyes. If the earth had no atmosphere, there would not have been any scattering. Then, the sky would have looked dark. The sky appears dark to passengers
flying at very high altitudes, as scattering is not prominent at such heights. You might have observed that
‗danger‘ signal lights are red in colour.  Do you know  why? The red is least scattered by fog or smoke.
Therefore, it can be seen in the same colour at a distance.



84. Solution: d)

Already explained in the previous question.



85. Solution: d)


















http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 26
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  5 SOLUTIONS                     


More than 75 per cent infants in India suffer from anaemia or iron deficiency, says a National Family Health Survey conducted in 2006. The problem can be reduced substantially if doctors wait for two to three minutes before cutting the umbilical cord during childbirth. Unfortunately, most doctors prefer not to wait before they clamp the cord.

The umbilical cord provides nutrition and blood to the baby from the mother. For many years, researchers have pointed out that delaying cutting of the umbilical cord is good for the health of the baby. If the cord is cut at least two minutes after the birth of the child, the baby can take in more blood from the placenta, which makes the infant  stronger. This delay  also helps the baby fight iron deficiency (see ‗Especially good for babies of anaemic mothers‘).

According to the World  Health Organization guidelines, doctors should wait till the ―cord is flat and pulseless.‖ That happens two to three minutes after birth. Even the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare recommends delayed cord clamping (DCC) in the current national guidelines for the care of newborn and has incorporated the practice in all its training modules in the past two years. Despite clear guidelines, most doctors do not practise DCC.

One of the reasons behind the non-compliance has been the assumption that the baby has to be held in the introitus position (at the level of vagina) for DCC because gravity affects the volume of placental transfusion through the umbilical cord. This is often cited by doctors as a difficult posture to strike, especially with a slippery baby in gloved hands. But a new study by Nestor E Vain and his colleagues from School of Medicine, University of Buenos Aires, Argentina, provides a solution.

86. Solution: a)



















87. Solution: c)

Electric fuse is an important component of all domestic circuits. A fuse in a circuit prevents damage to the appliances and the circuit due to overloading. Overloading can occur when the live wire and the neutral wire come into direct contact. (This occurs when the insulation of wires is damaged or there is a fault in the appliance.) In such a situation, the current in the circuit abruptly increases. This is called short-circuiting. The use of an electric fuse prevents the electric circuit and the appliance from a possible damage by stopping the flow of unduly high electric current.

http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 27
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  5 SOLUTIONS                     


88. Solution: b)

India is yet to implement Air Quality Index. In October 2014 it released a draft policy regarding this:

Key highlights of the proposed index:

     Pollutants to be monitored: The AQI has been developed for eight pollutants – PM2.5, PM10, nitrogen oxides, sulphur dioxide, ozone, and carbon monoxide. The ministry has also taken additional steps to include lead and ammonia, that also have harmful effects over time.

     Colour coded warning: AQI has been developed in relation to the Ambient Air Quality Standards and air quality has been classified into six bands and described simply as good, satisfactory, moderately polluted, poor, very poor, and severe. Each band has cut points of concentration with a colour code to visually express the level of severity that people can understand easily. This recognises the principle that from a public health standpoint, even air quality standards that are the regulatory targets to push action are not good enough. From that perspective, air quality is classified as good if the pollution levels are at least 50 per cent below the regulatory standards. This will be reported daily by the state pollution control boards.

     Health advisory to raise public awareness: The government will now issue health alerts to people based on air quality index. Possible health consequences of each air quality band will be indicated separately to alert the vulnerable—especially the elderly, children, and those already predisposed towards heart and respiratory problems. This will also indicate health consequences for general public during severe smoggy episodes. For instance, good air quality days will have minimal impact. On days that are satisfactory, it may cause minor breathing discomfort to sensitive people. On severely polluted days there may be respiratory impacts even on healthy people, and serious health impacts with lung and heart disease and so on.

     National implementation: AQI will be implemented nationally in cities with million plus population first and then the next rung in the next phase.


http://www.downtoearth.org.in/content/india-finally-get-national-air-quality-index http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/2014-10-25/news/55422072_1_cpcb-air-quality-index-
monitoring

89. Solution: a)















http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 28
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  5 SOLUTIONS                     




90. Solution: a)

There are some units of the Indian Union which enjoy very little power. These are areas which are too small to become an independent State but which could not be merged with any of the existing States. These areas, like Chandigarh, or Lakshadweep or the capital city of Delhi, are called Union Territories. These territories do not have the powers of a State. The Central Government has special powers in running these areas. Therefore, option 3 has no connection with the Principle of federalism.

Rest two options ensure that the state government is not subordinated by the Union government.

91. Solution: b)








































DNA cage for drugs

DNA complexes can help deliver cancer drugs only to affected cells



http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 29
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  5 SOLUTIONS                     


CANCER TREATMENT has serious side-effects because drugs, apart from attacking cancerous tissues, also expose non-target tissues to chemicals. To overcome this problem, researchers often look for methods to deliver the drug only to the affected areas. Now, liposomes, artificially prepared structures having lipid bilayers around them, are being tested for this. The therapy uses two sets of liposomes, one containing adenosine-5-triphosphate (ATP, or the energy molecule) and the other containing an anti-cancer drug embedded in a complex of DNA. The liposomes target the cancerous cells. Once absorbed into a cancer cell, the liposomes are sealed off from the rest of the cell in a special structure called endosome. In the acidic environment inside the endosome, the two types of liposomes fuse together and with the wall of the
endosome. When the DNA molecules come into contact with ATP, they unfold using the energy from ATP and release the drug from its DNA cage in the cell, killing it




92. Solution: c)

http://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/science/comet-siding-spring-isro-repositions-its-mars- orbiter/article6505153.ece



93. Solution: d)

Sugarcane plants are one of the most efficient convertors of sunlight into chemical energy. Sugarcane juice can be used to prepare molasses which is fermented to give alcohol (ethanol). Some countries now use alcohol as an additive in petrol since it is a cleaner fuel which gives rise to only carbon dioxide and water on burning in sufficient air (oxygen).

http://www.plasmaneem.com/neem-alternative-biofuel.html



94. Solution: d)

Refer to the section on Power sharing in the 1st chapter 10th Polity NCERT. The explanation is very long and it is suitable to refer to the NCERT directly.



95. Solution: d)

Explanation is same as that of question 2.



96. Solution: d)

Explanation will again be the same as the previous question as we are dealing with the same concept that has been properly explained previously.




http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 30
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  5 SOLUTIONS                     


DoPT is an administrative agency (executive); CAT is a judicial body. Both deal with personnel matters. Hence the separation of powers.

97. Solution: d)

Refer to http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Discrimination_against_girls_in_India for a detailed understanding.



98. Solution: d)

Consider the following:

    Gandhiji used to say that religion can never be separated from politics. What he meant by religion was not any particular religion like Hinduism or Islam but moral values that inform all religions. He believed that politics must be guided by ethics drawn from religion.
    Human rights groups in our country have argued that most of the victims of communal riots in our country are people from religious minorities. They have demanded that the government take special steps to protect religious minorities.
    Women‘s movement has argued that FAMILY LAWS of all religions discriminate against women. So
they have demanded that government should change these laws to make them more equitable. These are all examples to shows that religion and politics can not be separated.


99. Solution: d) Bhangar:
1.   It is the largest part of Northern plain.

2.   It is made up of alluvium.

3.   The soil in this region is not renewed frequently, it is old alluvial soil.

4.   It is not very fertile.

5.    It contains calcareous deposits locally known as 'Kankar '.

Khadar:

1.   It is not the largest part of Northern plain.

2.   It is made up of new alluvium and fine granules and therefore fertile.

3.   The soil is frequently renewed due to frequent flooding.

4.   It does not contain calcareous deposits of calcium.

5.    Suitable foe extensive cultivation.


http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 31
                     INSIGHTS MOCK TEST SERIES 2015: TEST –  5 SOLUTIONS                     




100.            Solution: a)

The Western Ghats and the Eastern Ghats mark the western and the eastern edges of the Deccan Plateau respectively. Western Ghats lie parallel to the western coast. They are continuous and can be crossed through passes only. The Western Ghats are higher than the Eastern Ghats. Their average elevation is 900– 1600 metres as against 600 metres of the Eastern Ghats. The Eastern Ghats stretch from the Mahanadi Valley to the Nigiris in the south. The Eastern Ghats are discontinuous and irregular and dissected by rivers draining into the Bay of Bengal. The Western Ghats cause orographic rain by facing the rain bearing moist winds to rise along the western slopes of the Ghats.

















































http://insightsonindia.com                              INSIGHTS                                                                                                         Page 32
